To whom did the Virgin Mary allegedly appear in 1858 in Lourdes France?	Saint Bernadette Soubirous
What is in front of the Notre Dame Main Building?	a copper statue of Christ
The Basilica of the Sacred heart at Notre Dame is beside to which structure?	the Main Building
What is the Grotto at Notre Dame?	a Marian place of prayer and reflection
What sits on top of the Main Building at Notre Dame?	a golden statue of the Virgin Mary
When did the Scholastic Magazine of Notre dame begin publishing?	September 1876
How often is Notre Dame's the Juggler published?	twice
What is the daily student paper at Notre Dame called?	The Observer
How many student news papers are found at Notre Dame?	three
In what year did the student paper Common Sense begin publication at Notre Dame?	1987
Where is the headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross?	Rome
What is the primary seminary of the Congregation of the Holy Cross?	Moreau Seminary
What is the oldest structure at Notre Dame?	Old College
What individuals live at Fatima House at Notre Dame?	Retired priests and brothers
Which prize did Frederick Buechner create?	Buechner Prize for Preaching
How many BS level degrees are offered in the College of Engineering at Notre Dame?	eight
In what year was the College of Engineering at Notre Dame formed?	1920
Before the creation of the College of Engineering similar studies were carried out at which Notre Dame college?	the College of Science
How many departments are within the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering?	five
The College of Science began to offer civil engineering courses beginning at what time at Notre Dame?	the 1870s
What entity provides help with the management of time for new students at Notre Dame?	Learning Resource Center
How many colleges for undergraduates are at Notre Dame?	five
What was created at Notre Dame in 1962 to assist first year students?	The First Year of Studies program
Which organization declared the First Year of Studies program at Notre Dame "outstanding?"	U.S. News & World Report
The granting of Doctorate degrees first occurred in what year at Notre Dame?	1924
What type of degree is an M.Div.?	Master of Divinity
Which program at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree?	Alliance for Catholic Education
In what year was a Master of Arts course first offered at Notre Dame?	1854
Which department at Notre Dame is the only one to not offer a PhD program?	Department of Pre-Professional Studies
What institute at Notre Dame studies  the reasons for violent conflict?	Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies
What is the title of Notre Dame's Theodore Hesburgh?	President Emeritus of the University of Notre Dame
In what year was the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies founded?	1986
To whom was John B. Kroc married?	Ray Kroc
What company did Ray Kroc own?	McDonald's
How many stories tall is the main library at Notre Dame?	14
What is the name of the main library at Notre Dame?	Theodore M. Hesburgh Library
In what year was the Theodore M. Hesburgh Library at Notre Dame finished?	1963
Which artist created the mural on the Theodore M. Hesburgh Library?	Millard Sheets
What is a common name to reference the mural created by Millard Sheets at Notre Dame?	Touchdown Jesus
How many incoming students did Notre Dame admit in fall 2015?	3,577
What percentage of students were admitted to Notre Dame in fall 2015?	19.7%
Where does Notre Dame rank in terms of academic profile among research universities in the US?	the top 10 to 15 in the nation
What percentage of students at Notre Dame participated in the Early Action program?	39.1%
How many miles does the average student at Notre Dame travel to study there?	more than 750 miles
Where did U.S. News & World Report rank Notre Dame in its 2015-2016 university rankings?	18th overall
Forbes.com placed Notre Dame at what position compared to other US research universities?	8th
The undergrad school at the Mendoza College of Business was ranked where according to BusinessWeek?	1st overall
In 2014 what entity named Notre Dame 10th best of all American universities?	USA Today
What percentage of Notre Dame students decide to study abroad?	57.6%
What person was the Director of the Science Museum at Notre Dame in the late 19th century?	Father Joseph Carrier, C.S.C.
What was the lifespan of John Augustine Zahm?	1851–1921
What program did John Augustine Zahm come to co-direct at Nore Dame?	the Science Department
What book did John Zahm write in 1896?	Evolution and Dogma
What professorship did Father Josh Carrier hold at Notre Dame?	Professor of Chemistry and Physics
In what year did Albert Zahm begin comparing aeronatical models at Notre Dame?	1882
Which professor sent the first wireless message in the USA?	Professor Jerome Green
In what year did Jerome Green send his first wireless message?	Around 1899
Which individual worked on projects at Notre Dame that eventually created neoprene?	Father Julius Nieuwland
What did the brother of John Zahm construct at Notre Dame?	an early wind tunnel
Work on a germ-free-life ended up in the creation of which Notre Dame institute?	The Lobund Institute
Around what time did Lobund of Notre Dame become independent?	the 1940s
In what year did Lobund at Notre Dame become an Institute?	1950
The Lobund Institute was merged into the Department of Biology at Notre Dame in what year?	1958
When did study of a germ-free-life begin at Notre Dame?	1928
Gurian created what in 1939 at Notre Dame?	The Review of Politics
What was the Review of Politics inspired by?	German Catholic journals
Over how many years did Gurian edit the Review of Politics at Notre Dame?	44
Thomas Stritch was an editor of which publican from Notre Dame?	Review of Politics
Who was the president of Notre Dame in 2012?	John Jenkins
The Kellogg Institute for International Studies is part of which university?	Notre Dame
What does the Kroc Institute at Notre Dame focus on?	International Peace studies
In what year did Notre Dame begin to host the Global Adaptation Index?	2013
What threat does the Global Adaptation Index study?	climate change
How many undergrads were attending Notre Dame in 2014?	8,448
What percentage of students at Notre Dame are the children of former Notre Dame students?	21–24%
How many teams participate in the Notre Dame Bookstore Basketball tournament?	over 700
For what cause is money raised at the Bengal Bouts tournament at Notre Dame?	the Holy Cross Missions in Bangladesh
How many students in total were at Notre Dame in 2014?	12,179
What percentage of undergrads live on the Notre Dame campus?	80%
How many student housing areas are reserved for Notre Dame's graduate students?	four
How many dorms for males are on the Notre Dame campus?	15
What amount of the graduate student body at Notre Dame live on the campus?	20%
There are how many dorms for females at Notre Dame?	14
What is Congregation of Holy Cross in Latin?	Congregatio a Sancta Cruce
What percentage of Notre Dame students feel they are Christian?	more than 93%
How often is Catholic mass held at Notre Dame in a week?	over 100 times
How many chapels are on the Notre Dame campus?	Fifty-seven
What amount of the student body of Notre Dame identifies as Catholic?	over 80%
What was the music hall at Notre Dame called?	Washington Hall
In what year was the Main Building at Notre Dame razed in a fire?	1879
Who was the president of Notre Dame in 1879?	Rev. William Corby
On what date was the rebuilding of The Main Building begun at Notre Dame after the fire that claimed the previous?	17th of May
What did the Science Hall at Notre Dame come to be known as?	LaFortune Student Center
What type of education was pushed at Notre Dame before its embracing of national standards?	scholastic and classical
Which college did Notre Dame add in 1921?	College of Commerce
In 1919 a new president of Notre Dame was named, who was it?	Father James Burns
Over how many years did the change to national standards undertaken at Notre Dame in the early 20th century take place?	three years
Those who attended a Jesuit college may have been forbidden from joining which Law School due to the curricula at the Jesuit institution?	Harvard Law School
The Notre Dame football team got a new head coach in 1918, who was it?	Knute Rockne
What was the amount of wins Knute Rockne attained at Notre Dame while head coach?	105
In what year did the team lead by Knute Rockne win the Rose Bowl?	1925
How many years was Knute Rockne head coach at Notre Dame?	13
How many national titles were won when Knute Rockne coached at Notre Dame?	three
Catholic people identified with Notre Dame, what religious group did people feel Yale represented?	the Protestant establishment
Notre Dame students had a showdown in 1924 with which anti-catholic group?	the Ku Klux Klan
Which college president of Notre Dame is credited with preventing more confrontations between students and the KKK?	Fr. Matthew Walsh
What type of event did the Klan intend to have at Notre Dame in March of 1924?	a week-long Klavern
Where did Notre Dame students and the KKK have their encounter?	South Bend
Which person became vice-president of Notre Dame in 1933?	Father John Francis O'Hara
Who was the president of Notre Dame in 1934?	Father John Francis O'Hara
Irvin Abell was given what award by Notre Dame?	Laetare Medal
Which year was the Laetare Medal first given out at Notre Dame?	1883
For whos glory did Father O'Hara believed that the Notre Dame football team played?	God
Around the time that Rev. Cavanaugh became president of Notre Dame by how much did the undergrad student body of Notre Dame increase?	more than half
Which institute involving animal life did Cavanaugh create at Notre Dame?	Lobund Institute for Animal Studies
What is O'Shaughnessy Hall of Notre Dame formerly known as?	Hall of Liberal Arts
Which president did Notre Dame have in 1947?	Rev. John J. Cavanaugh, C.S.C.
Outside of an institute studying animals, what other institute did Cavanugh create at Notre Dame?	Medieval Institute
What was the lifespan of Theodore Hesburgh?	1917–2015
In the time that Hesburgh was president of Notre Dame by what factor did the operating budget increase?	18
What was the size of the Notre Dame endowment when Theodore Hesburgh became president?	$9 million
During what years was Theodor Hesburgh president of Notre Dame?	1952–87
How many faculty members were at Notre Dame when Hesburgh left the role of president?	950
What type of educational institute is Hesburgh given credit for creating at Notre Dame?	coeducational
Which role did Charles Sheedy have at Notre Dame?	Dean of Arts and Letters
What title did Thomas Blantz have at Notre Dame?	Vice President of Student Affairs
In what year did Notre Dame have its earliest undergraduate that was female?	1971
With what institute did Notre Dame agree to an exchange program in the 1960s?	Saint Mary's College
During what years was Edward Malloy president of Notre Dame?	1987–2005
What was the SAT score, on average, at Notre Dame when Edward Malloy became president?	1240
When Malloy became president of Notre Dame what was the size of the endowment?	$350 million
When Malloy reached the end of his time as president how much annuals funding for research did Notre Dame have?	more than $70 million
The amount of professors at Notre Dame increased by what amount under Malloy?	500
When did John Jenkins become the president of Notre Dame?	2005
In terms of the amount of presidents Notre Dame has had, where is John Jenkins on the list?	17th
Who was the Notre Dame president that preceded John Jenkins?	Malloy
Which arena was constructed under Jenkins at Notre Dame?	Compton Family Ice Arena
How much money was spent on enhancing Notre Dame Stadium under John Jenkins?	$400m
Which congregation is in charge of the Old College at Notre Dame?	Congregation of Holy Cross
What structure is found on the location of the original church of Father Sorin at Notre Dame?	Basilica of the Sacred Heart
In which architectural style is the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at Notre Dame made?	French Revival
Which individual painted the inside of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at Notre Dame?	Luigi Gregori
In what year was the Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes at Notre Dame constructed?	1896
Which person oversaw the creation of a science hall at Notre Dame in 1883?	Fr. Zahm
In what year did the student union building at Notre Dame get renamed to LaFortune Center?	1950
After which individual was the LaFortune Center Notre Dame named?	Joseph LaFortune
How large in square feet is the LaFortune Center at Notre Dame?	83,000 square feet
What is the annual budget of Notre Dame's LaFortune Center?	$1.2 million
How many halls are at Notre Dame that house students?	29
Which library was built at Notre Dame in 1963?	Theodore Hesburgh Library
How many books are housed at the Theodore Hesburgh Library?	almost 4 million
Construction for which hall started on March 8th 2007 at Notre Dame?	Duncan Hall
Which baseball stadium is found at Notre Dame?	Frank Eck Stadium
In what year did Notre Dame create the Office of Sustainability?	2008
What percentage of the food served at Notre Dame is locally grown?	40%
Notre Dame got a "B" for its sustainability practices from which entity?	Sustainable Endowments Institute
Gustavo Gutierrez is faculty of which institute?	Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies
In what year did Notre Dame first have a facility in England?	1968
At which location is the London Center operated by Notre Dame found?	1 Suffolk Street in Trafalgar Square
Notre Dame has a center in Beijing, what is it referred to as?	Global Gateways
In what year did the Suffolk Street location start to house a Notre Dame facility?	1998
What was Notre Dame's first college?	The College of Arts and Letters
In what year was the The College of Arts and Letters at Notre Dame created?	1842
In what year did the College of Arts and Letters at Notre Dame grant its first degree?	1849
On which university did Notre Dame base its curriculum on?	Saint Louis University
How many BA majors does the College of Arts and Letters at Notre Dame offer?	33
Which president at Notre Dame created the College of Science?	Father Patrick Dillon
In what year was the Notre Dame College of Science formed?	1865
How many years long was a scientific course under Patrick Dillon at Notre Dame?	six years
Which hall at Notre Dame contains the current College of Science?	Jordan Hall of Science
How many undergrad students attend the College of Science at Notre Dame today?	over 1,200
In 1899 Notre Dame formed which college?	School of Architecture
In what building is the current School of Architecture housed at Notre Dame?	Bond Hall
What length is the course of study at the Notre Dame School of Architecture?	five-year
In which location do students of the School of Architecture of Notre Dame spend their 3rd year?	Rome
Which prestigious prize does the School of Architecture at Notre Dame give out?	Driehaus Architecture Prize
In what year did the opening of a theology library at Notre Dame occur?	2015
Where is the theology library at Notre Dame?	the first floor of Stanford Hall
How many books are held by the Notre Dame libraries?	over three million volumes
Currently where does Notre Dame's library rank in the nation?	one of the 100 largest
What caused many intellectual Catholics to leave europe in the 1930s?	The rise of Hitler and other dictators
From where did Anton-Hermann Chroust come to reach Notre Dame?	Germany
What field of study did Anton-Hermann Chroust specialize in?	classics and law
Who did Waldemar Gurian receive his tutelage under while seeking his doctorate?	Max Scheler
What was Ivan Meštrović known for being?	a renowned sculptor
The school known as Notre Dame is known by a more lengthy name, what is it?	University of Notre Dame du
What type of institution is the Notre Dame?	Catholic research university
The French words Notre Dame du Lac translate to what in English?	Our Lady of the Lake
Who is the patron saint of Notre Dame?	the Virgin Mary
How large is Notre Dame in acres?	1,250
What caused Notre Dame to become notable in the early 20th century?	its Fighting Irish football team
Which 20th century Notre Dame football coach is most notable?	Knute Rockne
Which athletic association are the student athletes at Notre Dame a part of?	NCAA Division I
How many students at Notre Dame received the Heisman Trophy?	seven
There were multiple students from Notre Dame who entered the Pro Football Hall of Fame, how many?	13
Where among US universities does Notre Dame rank?	among the top twenty
How many individual colleges are part of Notre Dame?	four
Which prize does the Architecture School at Notre Dame give out?	Driehaus Architecture Prize
How many doctorate and masters programs are available at Notre Dame?	more than 50
Which art museum does Notre Dame administer?	Snite Museum of Art
In what year was Father Edward Sorin given two years to create a college?	1842
Which individual offered land to Father Edward Sorin?	Célestine Guynemer de la Hailandière
Which church was Father Edward Sorin representing?	the Congregation of the Holy Cross
On what date did brothers from Holy Cross arrive at the future location of Notre Dame?	November 26, 1842
Which structure was the first used for the purposes of the college?	Father Stephen Badin's old log chapel
In what year did the initial degrees get handed out at Notre Dame?	1849
In what year did the original Sorin built Main Building get replaced?	1865
Which individual began a library at Notre Dame?	Father Lemonnier
In what year had the library at Notre Dame reach 10,000 books?	1879
In what year was the library at Notre Dame started?	1873
Which television station finds its home at Notre Dame?	NDtv
How many programs did NDtv feature in 2002?	one show
Which radio station provides radio to the students of Notre Dame at 88.9 FM?	WSND-FM
Which internet radio station of Notre Dame is served as an internet stream?	WVFI
How much is Eddy Street Commons at Notre Dame expected to cost?	$215 million
When was ground broke on the Eddy Street Commons Project of Notre Dame?	June 3, 2008
Who is the developer of Eddy Street Commons?	Kite Realty
Which entity did Notre Dame hire to build a parking structure outside of Eddy Street Commons?	the City of South Bend
There were protested as a part of the construction at Eddy Street Commons, they came due tot he hiring of whom?	non-union workers
What does the acronym NCAA stand for?	National Collegiate Athletic Association
Which league did Notre Dame Fighting Irish teams participate in in 1982?	Horizon League
What when conference do the Notre Dame fencing teams take part in?	Midwest Fencing Conference
There is a conference that the male hockey team of Notre Dame competes in, what is it?	Hockey East
In what conference did the Fighting Irish take part in in 2012?	Big East Conference
To what conference did the Fighting Irish go after the Big East?	the ACC
How many teams in each season do the Fighting Irish commit to play against ACC opponents?	five
Where did the Fighting Irish hockey team compete prior to a move to Hockey East, in terms of conference?	Central Collegiate Hockey Association
What colors are the official ones used by Notre Dame in sport competition?	Navy Blue and Gold Rush
What type of mascot do the Notre Dame sport teams have?	Leprechaun
Who currently provides uniforms to Notre Dame sport teams?	Under Armour
What is the value of the contract between Under Armour and Notre Dame?	almost $100 million
When did the Notre Dame marching band form?	1846
What is notable about the Notre Dame marching band?	oldest university band in continuous existence in the United States
What is the Notre Dame fight song?	Notre Dame Victory March
Which team did Notre Dame's football team find inspiration from?	Michigan Wolverines football team
In what year did Notre Dame football begin?	1887
What university is Notre Dame tied with in terms of most Heisman Trophy winners?	Ohio State University
Against which team does Notre Dame compete for the Jeweled Shillelagh?	USC
In terms of Notre Dame students in the College Football Hall of Fame the amount of students named is what ?	the most
What notable football player played at Notre Dame from 1916 to 1920?	George Gipp
Against which opponent did Knute Rockne tell his team to "win one for the Gipper?"	the Army team
Which person portrayed Knute Rockne in the 1940 movie "Knute Rockne?"	Pat O'Brien
Ronald Reagan played the role of whom in 1940's "Knute Rockne?"	Gipp
How many seats are in Notre Dame Stadium?	80,795
What is displayed at Zahm House for football home games at Notre Dame?	two-story banner
What occurs at midnight preceding a football home game at Notre Dame?	the Drummers' Circle
From where does the Band of the Fighting Irish lead a march to the Notre Dame Stadium for football home games?	the steps of Bond Hall
What songs does the trumpet section of the Band of the Fighting Irish play preceding home football games?	the Notre Dame Victory March and the Notre Dame Alma Mater
On what day do Notre Dame home football games occur?	Saturday
How many wins does the Notre Dame men's basketball team have?	over 1,600
How many schools have a similar men's basketball record to Notre Dame in terms of wins?	12
How many NCAA tournaments did the Notre Dame men's basketball team take part in?	28
Which Notre Dame men's basketball player has the record for more points in one game?	Austin Carr
Who was the Notre Dame men's basketball coach in 2014?	Mike Brey
Who wrote the original lyrics to the Notre Dame Victory March?	John F. Shea
In what year did Michael J. Shea graduate from Notre Dame?	1904
Who is responsible for writing the music for "Notre Dame Victory March?"	Rev. Michael J. Shea
In what year did "Notre Dame Victory March" get copyrighted?	1928
To where are the loyal sons in "Notre Dame Fight Song" marching?	onward to victory
Ronald Reagan had a nickname, what was it?	The Gipper
In what film did a parody of the "Win one for the Gipper" speech appear?	Airplane!
Who starred as Daniel Ruettiger in the film Rudy?	Sean Astin
Which person was a former comrade to Ted Striker in the film Airplane!?	George Zipp
Pat O'Brien portrayed which person in the film Knute Rockne?	Knute Rockne
Which Secretary of State attended Notre Dame?	Condoleezza Rice
Which Notre Dame alum from the College of Science won a Nobel Prize?	Eric F. Wieschaus
Who is the current president of Notre Dame?	Rev. John Jenkins
Mariel Zagunis is notable for winning what?	Olympic gold
Which notable astronaut is known to have attended Notre Dame?	Jim Wetherbee
When did Beyonce start becoming popular?	in the late 1990s
What areas did Beyonce compete in when she was growing up?	singing and dancing
When did Beyonce leave Destiny's Child and become a solo singer?	2003
In what city and state did Beyonce  grow up?	Houston, Texas
In which decade did Beyonce become famous?	late 1990s
In what R&B group was she the lead singer?	Destiny's Child
What album made her a worldwide known artist?	Dangerously in Love
Who managed the Destiny's Child group?	Mathew Knowles
In what city did Beyonce grow up?	Houston
What was the name of Beyonce's first solo album?	Dangerously in Love
On what date was Beyonce born?	September 4, 1981
What is Beyonce's full name?	Beyoncé Giselle Knowles-Carter
When did Beyoncé rise to fame?	late 1990s
What role did Beyoncé have in Destiny's Child?	lead singer
What was the first album Beyoncé released as a solo artist?	Dangerously in Love
When did Beyoncé release Dangerously in Love?	2003
How many Grammy awards did Beyoncé win for her first solo album?	five
What was Beyoncé's role in Destiny's Child?	lead singer
What was the name of Beyoncé's first solo album?	Dangerously in Love
When did Beyoncé release her first solo album?	2003
After her second solo album, what other entertainment venture did Beyonce explore?	acting
Which artist did Beyonce marry?	Jay Z
To set the record for Grammys, how many did Beyonce win?	six
For what movie did Beyonce receive  her first Golden Globe nomination?	Dreamgirls
When did Beyonce take a hiatus in her career and take control of her management?	2010
Which album was darker in tone from her previous work?	Beyoncé
After what movie portraying Etta James, did Beyonce create Sasha Fierce?	Cadillac Records
When did Destiny's Child end their group act?	June 2005
What was the name of Beyoncé's second solo album?	B'Day
What was Beyoncé's first acting job, in 2006?	Dreamgirls
Who is Beyoncé married to?	Jay Z
What is the name of Beyoncé's alter-ego?	Sasha Fierce
In her music, what are some recurring elements in them?	love, relationships, and monogamy
Time magazine named her one of the most 100 what people of the century?	influential
Which magazine declared her the most dominant woman musician?	Forbes
In which decade did the Recording Industry Association of America recognize Beyonce as the The Top Certified Artist?	2000s
What magazine rated Beyonce as the most powerful female musician in 2015?	Forbes
How did Beyonce describe herself as a feminist?	modern-day feminist
In which years did Time rate Beyonce in the 100 most influential people in the world?	2013 and 2014
How many records has Beyonce sold in her 19 year career?	118 million
How many records did Beyoncé sell as part of Destiny's Child?	60 million
After leaving Destiny's Child, how many records did Beyoncé release under her own name?	118 million
How many Grammy awards has Beyoncé won?	20
What magazine named Beyoncé as the most powerful female musician for 2015?	Forbes
Beyonce's younger sibling also sang with her in what band?	Destiny's Child
Where did Beyonce get her name from?	her mother's maiden name
What race was Beyonce's father?	African-American
Beyonce's childhood home believed in what religion?	Methodist
Beyonce's father worked as a sales manager for what company?	Xerox
Beyonce's mother worked in what industry?	hairdresser and salon owner
What younger sister of Beyonce also appeared in Destiny's Child?	Solange
Beyonce is a descendent of what Arcadian leader?	Joseph Broussard
What company did Beyoncé's father work for when she was a child?	Xerox
What did Beyoncé's mother own when Beyoncé was a child?	salon
What is the name of Beyoncé's younger sister?	Solange
Beyoncé is a descendant of which Acadian leader?	Joseph Broussard.
Beyoncé was raised in what religion?	Methodist
What town did Beyonce go to school in?	Fredericksburg
Who was the first person to notice Beyonce's singing ability?	Darlette Johnson
Beyonce moved to which town after she left her first elementary school?	Houston
Which of her teachers discovered Beyonce's musical talent?	dance instructor Darlette Johnson
I which church was Beyonce  a member and soloist  in the choir?	St. John's United Methodist Church
What type of school was Parker Elementary School?	music magnet school
Which song did Beyonce sing to win a competition at age 7?	Imagine
What city was Beyoncé's elementary school located in?	Fredericksburg
What was the name of Beyoncé's first dance instructor?	Darlette Johnson
How old was Beyoncé when she won a school talent show?	seven
What choir did Beyoncé sing in for two years?	St. John's United Methodist Church
Who decided to place Beyonce's group in Star Search the talent show?	Arne Frager
In 1995, who decided to manage the girls singing group?	Beyoncé's father
Who was the first record label to give the girls a record deal?	Elektra Records
Who brought Beyonce to California and enter her group in Star Search?	Arne Frager
In what year did Beyonce's father quit his job to manage her group?	1995
What large record company recorded Beyonce's group's first album?	Sony Music
What record company first signed Beyonce's group and later cut them?	Elektra Records
At what age did Beyonce meet LaTavia Robertson?	age eight
How old was Beyoncé when she met LaTavia Roberson?	eight
What was the name of the first group Beyoncé was a part of?	Girl's Tyme
Who placed Girl's Tyme in Star Search?	Arne Frager
When did Beyoncé begin to manage the girl group?	1995
Who signed the girl group on October 5, 1995?	Dwayne Wiggins's Grass Roots Entertainment
Which film featured Destiny's Child's first major single?	Men in Black
For which song, did Destiny's Child take home the grammy award for best R&B performance?	"Say My Name"
Who did Beyonce record with for the movie "The Best Man?"	Marc Nelson
Beyonce's group changed their name to Destiny's Child in what year?	1996
The name Destiny's Child was based on a quote in which book of the Bible?	Book of Isaiah
Debut song, "Killing Time" was featured on what movie's sound track?	Men in Black
What song won Best R&B Performance in the 43 Annual Grammy Awards?	Say My Name
What singer did Beyonce record a song with for the movie, ''The Best Man"?	Marc Nelson
Where did Destiny's Child get their name from?	Book of Isaiah.
Destiny's Child song, Killing Time, was included in which film's soundtrack?	Men in Black.
What was Destiny's Child's first major song hit?	No, No, No
When did Destiny's Child release their second album?	1999
Who did Beyoncé sing a duet with for "The Best Man" film?	Marc Nelson
What mental health issue did Beyonce go through?	depression
What event occured after she was publicly criticized?	boyfriend left her
Who supported Beyonce through her depression?	her mother
What event caused Beyonce's depression?	split with Luckett and Rober
How long was Beyonce depressed?	a couple of years
Who helped Beyonce fight her depression the most?	her mother
Who replaced Luckett and Roberson in Destiny's Child?	Farrah Franklin and Michelle Williams.
Who was blamed for Luckett and Roberson leaving Destiny's Child?	Beyoncé
Who helped Beyoncé overcome her depression during the years following the Destiny's Child split?	her mother
Which newest member was removed from Destiny's Child?	Farrah Franklin
"Charlie's Angels" featured which single from the band members?	Independent Women Part I
How many weeks did their single "Independent Women Part I" stay on top?	eleven
For what network, did Beyonce land a major movie role in?	MTV
Their third album, Survivor, sold how many during its first week?	663,000 copies
What French composer wrote the original opera ''Carmen'' in the 19th century?	Georges Bizet
What album caused a lawsuit to be filed in 2001?	Survivor
Independent Women Part I was on which 2000 film's soundtrack?	Charlie's Angels.
Which film did Beyoncé star in 2001 with Mekhi Phifer?	Carmen: A Hip Hopera
What was the name of Destiny Child's third album?	Survivor
Who filed a lawsuit over Survivor?	Luckett and Roberson
When did Destiny's Child announce their hiatus?	October 2001
Who did Beyonce star with in the movie, "Austin Powers in Goldmember"?	Mike Myers
Which three countries did Beyonce's song "Work It Out" achieve top ten status?	UK, Norway, and Belgium
Beyonce starred with Cuba Gooding Jr. in which film?	The Fighting Temptations
Who did Beyonce record the lead single with in the movie "The Fighting Temptations"?	Missy Elliott
Which other song from the soundtrack did better in the charts?	Summertime
What film did Beyonce appear in with Mike Myers?	Austin Powers in Goldmember
What large amount did the movie "Goldmember" gross?	73 million
What genre of movie did Beyonce star in with Cuba Gooding, Jr?	musical comedy
What song was the lead single from the film's sound track?	Fighting Temptations
How did the critics view the movie, ''The Fighting Temptations''?	mixed reviews
What film did Beyoncé star in with Mike Myers in 2002?	Austin Powers in Goldmember
What was Beyoncé's character called in Austin Powers in Goldmember?	Foxxy Cleopatra
Which song did Beyoncé release as the lead single for Austin Powers in Goldmember's soundtrack?	Work It Out
What musical comedy did Beyoncé star in along with Cuba Gooding, Jr. in 2003?	The Fighting Temptations
What song did Beyoncé release as the lead single from The Fighting Tempations?	Fighting Temptations
What was the highest Beyonce's first solo recording achieved in the Billboard Hot 100?	number four
Beyonce's first album by herself was called what?	Dangerously in Love
How many has "Dangerously in Love" sould worldwide since its debut?	11 million
Beyonce's first number one song was which song?	Crazy in Love
How many top five singles came from her first album?	four
Beyonce's first solo album in the U.S. with what artist in the lead single?	Jay Z
What solo album did Beyonce release in 2003?	Dangerously in Love
 The album, Dangerously in Love  achieved what spot on the Billboard Top 100 chart?	number four
"The Closer I get to You" was recorded with which artist?	Luther Vandross
Which artist was associated with Beyoncé's premiere solo recording?	Jay Z
When did Beyoncé release her first solo album?	June 24, 2003
What is the lead single on Beyoncé's first album?	Crazy in Love
Who helped Beyoncé earn a Grammy award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group at the 46th annual Grammy Awards?	Luther Vandross.
How many awards did Beyoncé win at the 46th Grammy's Awards?	five.
Destiny's Child's final album was named what?	Destiny Fulfilled
Destiny's Child got a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in what year?	2006
In what year did Beyonce embark on her Dangerously in Love tour of Europe?	November 2003
What was the name of the final album of Destiny's Child?	Destiny Fulfilled
It was announced that Destiny's Child would  disban in what European city?	Barcelona
When did Destiny's Child get their star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame?	March 2006
What was the name of Beyoncé's European start that started in November 2003?	Dangerously in Love Tour
Who did Beyoncé tour with for the Verizon Lades First Tour?	Missy Elliott and Alicia Keys
What major event did Beyoncé perform at on February 1, 2004?	Super Bowl XXXVIII
What is the name of the final studio album from Destiny's Child?	Destiny Fulfilled.
How many albums did Beyonce sell in the first week when she released her second album?	541,000
The lead single from the album was which song?	Déjà Vu
How many countries did her song "Irreplaceable" get number one status in?	five
How many singles did her second album produce?	five
What birthday did Beyonce's album B'Day celebrate?	twenty-fifth birthday
What artist did Beyonce duet with in the single, "Deja Vu''?	Jay Z
How high did ''Deja Vu'' climb on the Billboard chart?	top five
What is the name of Beyoncé's second album?	B'Day
How many copies did B'Day sell during the first week of its release?	541,000
Who collaborated with Beyoncé on the single, Deja Vu?	Jay Z
Which single from B'Day was only released in the U.K.?	Green Light
What movie did Beyonce act in 2006?	The Pink Panther
Her second movie Beyonce did was what film?	Dreamgirls
The single, "Listen" was featured in which movie?	Dreamgirls
Beyonce's first world tour was when?	2007
How much money did Beyonce's tour make in 2007?	24 million
How many millions of dollars did ''The Pink Panther'' gross world-wide?	158.8 million
What did Beyonce call her first concert tour?	The Beyoncé Experience
Who was Beyonce's duet with in ''Beautiful Liar''?	Shakira
Which film did Beyoncé star with Steve Martin in?	The Pink Panther
Beyoncé's role in Dreamgirls was based on what pop singer?	Diana Ross.
What was the lead single for the Dreamgirls soundtrack?	Listen
What was the name of Beyoncé's first international tour?	The Beyoncé Experience
What pop singer did a duet with Beyoncé on Beautiful Liar?	Shakira
Beyonce got married in 2008 to whom?	Jay Z
Her third album, "I am...Sasha Fierce" was released when?	November 18, 2008
For which decade, did Beyonce have more top ten songs than any other woman?	2000s
Which singer beat out Beyonce for best video performance?	Taylor Swift
In 2009, Beyonce started her second world tour and grossed how much money?	119.5 million
How did she reveal the marriage?	in a video montage
When did Beyonce begin her second world tour?	March 2009
Who beat out Beyonce for Best Female Video ?	Taylor Swift
How much did the second world tour make in dollars?	119.5 million
When did Beyoncé get married?	April 4, 2008
Who did Beyoncé marry?	Jay Z.
Who is Beyoncé's alter ego?	Sasha Fierce
The video for what song won Beyoncé the 2009 MTV Video of the Year award?	Single Ladies
Which prominent star felt the 2009 Female Video of the Year award should have went to Beyoncé instead of Taylor Swift?	Kanye West
Beyonce portrayed which character in the film, Cadillac Records?	Etta James
Beyonce gave her entire salary from Cadillac Records to which organization?	Phoenix House
Which song did Beyonce sing at the first couple's inaugural ball?	At Last
What genre of film was the movie, Obsessed, in which Beyonce starred in?	thriller
A fight scene from the movie, Obsessed, won which award for Beyonce?	MTV Movie Award for Best Fight
Where did Beyonce donate her salary from the movie Cadillac Records?	Phoenix House
What thriller film did Beyonce star in?	Obsessed
What was the name of the woman she played in Obsessed?	Sharon Charles
How much more that the buget did the film gross?	60 million
Which singer did Beyoncé portray in Cadillac Records?	Etta James
Which organization received Beyoncé's entire Cadillac Records salary?	Phoenix House
Where did Beyoncé perform on January 20, 2009?	the First Couple's first inaugural ball.
Which thriller film did Beyoncé star in with Ali Larter?	Obsessed.
How many awards was Beyonce nominated for at the 52nd Grammy Awards?	ten
Beyonce tied with which artist for most nominations by a female artist?	Lauryn Hill
In 2010, Beyonce worked with which other famous singer?	Lady Gaga
How many number one singles did Beyonce now have after the song "Telephone"?	six
Beyonce tied who for most number one singles by a female?	Mariah Carey
Beyonce received how many nominations at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards?	ten nominations
What song was the sixth first place song for Beyonce?	Telephone
Who else appeared with Beyonce in Telephone?	Lady Gaga
Who did they tie with for six top songs?	Mariah Carey
Who did Beyonce tie with for the most nominations in a year?	Lauryn Hill
How many nominations did Beyoncé receive at the 52nd Grammy Awards ceremony?	ten
Who did Beyoncé tie with for the most Grammy nominations for female artists?	Lauryn Hill
Beyoncé was a featured artist on which singer's hit, Telephone?	Lady Gaga
Who did Beyoncé and Lady Gaga tie with for the most number one hits since 1992?	Mariah Carey
Beyonce would take a break from music in which year?	2010
Which year did Beyonce and her father part business ways?	2010
Which famous landmark did Beyonce see in China?	the Great Wall of China
In what year did Beyonce have her hiatus?	2010
Who inspired this hiatus?	her mother
When did she stop using her father as a manager?	During the break
How long did the hiatus last?	nine months
What did Beyoncé announce in January 2010?	a hiatus
Who suggested the hiatus for Beyoncé?	her mother
Who did Beyoncé part ways with during her hiatus?	her father
How long did her hiatus last?	nine months
In which year was reports about Beyonce performing for Muammar Gaddafi surface?	2011
Who did Beyonce donate the money to earned from her shows?	Clinton Bush Haiti Fund
Beyonce became the first female artist to perform solo in 20 years at which stage?	the 2011 Glastonbury Festival
Which organization did Beyonce's spokespeople confirm her donations to?	The Huffington Post
Beyonce was listed in 2011 as the highest paid performer per what?	minute
Hoe did everyone learn that Beyonce performed for Kaddafi?	documents obtained by WikiLeaks
When did this leak happen?	2011
Who did she tell about the donation?	The Huffington Post
Where did Beyonce perform in 2011?	Glastonbury Festival
Who did Beyoncé perform privately for in 2011?	Muammar Gaddafi.
Who released the information about Beyoncé's performance for the Libyan ruler?	WikiLeaks
Which organization did Beyoncé donate her pay for the private performance to?	Clinton Bush Haiti Fund.
Beyoncé was the first female singer to headline what at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival?	Pyramid stage
Beyonce's fourth album debuted in what year?	2011
Which single had the most success from that album?	Love on Top
Beyonce won an award for which activity in 2011?	writing
in 2011, Beyonce performed for four nights where?	New York's Roseland Ballroom
When was Beyonce's forth album released?	June 28, 2011
How many copies did the album sell in its first week?	310,000 copies
Who awarded Beyonce and award for writing?	New York Association of Black Journalists
When did she perform at the Roseland ballroom?	2011
What is the name of Beyoncé's fourth studio album?	4
When was 4 released?	June 28, 2011
How many copies of 4 sold in the first week?	310,000
What magazine did Beyoncé write a story for about her earlier hiatus?	Essence
Where did Beyoncé perform for four nights of standing room only concerts in 2011?	New York's Roseland Ballroom
When did Beyonce have her first child?	January 7, 2012
Where did Beyonce give birth to her first child?	Lenox Hill Hospital
Beyonce's first child is named what?	Blue Ivy Carter
Her first appearance performing since giving birth was where?	Revel Atlantic City's Ovation Hall
When did Beyonce have her first child?	January 7, 2012
What was the child's name?	Blue Ivy Carter
How long was it after the birth of her child before she performed again?	Five months
How many nights did she perform at Atlantic City?	four nights
When did Beyoncé give birth to a daughter?	January 7, 2012
What did Beyoncé name her daughter?	Blue Ivy Carter
Where was Blue Ivy born?	Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Where was Beyoncé's first public performance after giving birth?	Revel Atlantic City's Ovation Hall
How many nights did Beyoncé play at the resort?	four
Destiny's Child released a compilation album about which topic?	romance
Beyonce's documentary movie was called what?	Life Is But a Dream
What did Beyonce sign in 2013?	global publishing agreement
When did Destiny's Child release its album "Love Songs"?	January 2013
What was the title of the added track in Love Songs?	Nuclear
At whose inauguration did she perform the National Anthem?	President Obama
How many Tweets per minute did the half time show get?	268,000 tweets per minute
When did Destiny's Child release Love Songs?	January 2013
What was the new track for Love Songs?	Nuclear
What did Beyoncé sing at President Obama's second inauguration?	the American national anthem
What event did Beyoncé perform at one month after Obama's inauguration?	Super Bowl XLVII halftime show
What is the name of Beyoncé's documentary film?	Life Is But a Dream
How many dates did Beyonce's "The Mrs. Carter Show" entail?	132
One of Beyonce's most successful tours yet was which one?	The Mrs. Carter Show
Beyonce wrote which song for the movie "Epic"?	Rise Up
Beyonce voiced a character in which animated film?	Epic
When did the tour begin?	April 15
Of what event was Beyonce honorary chair?	2013 Met Gala
What part did she voice for the movie Epic?	Queen Tara
What song did Beyonce record for the film Epic?	Rise Up
What was the name of Beyoncé's tour that she started on April 15?	The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour
How many dates did the Mrs. Carter Show World Tour have?	132
Which Amy Winehouse song did Beyoncé cover and release in May 2014?	Back to Black
Beyoncé was an honorary chair of the 2013 what?	Met Gala.
Which character in the film, Epic, was voiced by Beyoncé?	Queen Tara
Where did Beyonce release her 5th album to a huge surprise?	the iTunes Store
When did Beyonce get her fifth consecutive number one hit album?	December 13, 2013
Where was the album released?	the iTunes Store
Who joined Beyonce on her On The Run Tour?	Jay Z
Who reported Beyonce to e the top earning woman in music?	Forbes
How much more were her earnings that the year before?	more than double her earnings
When did Beyoncé release her fifth studio album?	December 13, 2013
How many digital copies of her fifth album did Beyoncé sell in six days?	one million
What song on Beyoncé's fifth studio album featured her husband?	Drunk in Love
What was the name of the tour featuring both Beyoncé and Jay Z?	On the Run Tour.
How many awards did Beyonce take home with her at the 57th Grammy Awards?	three
Which artist beat Beyonce out for Album of the year?	Beck
Which magazine did Beyonce pose on the cover for in August of 2015?	Vogue
Beyonce would perform with who at Superbowl 50?	Coldplay
Beyonce took home how many awards at the 57th Grammy Awards?	three
Beyonce lost to which artist for Album of the year?	Beck
Who did Beyonce perform next to during Superbowl 50?	Coldplay
If Beyonce won three Grammies in 2015, how many was she nominated for?	six awards
On what magazine was she the cover model?	Vogue
Who would she perform with at Superbowl 50?	Coldplay
With what British band did Beyonce perform on their album?	Coldplay
How many awards was Beyoncé nominated for at the 57th annual Grammys?	six
How many awards did Beyoncé win at the 57th Annual Grammys?	three
Beyoncé lost the Album of the Year award to which entertainer?	Beck
Which magazine did Beyoncé pose for the cover, making her the first black female artist to do so?	Vogue
Who did Beyonce perform with at Super Bowl 50?	Coldplay
Beyonce released the song "Formation" on which online music service?	Tidal
Beyonce's new single released before the super bowl was called what?	Formation
What day did Beyonce release her single, Formation?	February 6, 2016
How was the single released?	exclusively
What was the name of the streaming service?	Tidal
What kind of platform was the song released?	music streaming
When did Beyoncé release Formation?	February 6, 2016
Where did Beyoncé exclusively release her single, Formation?	Tidal
As of April 2014, how many albums have Jay Z and Beyonce sold together?	300 million
Where did Beyonce become pregnant?	Paris
Beyonce described what as the "hardest thing she had to endure"?	miscarriage
Who did Beyonce have a relationship with?	Jay Z
When were Beyonce and Jay Z married?	April 4, 2008
Together how records have they sold ?	300 million
How did Beyonce deal with the miscarriage of her child?	wrote music
Where was Beyonce when she became pregnant?	Paris
In which music video did Beyoncé star as Jay Z's girlfriend, creating speculation about their relationship?	'03 Bonnie & Clyde
When were Beyoncé and Jay Z married?	April 4, 2008
How many records combined have Beyoncé and Jay Z sold?	300 million
What did Beyoncé describe as the saddest thing in her life?	miscarriage
Where did Beyoncé get pregnant?	Paris.
Jay Z and Beyonce attended which event together in August of 2011?	MTV Video Music Awards
Beyonce confirmed what after performing one of her songs?	her pregnancy
How many people watched the 2011 MTV Music Awards?	12.4 million
Where did she announce her pregnancy?	2011 MTV Video Music Awards
Why was the broadcast the most-watched in history?	Her appearance
What even was recorded in the Guinness World Records?	most tweets per second
What was the most searched term in week of Aug 29, 2011?	Beyonce pregnant
What song did she perform at the MTV Awards?	Love on Top
Where did Beyoncé announce her pregnancy?	2011 MTV Video Music Awards
What song did Beyoncé sing prior to announcing her pregnancy?	Love on Top
How many people watched the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards?	12.4 million
What was the most searched term on Google for the week of August 29, 2011?	Beyonce pregnant
Jay Z has a website called what?	Lifeandtimes.com
Which song by Jay Z talked about the pregnancy struggles?	Glory
What was the name of Beyonce's daughter?	Blue Ivy Carter
At what hospital was the baby delivered?	Lenox Hill Hospital
What was the named of the song  dedicated to the child?	Glory
What does B.I.C. stand for?	Blue Ivy Carter
Who was credited for her cries on the song?	B.I.C.
When did Beyoncé give birth to her daughter?	January 7, 2012
What did Beyoncé and Jay Z name their daughter?	Blue Ivy Carter
What song did Jay Z release two days after Blue Ivy was born?	Glory
What is included at the end of Glory?	Blue Ivy's cries
How was Blue Ivy credited on Glory?	B.I.C.
Beyonce and Jay-Z went to a rally for the acquittal of whom?	George Zimmerman
Beyonce sang which song during the 2009 presidential inauguration?	America the Beautiful
How much did Beyonce raise for Obama at the 40/40 Club?	4 million
What did she endorse on March 26, 2013?	same sex marriage
What did they attend in July 2013?	a rally
What did she sing at the 2009 Presidential Inauguration?	America the Beautiful
What song did Beyoncé perform at the 2009 inauguration of Obama?	America the Beautiful
What song did Beyoncé perform at the first inaugural dance for the Obamas.	At Last
What social media platform did Beyoncé upload a picture of her paper ballot on?	Tumblr
When did Beyoncé endorse on March 26, 2013?	same sex marriage
Beyonce did an interview with which magazine and was asked about feminism?	Vogue
Beyonce supported which campaign that encourages leadership in girls?	Ban Bossy campaign
Where was Beyonce quoted as saying that she is a modern-day feminist?	Vogue
When did she say the she is a feminist?	April 2013
What campaign did she contribute to?	Ban Bossy
What song did she release in 2013 in response to a speech?	Flawless
What does Ban Bossy encourage?	leadership in girls
Beyoncé used words from which Nigerian author in her song, Flawless?	Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
Which campaign does Beyoncé contribute to that encourages leadership in females?	Ban Bossy
Beyonce signed a letter with who in 2015?	the ONE Campaign
An important UN summit took place when?	September 2015
The letter Beyonce signed focused on what issue?	women
What had to be set in developing funding?	priorities
When did Beyonce sign a letter for ONE Campaign?	2015
To whom was the letter addressed?	Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma
Who are these women?	head of the G7 in Germany
When will they meet?	September 2015
Who did Beyoncé sign a letter for in 2015?	the ONE Campaign
Who was the letter addressed to?	Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma
What was Angela Merkel serving as in relation to the letter?	the head of the G7 in Germany
What did the letter want the two recipients to focus on?	women
Beyonce along with Jay Z met with whom's family after their death?	Freddie Gray
Beyonce with Jay Z gave lots of money to bail who out of prison?	protesters
Who's death caused this protest?	Freddie Gray
How much bail money did they spend?	thousands of dollars
Beyonce beat out which musical artists for most paid between June 2007 and June 2008?	Madonna and Celine Dion
Beyonce and Jay Z got a Guinness World record for what in 2009?	highest-earning power couple
Beyonce became the highest-paid black musician in which year?	2014
Up until May of 2015, how much is Beyonce's total worth?	250 million
Between 2008 and 2009, which entertainers did Beyonce beat in earnings?	Madonna and Celine Dion
In 2012 who placed Beyonce at 16 in the Celebrity List?	Forbes
When did she and Jay Z become the highest paid black celebrity couple?	2011
How much did she earn in 2014?	115 million
What is Beyonce's net worth in 2015?	250 million
Who began reporting Beyoncé's annual earnings, starting in 2008?	Forbes
When did Beyoncé become the highest paid black musician, ever?	April 2014.
Who predicted that Beyoncé would become the highest paid black entertainer?	MTV
When did Jay Z and Beyoncé become the first music couple worth over a billion dollars?	2013
Beyonce's range in singing is how many octaves?	four
who talked about Beyonce's tone and timbre as distinctive?	Jody Rosen
Which critic called Beyonce's voice "versatile"?	The Daily Mail
Which era was credited to have influenced Beyonce's singing style by Jody Rosen?	hip hop
How many octaves does Beyonce have?	four octaves
What did the Daily Mail say about Beyonce's voice?	versatile
What does Rosen claim influenced Beyonce's style?	hip hop
What do other critics claim?	praise her range and power
How many octaves does Beyoncé's voice span?	four
Why is Beyoncé known as the centerpiece of Destiny's Child?	Her vocal abilities
New York Times' Jon Pareles calls Beyoncé's voice velvety yet what?	tart
What does Jody Rosen say influenced Beyoncé's vocal style?	the hip hop era
Music from Beyonce is generally categorized as what genre?	R&B
Besides R&B, which genres does Beyonce dabble in?	pop, soul and funk
Beyonce mostly releases English songs, but what other language did she release songs?	Spanish
Spanish songs Beyonce released were for what?	re-release of B'Day
Beyonce was coached for her Spanish songs by which American?	Rudy Perez
What kind of music does Beyonce do?	R&B
What language does she mainly sing?	English
What other language has she sung?	Spanish
What album did she re-release in Spanish?	B'Day
What style of music does Beyoncé usually perform?	R&B
What language did Beyoncé release several songs in?	Spanish
Who coached Beyoncé for her Spanish recordings?	Rudy Perez.
What album did the Spanish songs come from?	B'Day.
Beyonce does not create which aspect of her music?	beats
An example of a song aimed towards a male audience is what?	Cater 2 U
What theme was Beyonce's early music?	female-empowerment
With Jay Z what were her new themes?	man-tending anthems
What does she get credits for in her music?	co-producing credits
What part of production does she do?	melodies
Beyoncé's early recordings empowered who?	Women
In addition to co-writing credits, Beyoncé also got what credits for most of her albums?	co-producing
Rather than beats, what two things does Beyoncé usually come up with for producers?	melodies and ideas
Pop Songwriter of the Year award in 2001 was awarded to whom?	Beyoncé
Beyonce received the Pop Songwriter of the Year award at which event?	American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers Pop Music Awards
Beyonce has the same number of writing credits on number one singles as whom?	Diane Warren
Beyonce joined 2 other women on what list from Billboard magazine in 2011?	Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters
When did Beyonce become the first African American woman to win Pop songwriter of the year?	2001
What place is she tied for in songwriting credits?	third
Who listed her at number 17 in their list of  Top 20 hot 100 Songwriters?	Billboard magazine
Where does she place in writing credits  for three number one songs?	third woman
What did Beyoncé win in 2001, making her the first black woman to do so?	Pop Songwriter of the Year award
Who gave Beyoncé the Pop Songwriter of the Year award in 2001?	the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers Pop Music Awards.
Beyoncé was one of how many women on Billboard magazine's 2011 "Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters" list.	three
What number was Beyoncé on the Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters list?	17
To whom did Beyonce credit as her major influence on her music?	Michael Jackson
How old was Beyonce when she went to her first Michael Jackson concert as a kid?	five
Beyonce gave a tribute award to who in 2006?	Michael Jackson
Beyonce cites Mariah Carey to making her want to start doing what?	vocal runs
Who influenced Beyonce?	Michael Jackson
What song by Mariah Carey influenced her?	Vision of Love
Who is Beyoncé's biggest musical influence?	Michael Jackson
What was Beyoncé's first concert?	Michael Jackson
Who does Beyoncé feel is an all-around entertainer?	Diana Ross
Who does she credit for the inspiration to "get up there and do what she did"?	Whitney Houston
What song caused Beyoncé to practice runs as a child?	Vision of Love
What themes were influenced by her acting role in Dreamgirls?	feminism and female empowerment
Which singer did Beyonce honor by entertaining with her song "Deja Vu"?	Josephine Baker
Who motivated Beyonce to explore other areas of music?	Etta James
What movie influenced Beyonce towards empowerment themes?	Dreamgirls
How did Etta James influence her?	boldness
Where did she perform wearing Baker's hula skirt?	2006 Fashion Rocks concert
What singer inspired Beyoncé's B'Day album?	Josephine Baker.
What song did Beyoncé sing at a 2006 concert to honor Josephine Baker?	Déjà Vu
Beyonce has noted which first lady with saying "She proves you can do it all"?	Michelle Obama
Which month and year did Beyonce credit Madonna for inspiring her to take control of her career?	February 2013
Beyonce has said that who embodies the "definition of inspiration and a strong woman"?	Oprah Winfrey
Who personally influences Beyonce?	Michelle Obama
Hoe does she describe Oprah Winfrey?	a strong woman
How does she describe Jean- Michel Basquiat?	lyrical and raw
How does Madonna influence her?	to take control of her own career
How does she describe Jay Z?	continuing inspiration
Who inspires Beyoncé because "she does it all?"	First Lady Michelle Obama
Who does Beyoncé describe as the definition of inspiration?	Oprah Winfrey
Who does Beyoncé describe as lyrical and raw?	Jean-Michel Basquiat
Who inspired Beyoncé to take control of her career?	Madonna
Beyonce had an all-female tour band whose name was what?	Suga Mama
Beyonce had singers in the background known by the name as?	The Mamas
The Mamas members included which 3 musicians?	Montina Cooper-Donnell, Crystal Collins and Tiffany Moniqué Riddick
The Mamas first appearance was when?	2006
What band did Beyonce introduce in 2006?	Suga Mama
What song name does the band Suga Mama  and a song on the B'Day album share?	Suga Mama
Where did Suga Mama band make their first appearance?	2006 BET Awards
What band supports Beyonce in her tours?	Suga Mama
What is the name of Beyoncé's female tour band?	Suga Mama
Suga Mama is also a song on which Beyoncé album?	B'Day
What are Beyoncé's backup singers called?	The Mamas
When did The Mamas make their debut?	the 2006 BET Awards
What characteristics has Beyonce received acclaim for?	stage presence and voice
Which former president of Def Jam called Beyonce the greatest entertainer alive?	L.A. Reid
For what does Beyonce receive praise?	stage presence
Who chose her as number one on his list of Best singers/ Dancers?	Jarett Wieselman
How has L.A. Reid described her?	greatest entertainer alive
How does Alice Jones describe her?	she's almost too good
Who has Beyoncé at number one on her Five Best Singer/Dancers?	Jarett Wieselman
Who has said that Beyoncé is the best entertainer alive?	L.A. Reid
Beyonce self proclaimed alter ego is named what?	Sasha Fierce
Her alter ego was born when according to Beyonce?	making of "Crazy in Love"
What year did Beyonce do away with Sasha Fierce?	2010
Beyonce brought back Sasha Fierce during which event?	Revel Presents: Beyoncé Live
How does she describe Sasha?	too aggressive, too strong
Later what did she say about Sasha?	she would bring her back
What is the name of Beyoncé's alter ego?	Sasha Fierce.
When did Beyoncé introduce Sasha Fierce?	2008
Sasha Fierce was created during the making of what song?	Crazy in Love
Who did Beyoncé tell in February 2010 that Sasha Fierce was no longer needed?	Allure magazine
Beyonce's sex appeal is characterized as what?	wide-ranging
Which music journalist described Beyonce as a "crossover sex symbol?"	Touré
Which word spawned from a term used to describe Beyonce in 2006?	Bootylicious
Bootylicious was a song from which act that Beyonce performed with?	Destiny's Child
Oxford Dictionary added which word from the 2000s dedicated to Beyonce?	Bootylicious
What word is often used to describe Beyonce/	Bootylicious
When was the term added to the dictionary?	2006
What journalist wrote that Beyoncé was a "sex symbol"?	Touré
Because of Beyoncé's physical shape, what slang term has been used to describe her?	Bootylicious
In what year was the slang term from a title of a Destiny's Child song that is also used to describe Beyoncé put in the dictionary?	2006
How does Beyoncé say she likes to dress off-stage?	sexily
in September 2010, what career area did Beyonce start exploring?	modelling
Beyonce's first modelling event was at where?	Tom Ford's Spring/Summer 2011 fashion show
"World's Most Beautiful woman" was declared to Beyonce by which national magazine?	People
Which month and year did GQ feature Beyonce on its cover?	January 2013
What TV network listed Beyonce as number 1 on its 100 Sexiest Artists list?	VH1
Who called Beyonce the World's most Beautiful Woman?	People
Who called her Hottest Female Singer of all Time?	Complex
When did she appear on the cover of GQ?	2013
VH1 listed her at what number on their 100 Sexiest Artists list?	number 1
What year did Beyoncé first model for Tom Ford?	2010
What magazine said Beyoncé was the "World's Most Beautiful Woman"?	People
What title did Complex award Beyoncé?	Hottest Female Singer of All Time
What museum has made several models of Beyoncé in wax?	Madame Tussauds Wax Museums
Which parent of Beyonce's help co-write a book?	Her mother
Which African-American woman before Beyonce had posed for SI Swimsuit issue?	Tyra Banks
What was the title of Beyonce's mother's book?	Destiny's Style
When was she on the Sports Illustrated cover?	2007
Who was she the second  African American on the cover after?	Tyra Banks
Beyoncé was the second African American woman featured as a swimsuit cover on the magazine, who was first?	Tyra Banks
What magazine said Beyoncé was the "best-dressed celebrity"?	People
Beyonce has a fan base that is referred to as what?	The Bey Hive
Before the Bey Hive, fans of Beyonce were called what?	The Beyontourage
Which social media company proclaimed Beyonce fans are know as the Bey Hive?	Twitter
What is Beyonce's fan base called?	Bey Hive
What did the fans used to be called?	Beyontourage
What is the latest term used to describe Beyoncé fans?	Bey Hive
What was the former word given to Beyoncé fans?	Beyontourage
What word does "Bey Hive" derive from?	beehive
Beyonce has a clothing line known as what?	House of Deréon
Which French magazine did Beyonce show up on the cover of?	L'Officiel
Beyonce was seen wearing what on the french magazine that caused controversy?	blackface and tribal makeup
Which year did PETA spark controversy with Beyonce?	2006
What did PETA criticize Beyonce for in 2006?	for wearing and using fur
What French Magazine cover did the media criticize?	L'Officiel
How was she dressed on the cover of L'Officiel?	in blackface and tribal makeup
What French magazine did Beyoncé appear in wearing blackface and tribal makeup?	L'Officiel
What clothing line of Beyoncé drew PETA criticism?	House of Deréon.
What type of magazine is L'Officiel?	French fashion magazine
Which racial community gave criticism to Beyonce?	African-American
Which professor from Northeastern University wrote about how race correlates with these criticisms of Beyonce?	Emmett Price
Which company was accused of coloring Beyonce's hair?	L'Oréal
What did Vogue request?	natural pictures be used
How did L'Oreal respond to accusations of changing pictures?	it is categorically untrue
In addition to her light skin color, what else has made part of the African American community criticize Beyoncé?	costuming
In 2007, which music professor said he believes this criticism does involve race as well?	Emmett Price
Who was accused of lightening Beyoncé's skin for an advertisement?	L'Oréal
What advertisement was Beyoncé's skin supposedly lightened in?	Feria hair color advertisements
Who did Beyoncé tell in 2013 to only use natural pictures of her rather than retouched images?	H&M
Artist of the Decade was bestowed upon Beyonce from which magazine?	The Guardian
Whats the first year that Beyonce appear on the Time 100 list?	2013
Beyonce than appeared again on the Time 100 list in what year?	2014
What did the Guardian name her?	Artist of the Decade
When did Beyonce first make the Time 100 List?	2013
When was she again on the Time 100 List and on the cover?	2014
Who said that she is the reigning national voice?	Baz Luhrmann
Who stated that Beyoncé is the most important musician of the 21st century?	Jody Rosen
Which publication named Beyoncé the Artist of the Decade?	The Guardian
What list did Beyoncé make in 2013?	Time 100 list
Who said Beyoncé is the heir-apparent diva of the United States?	Baz Luhrmann
What year was Beyoncé featured both on the Time 100 list as well as the cover of the issue?	2014
Which rock band cited Beyonce on their third album?	White Rabbits
Which friend learned from Beyonce while preparing for the film, "Country Strong?"	Gwyneth Paltrow
Nicky Minaj became a spokesperson for which brand of soda after seeing Beyonce involved with it?	Pepsi
What influenced Nicki Minaj to join the Pepsi global campaign?	Beyoncé's Pepsi commercial
Which band listed Beyonce as an inspiration on their latest album?	White Rabbits
What about Beyonce has influenced many entertainers?	work
For what film was Paltrow studying Beyonce ?	Country Strong
Which Indie band said Beyoncé was an inspiration for one of hteir albums?	White Rabbits
What was the name of the White Rabbits' album?	Milk Famous
Who studied Beyoncé during live concerts for research for a film's music role?	Gwyneth Paltrow
What was the name of the film that Gwyneth Paltrow starred in as a musician?	Country Strong.
Beyoncé's Pepsi commercial inspired which star to join Pepsi's global campaign in 2012?	Nicki Minaj
VH1 declared what song the "Greatest song of the 2000s?"	Crazy in Love
How many Grammy awards did "Crazy in Love" win?	two
How many did Crazy in Love sell to become one of the greatest selling singles in history?	8 million
What type of organism was named after Beyonce in 2012?	fly
A place for Beyonce in the Rock and Roll Hall of fame was awarded when?	July 2014
Which of Beyonce's songs was called Greatest Song of the 2000s?	Crazy in Love
How many Grammy awards did Crazy in Love get?	earned two Grammy Awards
How many copies did Crazy in Love sell?	around 8 million copies
Who released the single Girls Love Beyonce?	Drake
Which publication considers Crazy in Love to be one of the top 500 songs of all time?	Rolling Stone
Who sang "Girls Love Beyoncé" in 2013?	Drake
What did Bryan Lessard name after Beyoncé?	a species of horse fly
How many copies of her albums as Beyonce sold in the US?	15 million
Totaling worldwide, how many records as Beyonce sold?	118 million
How many certifications was Beyonce awarded by the RIAA?	64
When Beyonce was with Destiny's Child, how many albums did she manage to sell?	60 million
Who was the first female to achieve the International Artist Award at the American Music Awards?	Beyoncé
How many albums has Beyonce as a solo artist sold in the U.S?	15 million
How many has she sold worldwide?	118 million
How many records has she sold with Destiny's Child?	60 million
When did she receive the Legend Award?	2008 World Music Awards
How many music certifications has she received in the 2000s?	64 certifications
How many records has Beyoncé sold in the United States?	over 15 million
How many records has Beyoncé sold throughout the world?	over 118 million
Who cited Beyoncé as being the top certified artist of the 2000s?	The Recording Industry Association of America
How many certifications did RIAA give Beyoncé?	64
When did Beyoncé receive the Legend Award?	the 2008 World Music Awards
How many Grammys has Beyonce won total with and without Destiny's Child?	20
Who is the only other woman with more Grammy awards than Beyonce?	Alison Krauss
Beyonce has been awarded how many Grammy nominations?	52
Beyonce holds the record for how many wins in one night by a female?	six
How many awards at the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards in 2006 did Beyonce bring home?	two
How many Grammies has Beyonce won?	20 Grammy Awards
How many Grammy nominations does Beyonce have?	52 nominations
When did she set the record for most Grammy awards won in one night?	2010
Who tied her record for most Grammies won in one night in 2012?	Adele
How many Grammys has Beyoncé won?	20
How many Grammy nominations has Beyoncé had?	52
What Beyoncé song was song of the year on 2010?	"Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)"
What movie had Beyoncé nominated as Best Actress for Golden Globe Awards?	Dreamgirls
Which soda company has Beyonce partnered with since 2002?	Pepsi
Pepsi paid Beyonce how much in 2012 for her endorsement?	50 million
Which organization wrote a letter to Beyonce after her Pepsi endorsement deal?	The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPINET)
What percentage of people were positive about Beyonce's endorsement of Pepsi?	70
When did Beyonce begin doing Pepsi advetisments?	2002
Who was in the commercial with Beyonce in 2004?	Britney Spears, Pink, and Enrique Iglesias
What did she agree to do for 50 million dollars in 2012?	endorse Pepsi
Who sent her a letter asking that she reconsider the Pepsi deal?	Center for Science in the Public Interest
What soft drink company has Beyoncé worked with since 2002?	Pepsi
How much did Beyoncé get for a deal with a soft drink company in 2012?	$50 million
Who asked her to change her mind about the soft drink deal due to the nature of the product?	The Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPINET)
What organization discovered that the advertisements Beyoncé did for the soft drink company were 70% positive?	NetBase
Beyonce worked with who on her perfumes, True Star and True Star Gold?	Tommy Hilfiger
The world's best selling celebrity perfume line belongs to whom?	Beyoncé
Beyonce's first fragrance had what name?	Heat
The Mrs. Carter Show Limited Edition was released in what year?	2013
How much money did The Mrs. Carter Show Limited Edition fragrance make?	400 million
What was Beyonce's 2010  perfume called?	Heat
When was her second perfume, Heat Rush, released?	2011
What was Beyonce's third perfume named?	Pulse
How many editions of Heat have been launched?	six editions
Which Emporio Armani fragrance did Beyoncé promote in 2007?	Diamonds
What year did Beyoncé introduce her first fragrance?	2010.
What was Beyoncé's first fragrance called?	Heat
How many editions of Heat exist?	six
How young was Beyonce when she acquired deals from American Express and L'Oreal?	18
What was the name of the video game that was cancelled for Beyonce?	Starpower: Beyoncé
When did Beyonce begin her deals with name brands?	since the age of 18
How many people lost jobs when Beyonce left the video game deal?	70 staff
How was the suit settled?	out of court
What was the name of the video game?	Starpower: Beyoncé
What video game did Beyoncé back out of?	Starpower: Beyoncé
What company was producing the video game?	GateFive
How many people lost their jobs over Beyoncé backing out of the deal?	70
When was the disagreement settled out of court?	June 2013
Who did Bayonce's management go into business with in 2014?	fashion retailer Topshop
After their agreement together, Beyonce's and Topshop" new business was called what?	Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd
What type of clothing does Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd produce?	activewear
The company and products were set to be in stores when?	fall of 2015
Who did Beyonce partner with in London?	Topshop
When will the new line launch?	2015
What is the name of Beyoncé's management company?	Parkwood Entertainment
Who did Beyoncé and Parkwood Entertainment partner with in October 2014?	Topshop
Where is Topshop located?	London
What was the new division of Topshop because of the partnership?	activewear
When was it discovered Beyonce was a co-owner of the music service, Tidal?	March 30, 2015
The parent company of Tidal became under the ownership of whom in 2015?	Jay Z
When was it announced that Beyonce was  a co-owner in Tidal?	March 30, 2015
What kind of service is Tidal?	music streaming service
What is a criticism of other streaming services?	low payout of royalties
What music streaming system is Beyoncé part owner of?	Tidal.
What is the parent company of the music service Beyoncé owns part of?	Aspiro
Who acquired the parent company of the music service Beyoncé owns part of?	Jay Z
What music service is accused of providing low royalty amounts?	Spotify
House of Dereon became known through Beyonce and which of Beyonce's relatives?	her mother
Beyonce's grandma's name was?	Agnèz Deréon
Beyonce's family's company name is what?	Beyond Productions
What types of garments are sold by Beyonce's clothing line?	sportswear, denim offerings with fur, outerwear and accessories that include handbags and footwear
Which two countries can you purchase Beyonce's clothing line?	US and Canada
Who partnered with Beyonce to start the clothing line, Dereon?	her mother
When did Beyonce and her mother start Dereon?	2005
Who was the business named for in Beyonce's family?	grandmother, Agnèz Deréon
Where were items from the clothing line displayed?	in Destiny's Child's shows and tours
Who shares in the House of Deréon fashion line introduction with Beyoncé?	her mother
What is the name of the House of Deréon junior collection?	Deréon.
What type of accessory company did Beyonce partner with in 2005?	shoe
In 2010, Beyonce released Dereon to what country?	Brazil
Back-to-school shopping was introduced in what year of Beyonce's clothing line?	2009
What did Beyonce's Fashion Diva  feature?	House of Deréon collection
What new idea did Beyonce and her mother launch in 2009?	Sasha Fierce for Deréon
When did Beyonce partner with C&A to sell fashion in Brazil?	May 27, 2010
What company did Beyoncé get together with in 2005 to add shoes to her fashions?	House of Brands
What was the name of the game put out by Starwave Mobile in 2008 that featured Beyoncé fashions?	Beyoncé Fashion Diva
What was the name of the junior fashions launched in 2009 by Beyoncé and her mother?	Sasha Fierce for Deréon
Who did Beyoncé team up with in 2010 to get her fashions into Brazil?	C&A
Sasha Fierce for Deréon fashions were sold at stores that included Macy's and what other store?	Dillard's
Beyonce, during October 2014, partnered with whom to produce an outdoor line of clothing?	Topshop
Beyonce and Topshops first products were to be sold in stores when?	autumn 2015
What is the new business called?	Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd
What is Beyonce's percentage of ownership in the new venture?	50
When will the full line appear?	April 2016
What company did Beyoncé contract with to sell clothing in England?	Topshop
What is the name of the equal partnership's fashion line between Beyoncé and the British company to come out in 2016?	Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd
What type of clothing does the British partnership with Beyoncé sell?	activewear
What national disaster caused Beyonce to create the Survivor Foundation?	Hurricane Katrina
How much cash did Beyonce put into the venture, the Survivor Foundation at startup?	250,000
What hurricane years later after Katrina did the organization provide support for?	Ike
What did Beyonce and Rowland found in 2005?	the Survivor Foundation
How much did Beyonce initially contribute to the foundation?	$250,000
How has this foundation changed in recent years?	expanded to work with other charities
What foundation did Beyoncé start after Hurricane Katrina?	Survivor Foundation
How much money did Beyoncé contribute at the beginning of her Hurricane Katrina foundation?	$250,000.
What other hurricane did Beyoncé's foundation help with?	Hurricane Ike
Who did Beyonce participate with in the Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit?	George Clooney and Wyclef Jean
Beyonce opened a cosmetology center in what location?	Brooklyn Phoenix House
After Osama Bin Laden's death, what single did Beyonce cover?	God Bless the USA
How much did the T-shirt with Beyonce's image on it make?	$1 million
What enterprise did Beyonce and her mother start on March 5, 2010?	Beyoncé Cosmetology Center at the Brooklyn Phoenix House
What charity benefited from  the release of the song, God Bless the USA?	New York Police and Fire Widows' and Children's Benefit Fund
What did she participate in with George Clooney?	Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit
Which two stars did Beyoncé help with their Haiti Earthquake organization?	George Clooney and Wyclef Jean
What did Beyoncé open at the Brooklyn Phoenix House in 2010?	Beyoncé Cosmetology Center
What Lee Greenwood song did Beyoncé cover after Osama bin Laden was killed?	God Bless the USA
Which national event caused Beyonce to produce "Demand a Plan?"	Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting
What song did Beyonce contribute to the campaign?	I Was Here
Beyonce is contributing to which food-donation campaign?	Miss a Meal
On June 1 , 2013 where was the concert held for "a Chime for Change"?	London
Beyonce was speaking about whom when she said her gift was "finding the best qualities in every human being."?	her mother
The Demand a Plan video campaign followed what tragic event?	Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.
What was the focus of the Gucci Chime for Change campaign?	spread female empowerment
What crowdfunding platform was used in the concert?	Catapult
What is the name of the campaign that Beyoncé and others are involved in that deals with gun control?	Demand A Plan
What school shooting prompted the creation of Demand A Plan?	Sandy Hook Elementary School
What song did Beyoncé donate to the 2012 World Humanitarian Day campaign?	I Was Here
Who did Beyoncé work with in 2013 on the Chime for Change campaign?	Salma Hayek and Frida Giannini
Where does the state's name come from?	Spanish word montaña (mountain)
What is the states rank in size?	4th
What is its rank in popularion?	44th
How many ranges are part of the Rocky Mountains?	77
Where does the state's name come from?	from the Spanish word montaña
What year was the state tree selected?	1908
When was the state tree actually assigned?	1949
What year was the state animal selected?	1981
What is the state animal of Montana?	grizzly bear
What is the state fossil	Maiasaura
When was the state song composed?	1910
What is Montana's motto?	Oro y Plata
What does Montana's motto mean?	"Gold and Silver"
When was the motto adopted?	1865
WHen was the state flower adopted?	1895
What is the state flower for Montana?	bitterroot
How much of the states population does the "Big 7" have?	35 percent
How many counties does Montana have?	56
What city in Montana has over 100,000 people?	Billings
What two cities have a population over 50,000?	Missoula and Great Falls
Where does the state's name mean?	"mountain"
What did the Spanish call this region?	Montaña del Norte
What is the total area of Montana?	147,040 square miles
What state does Montana border to the south?	Wyoming
What state does it border to the west?	Idaho
Where are most of the states mountain ranges?	western half of the state
How much of the state is prarie?	About 60 percent
Which direction do the rivers flow near the Triple Divide Peak?	north
Where does the Saskatchewan River empty into?	Hudson Bay.
How high is the Beartooth Plateau?	over 10,000 feet
What is thie highest point in the state?	Granite Peak
How high is Granite Peak?	12,799 feet
How many seats do Democrats hold in the state US Senate's seats?	one
How long has the single congressional district been Republican?	1996
What is the split in the State House of Representatives?	59 to 41.
What is the split in the state Senate controller by the Republicans?	29 to 21
In elections, what is Montana considered?	a swing state
What year was the last Democrat for president supported?	1992
How often has Montana voted for a Democratic governor?	60 percent
How often does Montana voted for a Democratic president?	40 percent
What is the name of the busiest airport in Montana?	Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport
When did Bozeman Airport surpass Billings Logan as the largest busiest in Montana?	2013
What is the states largest railway?	BNSF Railway
How long have railroads been important since in Montana	1880s
What is the name of the big game hunting foundation in Montana?	Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation
What season is black bear hunting allowed?	spring
What two predators can be hunted in specific numbers?	wolves and mountain lions
Since when has Montana been a destination for trout fisheries?	1930s
What fishing organization has its home here?	Federation of Fly Fishers
What type of fisheries does the state have?	trout and kokanee salmon fisheries
What Robert Redford movie was shot here in 1002?	A River Runs Through It
When was the Montana Territory formed?	April 26, 1864
When was the first formal school on record?	1862
How much were students charged per week?	$1.75
When did the first public school in Virginia City formed?	1886
How many miles of rivers are known for high class trout?	450
What Bay do rivers from Montana feed?	Hudson Bay
Where do the watersheds divide at?	Triple Divide Peak in Glacier National Park.
What ocean do rivers flow into from Montana?	Pacific Ocean
What rivers form the Missouri River?	Jefferson, Madison and Gallatin rivers
Near where do the rivers form up for the Missouri river merging?	Three Forks
Which direction does the water flow in this area?	north
Which year was the Fort Peck Reservoir designated a National Scenic River?	1976
Which direction does the Yellowstone River flow through the national park?	north
Where does the Yellowstone meet the Missouri river?	North Dakota
How many named lakes are there in Montana?	at least 3,223
What is the name of the largest freshwater lake in western United States?	Flathead Lake
What is the name of the largest reservoir in the state?	Fort Peck Reservoir
What river is the Fort Peck Reservoir on?	Missouri river
About how much area do forests cover the state?	approximately 25 percent
How many different types of fish are diverse to Montana?	90
What type of bear does Montana have the highest population of?	grizzly bear
How many endangered species are in Montana?	five
How many species of game fish have hunting seasons?	at least 17
What is the annual precipitation?	15 inches
How much precipitation does Heron recieve?	34.70 inches
How much precipitation does the  Grinnell Glacier recieve?	105 inches
How many tax brackets does Montana have?	7
What is the highest tax bracket in Montana?	6.9 percent
Does Montana have a sales tax?	no
About how many Native Americans live in Montana?	Approximately 66,000
When was the Indian Appropriations Act passed?	1851
What year was the Dawes act passed?	1887
Where are the Little Shell Chippewa headquartered?	Great Falls
About what percentage of the Native Americans in Montana live off the reservation?	63%
What is the largest European-American race in Montana?	German
What was Helena originally founded as?	a mining camp
What percentage of the population in Montana are Native peoples?	6.5 percent
What three counties are Native Americans a majority?	Big Horn, Glacier, and Roosevelt
Between what years did the Native population increase by 27.9%	1980 and 1990
In what year did many cities in Montana set heat records?	2007
What month was the hottest ever recorded?	July
What problem has substantially increased in its severity?	forest fires
What year was the Hellgate treaty formed?	1855
Who negotiated the Hellgate treaty?	Isaac Stevens
What year was the treaty ratified?	1859
What did the treaty establish?	Flathead Indian Reservation
What was the name of the first US Army post?	Camp Cooke
Where was Camp Cooke situated?	on the Missouri River
What year was the Great Sioux War?	1876
What year did the Battle of Bear Paw happen?	1877
What is the official language of Montana?	English
What percentage of the population in Montana speak English?	94.8 percent
What is the second most common language spoken in Montana?	Spanish
How about many Spanish speakers are there in the state?	13,040
ABout how many people in the state of Montana speak Cheyenne?	about 1,700
What percent of the state is White?	89.4 percent
What percent of the state is Native American Indian?	6.3 percent
Hispanics account for what percentage of Monatanas population?	2.9
What was the population of the state in 2015?	1,032,949
How much did the population increase since 2010?	4.40%
What county saw the largest growth?	Gallatin County
What city saw the largest growth?	Kalispell
What year was Jeannette Rankin vote against war the first time?	1917
When did she vote a second time against war?	1941
What were conscientious objectors sent to Montana to do?	smokejumpers and for other forest fire-fighting duties.
About how many bison were in Montana in 1870?	over 13 million
In 1884 about how many bison remained?	about 325
Who pleaded to Congress for slaughtering bison?	General Philip Sheridan
What year did General Sheridan approach Congress about killing bison?	1875
When did the Northern Pacific Railroad reach Montana from the west?	1881
When did the Northern Pacific Railroad reach Montana from the east?	1882
What years were the railroad challenged by Chief Sitting Bull?	1871, 1872 and 1873
What year was the Great White Sioux War?	1876
When was the transcontinental National Pacific Railroad finished?	1883
When was the first constitutional convention held in Montana?	1866
Why was this constitutional convention held?	bid for statehood
When was the second constitutional convention held?	1884
What year was Montana's statehood approved?	1889
What other three states were approved in the same year?	North Dakota, South Dakota and Washington
What year did the Homestead Act provide land to settlers?	1862
How much land did the Homestead Act allow?	160 acres
What year was the first homestead claim claimed?	1868
When was the Desert Land Act passed?	1877
How much land did the Desert Land Act allot?	640 acres
How much was the charge per acre at first?	$.25
Who promoted settlement in Montana in the early 1900s	James J. Hill
In what year was the Reclamation Act passed?	1902
What year was the Enlarged Homestead Act passed?	1909
How much land was alloted in the new Enlarged Homestead Act?	320 acres
When did Congress pass the Espionage Act?	1917
When was the Sedition Act passed?	1918
What were these acts make do to laws?	criminalized criticism of the U.S. government, military, or symbols through speech or other means
How many people were arrested from the Montana Act?	200
How many of the 200 arrested in the Montana Act were convicted?	78
How many Montanans entered the miltary in the first year of the war?	40,000-plus
How many Montanans joined the military in the war total?	over 57,000
About how many Montanans  died in the war?	At least 1500
Who trained at the military grounds in Montana?	First Special Service Force or "Devil's Brigade,"
Where were air bases built in Montana?	Great Falls, Lewistown, Cut Bank and Glasgow
In the judgement, it is stated that the aim of the Genocide Convention, at its most simplest, is preventing the destruction of which victims?	entire human groups
In addressing the issue of "in part," the Appeals Chamber found that the part must be a substantial part of what?	that group
Which phrase is especially contentious within international humanitarian law?	"in whole or in part"
What 2001 case was declared genocide by the International Criminal Tribune for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)?	Prosecutor v. Radislav Krstic
Who contributed to guiding the Appeals chamber in its conclusion?	opinions of respected commentators
Two bodies of the United Nations agreed with what restricted provision in defining genocide?	that biological-physical destruction was necessary
A definition of what, by the States, was necessary to preserve and expand genocidal law?	the type of group destruction
Which country's courts were noted by the ECHR for taking a wider stance on provisions of genocide laws?	Germany
The ECHR found most states to have largely undefined definitions of group destruction, despite what factor?	Convention States municipal laws
In its preparations, what was the source of other considerations by the ECHR?	the judgements of several international and municipal courts
In 1948, what general assembly resolution established genocide as a prosecutable act?	the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
In which war-era country was the Holocaust immortalized?	Nazi Germany
Following World War II, whose bid was successful in establishing the worldwide acceptance and the nascent legal definition of genocide?	Lemkin
Which group convened officially for the first time in 1946?	United Nations General Assembly
While recognizing genocide, what did the UN General Assembly fail to do in its resolution?	provide a legal definition of the crime
Which provision was initially included in the first write-up of the Convention and then removed?	political killings
What is one of the countries that objected to the inclusion of political killings in the early version of the Convention?	USSR
What was the primary concern of other nations who objected to including political groups in the definition of genocide?	international intervention in domestic politics
Which distinguished academic of genocide highlighted several other countries opposed to including political genocide in the Convention?	William Schabas
What atrocity motivated a self-serving USSR to object to the provision of political killings drafted into the Convention?	its own Great Purge
Which group was accused by the ECHR of having an overly constricted idea of the meaning of destruction in defining genocide?	majority of legal scholars
What groups did the ECHR feel should be included as potential victims of genocide?	national, racial, religious or ethnic
In 2007 what former case did the European Court of Human Rights draw on to further refine qualifiers of genocide?	Jorgic v. Germany
What form of destruction was considered too limited by a smaller group of experts?	biological-physical
Prior to being a formal legal term, how was the word "genocide" used in an indictment scenario?	as a descriptive term
Who ultimately defined genocide as a series of strategies leading up to the annihilation of an entire group?	Lemming
Lemming's concept of genocide triggered legal action in which realm?	international relations and community
What was the nationality of anthropologist Peg LeVine?	Australian
What relative term did LeVine coin to refer to cultural destruction, without the death of its members?	"ritualcide"
What term was coined to describe the destruction of culture?	ritualcide
What kind of scientist is Peg LeVine?	anthropologist
What elements of group existence, other than people themselves, can be targets of genocide?	language, culture, and economic infrastructure
What has been the primary focus in the study of genocide?	legal aspect of the term
In prosecuting genocide, what must the act be formally acknowledged as?	a crime
In a general aspect, what is genocide viewed as?	the deliberate killing of a certain group
In trials of genocidal crimes, what responsibly party is difficult to prosecute?	officials in power of a state or area
Long before genocide was established as a legal term, what treaty was in place to protect various groups from persecution and mass killings?	the Peace of Westphalia
Why does genocide often go unpunished?	genocide is more often than not committed by the officials in power
Who was the Peace of Westphalia designed to protect?	ethnic, national, racial and in some instances religious groups
What year was the Peace of Westphalia signed?	1648
When was the word "genocide" first used?	1944
What is the etymology of the term "genocide"?	The word genocide is the combination of the Greek prefix geno- (meaning tribe or race) and caedere (the Latin word for to kill).
What is the definition of genocide?	a specific set of violent crimes that are committed against a certain group with the attempt to remove the entire group from existence or to destroy them
Who coined the term "genocide"?	Raphael Lemkin
Who referred to acts of genocide in 1941?	Winston Churchill
The word "genocide" was unknown until what year?	1944
In 1941, how did Winston Churchill refer to the mass killings of Russian prisoners of war?	as "a crime without a name"
What was the name of the Polish-Jewish lawyer who first described Nazi atrocities as "genocide?"	Raphael Lemkin
What is the etymological basis of the word "genocide?"	Greek prefix geno- (meaning tribe or race) and caedere (the Latin word for to kill)
As it pertains to violent crimes against targeted groups, what is the ultimate motivation within the actions of genocide?	to remove the entire group from existence or to destroy them
Several considerations were involved in meeting the requirement to determine what?	when the targeted part is substantial enough
What is the key aspect of the targeted part of the group at the starting point of the inquiry?	The numeric size
The number of people targeted in a genocide should not be solely evaluated by what?	absolute terms
In addition to the numeric size of a targeted group, what other consideration was useful to the ICTY?	prominence within the group
The issue of what is raised by judges in Paragraph 13?	perpetrators' access to the victims
What is the basis for suggesting that several factors regarding the activity of the perpetrators be considered?	historical examples of genocide
The extent of what by the perpetrators was considered in an examination of their activity and level of control?	possible extent of their reach
What will always be restricted in terms of a perpetrator's intent to destroy?	the opportunity presented to him
While the factor cannot independently indicate if the targeted group is substantial, it can do what?	inform the analysis
On which date did the Genocide Convention become effective?	12 January 1951
What was the minimum number of countries necessary to form parties?	20
Of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, how many were parties to the treaty?	only two
What member ratified in 1970?	the United Kingdom
The delay in support by certain powerful members meant the Convention was largely powerless for over how many decades?	four
In 1998 it was written that the CPPCG was a legal entity resulting in which type of compromise?	a diplomatic compromise
Rather than a definition, the text of the treaty is considered as what type of tool?	a research tool
What does the treaty possess that others lack?	international legal credibility
The writers Jonassohn and Bjornson cite various reasons for the lack of widespread support of what?	alternative definitions
What two writers examined the lack of an accepted and singular definition for genocide?	Jonassohn and Björnson
The two writers suggested that academics adjusted what in their different definitions to assist them in interpreting events?	their focus
What writer joined Jonassohn in the study of the whole of human history?	Frank Chalk
With whom was Leo Kuper paired in research that focused on 20th century works?	R. J. Rummel
Two women and what man concentrated on post World War II events?	Ted Gurr
Some historians were critical of what exclusion in the definition of victims of genocide?	social and political groups
In what book did Kakar contend that the international definition of genocide was too narrow?	The Soviet Invasion and the Afghan Response
Kakar argued that the definition should include any group defined by the perpetrator and which other group?	political groups
In the writing of Chalk and Jonassohn, what is stated to be a form of one-sided mass killing?	Genocide
In further elaborating on the definition, how did Chalk and Jonassohn phrase the intention of the perpetrator?	intends to destroy a group
Harff and Gurr's definition of genocide included the promotion and execution of what, by a state or its agents?	policies
Harff and Gurr further defined what in terms of ethnicity, religion or nationality?	victimized groups
What was important to Harff and Gurr to distinguish from genocides?	politicides
Along with ethnicity and and religion, what other characteristic defined a member of a victimized group?	nationality
What did Harff define as "short-lived outbursts by mobs...?"	pogroms
In the writings of Rummel, what is the first and ordinary meaning of genocide?	murder by government
Rummel postulates that murder of people of government is due to national, ethnic, racial and which other membership?	religious group
The legal meaning of genocide is contained in which international treaty?	Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
Included in the CPPCG is non-killings that ultimately achieve what end?	eliminate the group
In the interpretation of non-killings, the CPPCG cites the forceful relocation of children along with what other factor?	preventing births
In terms of failed states and non-state actors, the possession of weapons of mass destruction was an issue examined by which writer?	Adrian Gallagher
In Gallagher's definition of genocide, a source of what is malicious in it implementation of the destruction of a group?	collective power
Gallagher's definition upholds the centrality of what?	intent
The centrality of intent broadens what definition, beyond the 1948 one?	group identity
In order for a genocide classification to happen, a major part of a group has to be what?	destroyed
Signatories to the CPPC are required to prevent and punish what?	acts of genocide
During which times can a perpetrator of genocide be charged?	both in peace and wartime
In enforcing a charge of genocide, what loophole do many of the signatories possess?	no claim of genocide could be brought against them
What major western power is exempt from charges or claims of genocide against itself?	the United States
Along with Cyprus, what other major signatory official protested the the immunity of others from prosecution of genocide?	Norway
In 1948 the worldwide acceptance of international laws that defined and forbade genocide was promulgated by which treaty?	Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
Perpetrators who were tried after World War II were in general found guilty of crimes against what?	humanity
An example of a more specific genocidal crime of which one could be accused was what?	crimes like murder
After WWII criminals were largely prosecuted under CPPCG for their involvement in what massive genocidal effort?	the Holocaust
Who is notable for coining the term "Holocaust?"	Raphael Lemkin
Which court dismissed Nikola Jorgic's appeal against his conviction for genocide by a German court?	European Court of Human Rights
In Jorgic v. Germany, what about the German courts was later rejected by international courts hearing similar cases?	wider interpretation of genocide
The ECHR noted that among certain academics, what act carried out by the Serbs agains Bosnian Muslims and Croats did not constitute genocide?	ethnic cleansing
The ethnic cleansing perpetrated by the Serbs against Bosnia-Herzegovina was conducted with what ultimate goal in mind?	expel Muslims and Croats from their homes
Conversely the scholars who did view the Serbs' acts as constituting genocide, were backed up by what Tribunal?	the ICTY
In the 1990s, how many people were indicted for war crimes that were officially defined as genocide?	About 30
Convicted perpetrators Popovic and Beara were found guilty of genocide despite what evasive action?	several plea bargains
Tolimir was found guilty of both genocide and what other charge?	conspiracy to commit genocide
Another charge beyond the act of genocide and for which Krstic and Nikolic were found guilty was what?	aiding and abetting genocide
Three others were charged with participating in genocides in Bosnia by which country's courts?	German courts
What event occurred in March 2006 that essentially ended Milosevic's trial?	He died
Where was Karadzic when he was finally arrested?	Belgrade
With Milosevic dead, who did the ICTY next charge with crimes of genocide in 1995?	Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić
Had Milosevic not died, what charges might he have been convicted of?	genocide or complicity in genocide
Which former president was by far the most senior politician to be accused of genocidal crimes by the ICTY?	Slobodan Milošević
What court was established under the aegis of the United Nations to prosecute genocidal crimes in Rwanda?	International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
The prosecutorial efforts of the ICTR focused on genocidal acts that took place during which time period?	April 1994
the ICTR was created in November 1995 by which branch of the UN?	the Security Council of the United Nations
The ICTR was established for the purpose of convicting those responsible for acts of genocide and what other charges?	serious violations of the international law
The charges of genocide brought up by the ICTR were against what group of people?	Rwandan citizens
What has been widely debated as a possible act of genocide in Sudan?	situation in Darfur
In 2003 what well known U.S. Secretary of State declared the situation in Darfur as an act of genocide?	Colin Powell
In front of which committee did Powell testify?	the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
What did UN Security Council Resolution 1564 authorize in 2004?	an International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur
Despite some concessions, what act did the Commission ultimately state that Sudan had not pursued?	genocidal policy
To whom did the Security Council officially refer the situation in Darfur?	Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
What was taken into account, without mentioning specific crimes?	the Commission report
China and what other permanent member of the Security Council abstained from the vote on the referral resolution?	the United States
In which number report to the Council did the Prosecutor concede that crimes had been committed but evidence for prosecution was insufficient?	his fourth report
In the build-up to genocide, what have other authors focused on?	structural conditions
What processes are thought to create an evolution toward genocide?	psychological and social
Who revealed the starting points of this evolution to be economic deterioration and political confusion?	Ervin Staub
A history of what is just one factor that contributes to the probability of violence developing into genocide?	devaluation of the group
What is one preventive effort in circumventing conditions that lead to genocide?	humanizing a devalued group
What is a modern common occurence with antibiotics?	resistance of bacteria
What is resistance to antibiotics a cause of?	evolution
When was the Luria-Delbruck experiment?	1943
Which two antibiotics that have high efficacy are much less useful now?	penicillin and erythromycin
What does emergence of resistance reflect?	evolutionary processes
What is the purpose of antibiotic treatment?	survive high doses of antibiotics
When was antibacterial-resistance demonstrated?	1943
Who made the demonstration in 1943?	Luria–Delbrück
What does the potency of antibacterials depend upon?	concentration
What does this eliminate?	bacterial infection
What does the bactericidal activitty of antibacterials depend on what?	bacterial growth phase
What besides ongoing metabolic activity is required in bactericidal activity?	division of bacterial cells
What does the activity of antibacterials depends on?	concentration
What does a successful treatment using antibiotics entail?	host defense mechanisms, the location of infection, and the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of the antibacterial
How do you predict the clinical result?	several pharmacological parameters are used as markers of drug efficacy
What do anitibiotics mostly target?	bacterial functions or growth processes
Which two types of antibiotics target the cell wall?	penicillins and cephalosporins
Which type of antibiotic goes after the cell membrane?	polymyxins
What 3 types go after protein synthesis?	(macrolides, lincosamides and tetracyclines
Besides sprectrum of activity and chemical structure, how can antibacterial antibiotics classified?	mechanism of action
What is another name used for bacterial cell wall?	penicillins and cephalosporins
whats another word for cell membrane?	polymyxins
How many new classes of antibacterial antibiotics was introduced in the late 2000's/	four
What three ways are antibiotics classified?	mechanism of action, chemical structure, or spectrum of activity
What are antibiotics in chemical terms?	semisynthetic modifications
What type of antibiotics include penicilin?	beta-lactam antibiotics
What are the type of antibiotics which are taken from still living things?	aminoglycosides
How are the slufonamides,quinolones, and oxazolidinones created?	synthesis
Besides semisytetic modifications, what advances in medicinal chemistry regarding antibacterials?	various natural compounds
What is the molecular weight loss of antibacterial compounds?	2000 atomic mass units
What is included in the beta-lactam antibiotics?	penicillins
What is penicillins produced by?	fungi
What is one disease that has been nearly eradicated thanks to vaccines and antibiotics?	tuberculosis
What is one issue that can arise from overuse of antibiotics?	overuse, especially in livestock raising, prompting bacteria to develop resistance
What organization called antimicrobial resistance a 'serious threat?'	World Health Organization
In which century were antibiotics first introduced?	20th century
What can be affected by issues resulting from overuse of antibiotics?	anyone, of any age, in any country
What does there medicines do for livestock?	develop resistance
What organization classifies this as a current serious threat in the whole world??	World Health Organization
In what century did antibiotics revolutionized medicine?	20th
Besides antimicrobial, what did the overused medicine cause?	antibiotic resistance
What other medicine worked along antibiotics to eradicate diseases like tuberculosis?	vaccination
When did antibiotics revolutinzed medicine?	20th century
What happened when antibiotics was over used in livestock?	develop resistance
What organization stated that the world has this serious problem?	World Health Organization
What regions in the world does this apply in?	every region of the world
When were antibiotics created?	20th century
What is a common problem in antibiotic use?	antimicrobial and antibiotic resistance
Who else uses antibiotics besides the medical industry?	livestock raising
What disease did antibiotics help eliminate?	tuberculosis
What is one kind of therapy that may be used when a patience has an infection, but it has not been identified?	empirical therapy
Where do doctors perform microorganism identification testing?	laboratory
What kinds of antibiotics are most commonly used for empirical therapy?	broad spectrum antibiotic
At what stage does a doctor begin empirical therapy?	While the microorgainsim is being identified
How long does the identification process take?	several days
What happens when a doctor doesn't know the microorganism yet?	broad spectrum antibiotic
What happens in empirical therapy?	a patient has proven or suspected infection, but the responsible microorganism is not yet unidentified
When is empirical started?	before the doctor knows the exact identification of microorgansim
What are two examples of minor side effects caused by some antibiotics?	fever and nausea
What causes diarrhea?	disruption of the species composition in the intestinal flora
What negative effects can antibiotics have on the vaginal area?	yeast
What is one example of antibiotics that may have a possible side effect of tendon damage?	a quinolone antibiotic with a systemic corticosteroid
What is one possible serious side effect of over-using antibiotics?	alter the host microbiota
What are antibiotics screened for on mammals and humans?	negative effects
What do antibiotics need approval for?	clinical use
What besides the individual patient is targeted when antibiotics is being used?	microbial organisms
Photodermatitis, nausea, allergic reactions and anaphylaxis are all what type of side effect?	Adverse effects
What was altered during the hypothesis of indiscriminate use of antibiotics?	host microbiota
Why are antibiotics checked before use?	negative effects on humans or other mammals
Name some adverse effects?	fever and nausea to major allergic reactions, including photodermatitis and anaphylaxis
Name some side-effects?	diarrhea
What can happen to vaginal flora?	overgrowth of yeast
What can happen when antibiotics are used with other drugs?	Additional side-effects
What is one common result of using antibiotics from a young age?	increased body mass
What does STAT stand for?	subtherapeutic antibiotic treatment
What are some antibiotics can be used for STAT?	penicillin, vancomycin, penicillin and vancomycin, or chlortetracycline
Do antibiotics cause obesity in humans?	unclear
Why do physicians use antibiotics on infants when the relationship has been proven?	weighed against the beneficial effects
What can happen if people are exposed to antibiotics at a young age?	increased body mass
When do intestinal microbiota develop?	Early life
Do antibiotics increase the chance of getting fat for humans?	unclear
Do antibiotics interact with birth control pills?	The majority of studies indicate antibiotics do interfere with contraceptive pills
What percentage of birth control pill failure is attributed to antibiotics?	about 1%
What are the potential effects on intestinal flora?	reduced absorption of estrogens in the colon
Have these potential effects been proven through testing?	inconclusive and controversial
What do physicians recommend to counteract this potential issue?	extra contraceptive measures
What do antibiotics interfere with?	contraceptive pills
What percent is the  failure rate of contraceptive pills?	about 1%
Whhat does intestinal flora reduce?	absorption of estrogens
In therapy, what does the antibacterial interact with?	oral contraceptives
Do antibiotics mess with birth control pills?	antibiotics do interfere
What should women do if they are using antibiotics and birth control pills?	extra contraceptive measures
What is birth control failure rate due to antibiotics?	about 1%
What is one potential issue with drinking alcohol while taking antibiotics?	decreased effectiveness
Do all antibiotics interact dangerously with alcohol?	moderate alcohol consumption is unlikely to interfere with many common antibiotics
Is it OK to drink alcohol while taking any antibiotic?	there are specific types of antibiotics with which alcohol consumption may cause serious side-effects
How common is the belief that alcohol and antibiotics should never be mixed?	widespread
What can alcohol and certain antibiotics cause?	decreased effectiveness of antibiotic therapy
What is unlikely to interfere with  with many common antibiotics?	alcohol consumption
What belief should bever be mixed widespread?	alcohol and antibiotics
What common drug can reduce antibiotic effectiveness?	alcohol
What type of antibiotic is most likely to be a problem with alcohol?	specific types of antibiotics with which alcohol consumption may cause serious side-effects
Should alcohol be used while on antibiotics?	alcohol and antibiotics should never be mixed
What is part of hje the make up of bacterial strains?	Intrinsic antibacterial resistance
What is exchanged between between bacterial strains or species via plasmids that have this resistance?	antibacterial resistance genes
What can be absent from the bacterial genome?	antibiotic target
When does the spread of antibacterial resistance frequently occurs/	vertical transmission
What does some resistance come from?	mutation
What method of spread can occur in antibacterial resistance?	vertical transmission of mutations
What do plasmids do in resistance?	carry several different resistance genes
What are strains that are resistant to antibiotics called sometimes?	superbugs
What was a once almost controlled disease that is coming back do to resistance?	tuberculosis
How many new infections of resistant TB are reported per year?	half a million
What is the acronym used to describe resistant TB?	MDR-TB
What are the two biggest reasons for resistance?	Inappropriate antibiotic treatment and overuse
What is a common method of misuse?	Self prescription
What is an example of bad treatment causing resistance?	overuse of antibiotics
What is a way of improperly using antibiotics for those traveling?	prophylactic antibiotics
What can happen if a doctor doesn't prescribe to a person's weight and prior use?	failure of medical professionals to prescribe the correct dosage
What are 3 other common forms of bad antibiotic practices?	failure to take the entire prescribed course of the antibiotic, incorrect dosage and administration, or failure to rest for sufficient recovery
What happens when a cold is treated with antibiotics?	Inappropriate antibiotic treatment
What do doctors usually do when a patient seems to want antibiotics even though they may not be right?	prescribe antibiotics
What is the name of a US government agency tasked with trying to stop improper use of antibiotics?	US Interagency Task Force on Antimicrobial Resistance
Which agencies control this task force?	US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
When did the French start going after overuse of antibiotics?	2002
When did the EU ban antibiotics for speeding up growth?	2003
What report caused the UK to worry about resistance?	Swann report 1969
What 3 US organizations have called for the banning of antibiotics in the production of food animals?	American Society for Microbiology (ASM), American Public Health Association (APHA) and the American Medical Association (AMA)
Name two US bills that want to ban antibiotics in food production?	S.742 and H.R. 2562
What 3 medical associations supported the bills?	American Holistic Nurses' Association, the American Medical Association, and the American Public Health Association (APHA)
What besides sick people are antibiotics used for?	animal husbandry
When was resistance first discussed as a problem in the raising of farm animals?	1977
When did a district court order the FDA to stop approving antibiotics in animals?	March 2012
What methods did people use before antibiotics to treat infections?	medicinal folklore
When were some kinds of antimicrobials first used?	over 2000 years ago
What type of things did Egyptians and Greeks use?	mold and plant materials and extracts
What does antibiosis mean?	against life
Who came up with the term antibiosis?	Jean Paul Vuillemin
What type of organism has been reported to have worked on infections?	mold
Who noticed in a lab the antibacterial characteristics of mold?	Alexander Fleming
What mold did Fleming notice had antibacterial properties?	penicillin
What did Fleming initially think a good use would be for it?	chemotherapy
What was the first available antibiotic?	Prontosil
What company developed Prontosil?	IG Farben
Who led the team that came up with Prontosil?	Gerhard Domagk
What prize did Domagk get for his work?	1939 Nobel Prize for Medicine
What was the first antibiotic developed from nature?	tyrothricin
When was tyrothricin created?	1939
What also happened in 1939 besides tyrothricin?	start of World War II,
Who discovered tyrothricin?	Rene Dubos
What was tyrothricin used for during the war?	wounds and ulcers
When was penicillin G first purified?	1942
When did penicillin G become available outside of military use?	1945
Who came up with a way to quickly produce penicillin?	Norman Heatley
When was the chemical make-up of penicillin discovered?	1945
Who discovered the chemical structure of penicillin?	Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin
What do vaccines need to work?	immune modulation or augmentation
What type of vaccines have saved millions of lives?	Antibacterial vaccines
What types of vaccines have been phased out?	Vaccines made from attenuated whole cells or lysates
What has been talked about to treat resistant bacteria?	Phage therapy
How have researchers been doing this?	infecting pathogenic bacteria
What is a worry of using phages?	phages will infect "good" bacteria
How many antibiotics have been created in the last 7 years?	2
How many are in the pipelin to fight GNB?	seven
What year did the Infectious Disease Society of America say that production of new antibiotics does not keep up with resistance?	2013
Who regulates antibiotic approval?	FDA
What could help to spur pharmaceuticals to make new antibiotics?	economic incentives
What are resistant bacteria called in the media?	superbugs
Who is a director at the Pew Charitable Trusts?	Allan Coukell,
What was Frédéric's nationalities?	Polish and French
In what era was Frédéric active in?	Romantic era
For what instrument did Frédéric write primarily for?	solo piano
In what area was Frédéric born in?	Duchy of Warsaw
At what age did Frédéric depart from Poland?	20
What year was Chopin born?	1810
What era was Chopin active during?	Romantic era
Where did Chopin grow up?	Warsaw
What instrument did he mostly compose for?	solo piano
At what age did Chopin  leave Poland?	20
When did Chopin die?	17 October 1849
What was Chopin's full name?	Fryderyk Franciszek Chopin
The majority of Chopin's compositions were for what instrument?	solo piano
Chopin was active during what era?	Romantic era
In what year was Chopin born?	1810
In what city was Chopin born and raised?	Warsaw
How old was Chopin when he left Poland?	20
In what era of music did Chopin compose?	Romantic
What year did Chopin die?	1849
At what age did Frédéric move to Paris?	21
How many public performances was Frédéric estimated to have given during the remainder of his life?	30
In what year did Frédéric obtain citizenship in France?	1835
In what area had Frédéric's most productive period of composition taken place?	Majorca
What was Frédéric's most likely cause of death?	tuberculosis
Where did he end up living when he was 21?	Paris
How many public shows did he perform during the last years of his life?	30
What other composer did Chopin develop a friendship with?	Franz Liszt
What year did he gain citizenship in France?	1835
What is the name of the woman he had a relationship with from 1837-847?	Maria Wodzińska
At what age did Chopin move to Paris?	21
During the last 18 years he lived about how many times did Chopin perform in public?	30
What year did Chopin become a citizen of France?	1835
In the last years of his life who was the person that supported him financially?	Jane Stirling
In what year did Chopin become a French citizen?	1835
Who gave Chopin money in the last years of his life?	Jane Stirling
What was the likely cause of death for Chopin?	tuberculosis
What instrument did every composition by Frédéric include?	piano
What concept was Frédéric credited with creating?	instrumental ballade
Whose music did Frédéric admire the most and thus provide influence on his work?	J. S. Bach, Mozart and Schubert
What features marked Frédéric's performance style and made them unique?	nuance and sensitivity
What establishments did Frédéric frequently visit in Paris that influenced his career?	Paris salons
Which instrument do every one of his compositions include?	piano
What concept did Chopin create?	instrumental ballade
What are two things Chopin's performances were known for?	nuance and sensitivity
What three composers influenced Chopin's work?	J. S. Bach, Mozart and Schubert
Chopin wrote some music to lyrics, what language were the lyrics?	Polish
What instrument is involved in all of Chopin's work?	piano
Chopin composed several songs to lyrics of what language?	Polish
Chopin's performances were known for what?	nuance and sensitivity
What three composers did Chopin take inspiration from?	J. S. Bach, Mozart and Schubert
What instrument was all of Chopin's compositions written for?	piano
What language were some songs written in that Chopin wrote music for?	Polish
Of what venue was Chopin an often invited guest?	Paris salons
What was the degree of Frédéric's association with political insurrection?	indirect
What parts of Frédéric's personal life influenced his legacy as a leading symbol of the era?	his love life and his early death
In which era was Frédéric leave a legacy of as a leading symbol?	Romantic era
In what forms of media has Frédéric been the subject of?	films and biographies
Where did Chopin create the majority of his compositions?	France
Chopin is a native of what country?	Poland
He had a non-direct association with what?	political insurrection
Chopin is closely associated with what era?	Romantic era
Where did Chopin create most of his works?	France
Chopin was indirectly related to what?	political insurrection
Chopin is considered a prominent symbol of what?	Romantic era
In what village was Frédéric born in?	Żelazowa Wola
On what date was Frédéric born on?	22 February 1810
Despite the birthdate given by parish baptismal, what date is given by the composer and his family instead?	1 March
What was the latin form of Frédéric's full name?	Fridericus Franciscus
How many miles was the village Frédéric born in located to the west of Warsaw?	29
Where was Chopin born?	Żelazowa Wola
Who was responsible for the creation of the Duchy of Warsaw?	Napoleon
When was his birthday recorded as being?	22 February 1810
What birth date is now considered as his actual birthday?	1 March
Chopin's given names in Latin are what?	Fridericus Franciscus
The Duchy of Warsaw was created by whom?	Napoleon
Chopin's birth is recorded as when?	22 February 1810
What birth date is now considered correct for Chopin?	1 March
What is the Latin form of Chopin's name?	Fridericus Franciscus
Chopin was actually born outside of Warsaw at what location?	Żelazowa Wola
What famous French leader had established the Polish state at this time?	Napoleon
Who did Frédéric's father marry in 1806?	Justyna Krzyżanowska
On what date was Frédéric baptised?	23 April 1810
What language did Frédéric's father, Nicolas, insist on using in the household?	Polish
What was the given name of Chopin's father?	Nicolas
Where was Chopin's father from?	Lorraine
Chopin's father married who?	Justyna Krzyżanowska
What is the name of Chopin's godfather?	Fryderyk Skarbek
What is the name of Chopin's eldest sister?	Ludwika
What was Chopin's father's first name?	Nicolas
From where id Chopin's father emigrate from?	Lorraine
What is Chopin's older sister's name?	Ludwika
During what month did Frédéric move to Warsaw with his family?	October
What language did Frédéric's father teach after they had moved to Warsaw?	French
Where did Frédéric live with his family while they were in Warsaw?	the Palace grounds
What two instruments did Frédéric's father play during this time?	flute and violin
What was Frédéric prone to during early childhood as a result of his slight build?	illnesses
When did Chopin's family move to Warsaw?	October 1810
Where did Chopin's father get a teaching position?	Warsaw Lyceum
What instruments did Chopin's father play?	flute and violin
What instrument did Chopin's mother teach?	piano
How old was Chopin when his family moved to Warsaw?	six months
What language did Chopin's father teach?	French
What two instruments did Chopin's father play?	flute and violin
What instrument did Chopin's mother teach at the boarding house?	piano
Where did Chopin live with his family in Warsaw?	Saxon Palace.
Who was Frédéric's first professional teacher in music?	Wojciech Żywny
Which sister did Frédéric play duets with sometimes while being tutored at this time?	Ludwika
At what age did Frédéric start giving public concerts?	7
What did Frédéric compose during the year of 1817?	two polonaises
What is the earliest surviving musical notation composed by Frédéric?	a polonaise in A-flat major of 1821
Who was Chopin's initial piano teacher?	Wojciech Żywny
Which of his sisters did Chopin sometimes duet with?	Ludwika
At what age did Chopin start playing publicly?	7
What year did Chopin compose his first work?	1817
During what years did Chopin receive instruction from  Żywny?	1816 to 1821
What is the name of Chopin's first music teacher that was not an amateur musician?	Wojciech Żywny
Which of Chopin's sisters would play music with him?	Ludwika
How old was Chopin when he began to perform for the public?	7
Who was Chopin's earliest piece of music, that there is a record of, dedicated to?	Wojciech Żywny
In what year was the Saxon Palace taken by the Russian governor for use regarding the military?	1817
What establishment today contains what was known as the Warsaw Lyceum during that time?	Warsaw University
What building was Frédéric's new home adjacent to?	Kazimierz Palace
What palace was Frédéric sometimes invited to as a companion of the ruler's son?	Belweder Palace
What short poem spoke of Frédéric's popularity as a child?	Nasze Przebiegi
The Saxon Palace was taken over for military use in what year?	1817
The Warsaw Lyceum was moved to where?	Kazimierz Palace
As a child Chopin was invited to play with the son of whom?	Grand Duke Constantine
What did Chopin create for Grand Duke Constantine?	a march
In one of his works who affirmed the popularity of Chopin as a child?	Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
What was the place Chopin was invited to as a friend of ruler's son?	Belweder Palace
What is the title and name of the ruler whose son Chopin was friends with?	Grand Duke Constantine
What type of musical piece did Chopin compose for his friend's ruling father?	a march
Who wrote in 1818 about the popularity of Chopin?	Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
During what years did Frédéric visit the Warsaw Lyceum for lessons?	1823 to 1826
Who was Frédéric a student of involving music theory starting in 1826?	Józef Elsner
What was the name of the mechanical organ Frédéric performed on during 1825?	eolomelodicon
Which tsar did Frédéric perform for due to his success in previous concerts?	Alexander I
On what date was Frédéric's first performance that earned international esteem?	10 June 1825
Who taught Chopin to play the organ?	Wilhelm Würfel
Chopin had three years of lessons with whom?	Józef Elsner
What instrument did Chopin play in front of Tsar Alexander I?	eolomelodicon
What gift did Tsar Alexander I give to Chopin?	diamond ring
What was the first of Chopin's works to gain international renown?	Rondo Op. 1
Who gave Chopin instruction on how to play the organ?	Wilhelm Würfel
What was the name of the teacher of Chopin's three year course that began in the fall of 1826?	Józef Elsner
What is th ename of the mechanical organ Chopin played in 1825?	eolomelodicon
What did Tsar Alexander I give to Chopin?	a diamond ring.
What is the title of his first commercially successful work?	Rondo Op. 1.
Who was Frédéric a guest of during his visit of Szafarnia in 1824 and 1825?	Dominik Dziewanowski
In which village did Frédéric first experience rural Polish folk music?	Szafarnia
To whom did Frédéric write letters to during his stay in Szafarnia?	his family
What did Frédéric write parodies of in his letters?	Warsaw newspapers
During his vacation in 1824 and 1825 who did Chopin spend his vacation with?	Dominik Dziewanowski
What type of music did Chopin discover for the first time while staying in Szafarnia?	Polish rural folk music
What was the name of the person who hosted Chopin as a guest when he discovered Polish rural folk music?	Dominik Dziewanowski
What was the title chopin gave of some spoof letters he wrote?	The Szafarnia Courier
Where did Chopin spend his vacation in 1824 and 1825?	Szafarnia
During what year did Frédéric's youngest sister, Emilia, pass away?	1827
What street did Frédéric's family move to after the death of his youngest sister?	Krakowskie Przedmieście
What year did Frédéric leave Warsaw after moving with his family to the south annex of Krasiński Palace?	1830
What did the Chopin's family business become in the 20th century?	a museum
Which artist created the first known portrait of Frédéric?	Ambroży Mieroszewski
What year did Chopin's sister Emilia die?	1827
What year did Chopin leave Warsaw?	1830
What was the Chopin family's business?	boarding house for male students
What artist painted the Chopin family?	Ambroży Mieroszewski
Who in Chopin's family died shortly before they moved in 1827?	sister Emilia
What year did Chopin leave Warsaw?	1830
What was the Chopin boarding house called in English?	Chopin Family Parlour
What artist made portraits of the Chopin family in 1829?	Ambroży Mieroszewski
Was the Chopin family boarding house for male or female students?	male
Of the individuals that became intimate with Frédéric during their stay at the family apartments, which two became part of Frédéric's social environment in Paris?	Jan Matuszyński and Julian Fontana
Which singer was cited specifically as someone Frédéric was attracted to?	Konstancja Gładkowska
What four boys from his family's boarding house became friends with Chopin?	Tytus Woyciechowski, Jan Nepomucen Białobłocki, Jan Matuszyński and Julian Fontana
Which singer did Chopin become fascinated with?	Konstancja Gładkowska
Which of Chopin's works was unknowingly dedicated to Gladkowska?	Piano Concerto No. 1 (in E minor)
When did Chopin receive his last Conservatory report?	July 1829
Which two of Chopin's friends became part of his Paris milieu?	Jan Matuszyński and Julian Fontana
What was the name of the singing student Chopin was attracted to?	Konstancja Gładkowska
To whom did Chopin reveal in letters which parts of his work were about the singing student he was infatuated with?	Tytus Woyciechowski
What musical piece had a Larghetto dedicated to the female singing student Chopin was infatuated with?	Piano Concerto No. 1 (in E minor)
How many boarders of his family's boarding house became intimate friends with Chopin?	Four
Who did Frédéric visit Berlin with in September 1828?	Feliks Jarocki
Which opera director did Frédéric see works of during his stay in Berlin?	Gaspare Spontini
Who was Frédéric a guest of during his stay in Berlin in 1829?	Prince Antoni Radziwiłł
What piece did Frédéric create specifically for the prince and the prince's daughter, Wanda?	Introduction and Polonaise brillante in C major for cello and piano, Op. 3
When did Chopin visit Berlin?	September 1828
With whom did Chopin go to Berlin?	Feliks Jarocki
While in Berlin he saw the operatic work of who?	Gaspare Spontini
In 1829 on a trip back to Berlin Chopin was a guest of who?	Prince Antoni Radziwiłł
What piece did Chopin create for Prince Antoni?	Introduction and Polonaise brillante in C major for cello and piano, Op. 3
What year did Chopin visit Berlin while still a student?	1828
Who did Chopin go to Berlin with?	Feliks Jarocki
What did the person who Chopin went with to Berlin do for his work?	zoologist
Who directed the operas they enjoyed in Berlin?	Gaspare Spontini
What year did Chopin return to Berlin?	1829
What did Frédéric compose after hearing Niccolò Paganini perform on the violin?	Souvenir de Paganini
During what month did Frédéric make his first appearance in Vienna?	August
How many piano concerts did Frédéric perform in Vienna during this time?	two
On what date did Frédéric give his first performance of Piano Concerto No. 2 in F minor, Op. 21?	17 March 1830
What did Chopin compose after hearing Niccolo Paganini?	Souvenir de Paganini
Where did Chopin debut after completing his studies?	Vienna
What piece did Chopin debut after returning to Warsaw?	Piano Concerto No. 2 in F minor, Op. 21
When did Chopin return to Warsaw?	September 1829
Why did some critics say that Chopin was too delicate?	accustomed to the piano-bashing of local artists
Who did Chopin hear play violin in 1829 that prompted him to write a composisition?	Niccolò Paganini
Where did Chopin make his debut after completing his education?	Vienna
How many public performances did Chopin do where he made his debut after completing his education?	two
How many weeks after completing school was it before Chopin made his public debut?	three
On what date did Frédéric begin his journey into Western Europe?	2 November 1830
Which country did Frédéric go to first after setting out for Western Europe?	Austria
In what year did his companion Woyciechowski depart to Poland to enlist for the uprising in Warsaw?	1830
What historian commented that the events involving Frédéric's friend in Poland contributed to his maturing?	Zdzisław Jachimecki
Who said that Chopin set out "into the wide world, with no very clearly defined aim, forever?"	Zdzisław Jachimecki
Who did Chopin leave for Austria with?	Woyciechowski
Where did Chopin intend to go after Austria?	Italy
Woyciechowski left Chopin to enlist in what?	the November 1830 Uprising
What geographicla region was opened for Chopin due to his composing and performances?	western Europe
When Chopin started to take his music to the world, what is the last name of the person who went with him to Austria?	Woyciechowski
What year did the uprising begin in Warsaw?	1830
What were the words Chopin wrote to a friend when he was alone and homesick?	"I curse the moment of my departure."
What year did Chopin learn that the uprising in Warsaw was crushed?	1831
What event was Frédéric a part of when he arrived in Paris during the later part of September in 1831?	the Polish Great Emigration
What version of Frédéric's birth name did he begin using after arriving in France?	French
In what year did Frédéric officially acquire French citizenship?	1835
What were the two kinds of relationships stated as Frédéric having with his fellow Poland natives in exile?	friends and confidants
What nationality is stated as the one Frédéric felt most identified by?	Polish
When did Chopin reach Paris?	September 1831
By not going back to Poland Chopin became part of what?	Polish Great Emigration
In what year did Chopin become a French citizen?	1835
What is the name of Chopin's biographer?	Adam Zamoyski
After 1831, what country did Chopin never return to?	Poland
What country's passport did he have from 1835?	France
What language was Chopin never completely at ease speaking?	French
What biographer of Chopin wrote that Chopin never considered himself French?	Adam Zamoyski
Due to the numbers of expatriates of Poland after the uprising, what did it become to be known as?	Polish Great Emigration
In what city did Frédéric achieve celebrity status?	Paris
Who was the principal of the Polish Literary Society that Frédéric became acquainted with?	Adam Mickiewicz
What did Frédéric create from verses of the poet Adam Mickiewicz?	songs
What poet did Chopin use verses from for songs?	Adam Mickiewicz
What people did Chopin meet while in Paris?	Hector Berlioz, Franz Liszt, Ferdinand Hiller, Heinrich Heine, Eugène Delacroix, and Alfred de Vigny
What was the name of the poet Chopin became acquainted with in Paris?	Adam Mickiewicz
What position did the poet who Chopin knew in Paris hold?	principal of the Polish Literary Society
Which friend of Frédéric failed to achieve success in England?	Julian Fontana
Who was Frédéric's trusted adviser while in Paris?	Albert Grzymała
What familial role was Albert Grzymała compared to in regards to Frédéric?	elder brother
Who is stated as a jack of all trades in service to Frédéric?	Julian Fontana
What nationality were the two friends who served as a pivotal influence in Frédéric's life while in Paris?	Polish
Julian Fontana tried to find his way where before moving to Paris?	England
Where did Julian Fontana fail to get established?	England
Who did Chopin know that became rich in Paris?	Albert Grzymała
Which friend of Chopin became like an older brother to him?	Albert Grzymała
Which friend took on the role of several jobs to help Chopin including copyist?	Julian Fontana
Where were Chopin and Fontana students together?	Warsaw Conservatory
Who gave Frédéric his first significant public approval in regards to his compositions?	Robert Schumann
On what date did Frédéric give his first performance at the Salle Pleyel?	26 February 1832
What is stated as a hindrance for Frédéric's ability to perform in large concert spaces?	intimate keyboard technique
Who did Frédéric rely upon financially before earning a great income from his works?	his father
From whom did Chopin receive his first big endorsement?	Robert Schumann
When did Chopin debut at Salle Pleyel ?	26 February 1832
What affluent family did Chopin gain a patronage from?	Rothschild
When did Chopin receive his first major endorsement from Robert Schumann?	1831
What did Chopin realize was not ideal for larger spaces after his first successful concert in Paris?	keyboard technique
Once Chopin stopped performing concerts, how did he earn his income?	publishing his works and teaching piano to affluent students
What was Frédéric's favorite environment to perform in?	his own Paris apartment for small groups of friends
What instrument did Frédéric play in a performance on 23 March 1833?	pianos
Chopin gave a yearly performance where?	Salle Pleyel
Chopin worked with Liszt on what piece?	Hexameron
In 1833 with whom with Chopin work to get his music published?	Maurice Schlesinger
What is the name of Chopin's pupil who performed with him?	Adolphe Gutmann
Where did Chopin prefer to play for people?	apartment
On March 23, 1833, who headlined and performed with Chopin at a concert?	Liszt and Hiller
Who did Chopin contract with for publishing his music?	Maurice Schlesinger
Who did Frédéric meet in the spring of 1834 at the Lower Rhenish Music Festival?	Felix Mendelssohn
What two activities did Frédéric do while visiting for a day in Düsseldorf with Mendelssohn and Hiller?	playing and discussing music
Who was the director of the Academy of Art that Frédéric met while in Düsseldorf?	Friedrich Wilhelm Schadow
Where were Frédéric's parents located at when he saw them for the final time in 1835?	Carlsbad
Where did Chopin meet Felix Mendelssohn?	the Lower Rhenish Music Festival
Who did Chopin attend the Lower Rhenish Music Festival with?	Hiller
In 1835 where did Chopin and his parents visit?	Carlsbad
When did Chopin propose marriage to Maria Wodziński?	July 1836
Who was Maria's mother?	Countess Wodzińska
Who did Chopin meet at a music festival early in 1834?	Felix Mendelssohn
Where did Chopin and Hiller go with the person Chopin met in the spring of 1834?	Düsseldorf
What was Friedrich Wilhelm Schadow position?	director of the Academy of Art
What was the first name of the girl Chopin proposed to?	Maria
Who was the recipient of Frédéric's letter he wrote on 12 December 1831?	Woyciechowski
What are the three names stated in Frédéric's letter that he had shown interest and curiosity in?	Herz, Liszt, Hiller
Who is stated as being in attendance of Frédéric's first performance at the Salle Pleyel on 26 February 1832?	Liszt
What was the date that LIszt first saw Chopin perform?	26 February 1832
Which friend received the letter in which Chopin referenced Liszt?	Woyciechowski
Where was Chopin's first concert in Paris held?	the Salle Pleyel
What address did Frédéric live at during his stay in Paris?	38 Rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin
How far down the road did Liszt live from Frédéric during this time?	a few blocks
How many times did Frédéric and Liszt collaborate in performances during the years of 1833 to 1841?	seven
For whose benefit was the first of these concerts performed for on 2 April 1833?	Harriet Smithson
At which two establishments was the last of these performances conducted at on 25 and 26 April 1841?	Salle Pleyel and the Paris Conservatory
When was the first time Liszt and Chopin performed together?	2 April 1833
What was the charity that Liszt and Chopin last performed for?	the Beethoven Memorial in Bonn
Where did Liszt and Chopin last perform together?	Salle Pleyel and the Paris Conservatory
When Liszt lived close to Chopin, where did he call home?	the Hôtel de France on the Rue Lafitte
How many times did Chopin and Liszy perform together in public?	seven
Who did the first concert of Chopin and Liszt benefit?	Harriet Smithson
What term describes the qualities of the relationship between Frédéric and Liszt?	love-hate relationship
What three qualities of Liszt are stated to have captivated Frédéric?	theatricality, showmanship and success
What did Frédéric receive from Liszt when the latter performed a nocturne with certain embellishments added?	an apology
What did Frédéric introduce Liszt as in when referring to him in his letters up to 1848?	my friend Liszt
What piece did Chopin dedicate to Liszt?	Op. 10 Études
What was the name of Liszt's mistress?	Marie d'Agoult
Who did Chopin dedicate the Op. 10 Études to?	Liszt
Who apologized to Chopin for adding embellishments to a musical piece he perforemed that was written by Chopin?	Liszt
What was the name of Liszt's mistress?	Marie d'Agoult
Who did Chopin write to displaying his desire to take away a performers ability to play his music?	Hiller
What was the name of the man who biogrpahers think Chopin was concerned about Liszt's growing relationship with?	George Sand
Who was the host of the gathering where Frédéric was introduced to George Sand?	Marie d'Agoult
What did Frédéric label the place in which he placed Maria and her mother's letters about the unlikely marriage?	My tragedy
Who did George Sand write to when admitting having a strong affection for Frédéric?	Grzymała
What is the name of the author Chopin met at a gathering put on by Marie d'Agoult?	George Sand
What was a possible reason for Chopin's failed engagement to Maria Wodzińska?	his poor health
What did Chopin write on the box of letters from Maria and her mother?	My tragedy
Who hosted the party whre Chopin met George Sand?	Marie d'Agoult
What year did Maria Wodzińska's mother tell Chopin that he likely would not marry her daughter?	1837
What did Chopin write on the package that contained letters from Maria and her mother?	My tragedy
Who did Sand confide to in a letter about her feelings for Chopin in June, 1838?	Grzymała
What city did Frédéric visit in June 1837?	London
What event occurred on Frédéric's return to Paris?	his association with Sand began in earnest
How many years older was George Sand compared to Frédéric?	six
What adjective is used to describe Frédéric and Sand's time together during the winter of 1838?	miserable
Where did Frédéric and Sand venture to after Majorca became unlivable when it was discovered they were not married?	Valldemossa
With whom did Chopin go to London with in 1837?	Camille Pleyel
What was James Broadwood's occupation?	piano maker
How much older was George Sands than Chopin?	six years
During Sands and Chopin's visit to Majorca who were they fleeing?	Félicien Mallefille
After it became known that Sands and Chopin were unmarried where did they end up taking up shelter?	a former Carthusian monastery
When did Chopin and Sand become lovers?	June 1838
Where did Chopin and Sand go between November 1838 and February 1839?	Majorca
Who joined Chopin and Sand on their trip to Majorca?	Sand's two children
One of the reasons Chopin and Sand went to Majorca was to escape the threats of who?	Félicien Mallefille.
Where did Chopin and Sand stay in Valldemossa?	a former Carthusian monastery
How many doctors saw Frédéric by the 3rd of December?	Three
What did Frédéric have trouble playing as a result of his growing illness?	piano
What condition did Frédéric describe the piano that arrived to him through many dangerous obstacles?	best possible condition
How many doctors visited Chopin?	3
What month did Chopin's piano arrive?	December
What did Chopin compalin about?	his bad health
What did Chopin have a hard time getting delivered to Majorca?	his Pleyel piano
What month did Chopin's Pleyel piano arrive in Majorca?	December
Who did Chopin send his Preludes to?	Pleyel
What is stated as having a negative effect on Frédéric's health during this productive time?	bad weather
What culture of French people did Sand sell the piano to?	Canuts
What city did the group travel to in order to help Frédéric recover?	Marseilles
Where was Sand's estate located where they stayed for the summers until 1846?	Nohant
Where did Frédéric and Sand move to in 1842 in buildings next to each other?	Square d'Orléans
Who did Sand sell Chopin's piano to?	the Canuts
Where did the group travel to after Barcelona?	Marseilles
Where was Sand's home?	Nohant
After returning to Paris where was Chopin's apartment?	5 rue Tronchet
In 1842 where did Chopin and Sand move?	Square d'Orléans
What had a negative effect on Chopin's health?	the bad weather
Who did Sand sell the piano to?	the Canuts.
Where did they travel after leaving Barcelona?	Marseilles
Where did Chopin and Sand move to in 1842?	Square d'Orléans
Where did they spend most summers until 1846?	Nohant
What event were Chopin and Sand at on 26 July 1840?	Berlioz's Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale
What anniversary was the July Revolution that Sand and Chopin were present at a dress rehearsal for?	tenth
At whose funeral did Chopin play in 1839?	Adolphe Nourrit
What instrument did Chopin play at  Adolphe Nourrit's funeral?	organ
What piece did Chopin play at  Adolphe Nourrit's funeral?	Franz Schubert's lied Die Gestirne
Chopin attended the funeral of who in 1839?	Adolphe Nourrit
What did Chopin play at the funeral?	Franz Schubert's lied Die Gestirne.
What was the dress rehearsal for?	Berlioz's Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale
It was in commemoration of the tenth anniversary of what?	the July Revolution.
What is the example given of a work produced by Frédéric during calm summers at Nohant?	Polonaise in A-flat major, Op. 53
Which of the two people that visited Chopin were tutored by him on piano?	Pauline Viardot
On what date did Delacroix write a letter based on his visit at Nohant?	7 June 1842
What did Chopin help Pauline Viardot with?	piano technique and composition
Who were two visitors to Chopin while in Nohant?	Delacroix and the mezzo-soprano Pauline Viardot
What two things did Chopin advise Viardot on?	piano technique and composition.
Who wrote a letter on June 7, 1842 about a stay in Nohant?	Delacroix
In which year did Chopin begin experiencing a serious decline in health?	1842
To whom did Chopin write a letter on 21 February 1842 about his agonizing pain?	Grzymała
What performance was Chopin forced to decline due to his increasing ill health?	Beethoven Seventh Symphony arrangement at Erard's
What instrument did Chopin play for Charles Hallé when the latter visited him?	piano
What has current day research suggested that Chopin was suffering from alongside his other illnesses?	temporal lobe epilepsy
Starting in what year did Chopin start showing evidence of very bad health?	1842
What second performance did Chopin have to decline to play?	Beethoven Seventh Symphony arrangement
What specific illness does modern evidence point to Chopin having?	temporal lobe epilepsy
When did Chopin show signs of serious illness?	From 1842 onwards
Chopin wrote in 1842 that he had to lie in bed all day because what ached so much?	mouth and tonsils
Chopin had to decline who's invitation in 1843 to particpate in a performance at Erard's?	Alkan
Who visited Chopin in 1844 and wrote about his inability to move?	Charles Hallé
Modern medicine indicates Chopin may have suffered from what condition?	temporal lobe epilepsy.
What was the name of Sand's daughter's fiance that contributed to deteriorating the relationship between Sand and Chopin?	Auguste Clésinger
What was the interest Sand had that Chopin showed apathy towards?	radical political pursuits
What did Sand begin referring to Chopin as as his illness got worse?	third child
What was the name of Sand's novel she published in reference to her situation with Chopin?	Lucrezia Floriani
In what year did Chopin and Sand ultimately bring their relationship to a close?	1847
When did Chopin's relationship with Sand start to deteriorate?	1846
Whom did Sand's daughter Solange become engaged to?	Auguste Clésinger
What novel did Sand write in 1847?	Lucrezia Floriani
Who was the fortune hunter engaged to Sand's daughter?	Auguste Clésinger.
What role did Sand take on as her relationship with Chopin progressed?	nurse
What was the name of Sand's book where the main characters can be interpreted as Sand and Chopin?	Lucrezia Floriani
When did Chopin end his relationship with Sand?	1847
What was the name of the single piece of work he wrote in 1844?	Op. 58 sonata
What can be said of these works compared to his work in other years even though the quantity was less?	more refined than many of his earlier compositions
How many pieces did Chopin write in 1841?	a dozen
How many pieces did Chopin compose in 1842?	six
What piece did Chopin compose in 1844?	Op. 58 sonata
How many works did Chopin write in 1842?	six
How many works did Chopin write in 1843?	six shorter pieces
How many works did Chopin write in 1845?	three mazurkas
In what month and year did Chopin give his final performance?	February 1848
With whom did Chopin perform his final concert?	Auguste Franchomme
When did Chopin last perform?	February 1848
Who did Chopin last perform with?	Auguste Franchomme
Plitical strife, popularity decline, instability of era and fewer students caused Chopin to what?	struggle financially.
Who did Chopin have at his last Parisian concert in 1848?	Auguste Franchomme
What instrument did Auguste Franchomme play?	Cello
What television station made a documentary on Chopin?	BBC
What two people created a documentary on Chopin for Italian tv?	Angelo Bozzolini and Roberto Prosseda
What was the title of the documentary the BBC released?	The Women Behind The Music
What television station released a documentary on Chopin?	BBC
What was the name of the documentary released by the BBC?	Chopin – The Women Behind The Music
What are the names of the two people that created a documentary for Italian tele vision?	Angelo Bozzolini and Roberto Prosseda
Who did a work for Italian television about Chopin's life?	Angelo Bozzolini and Roberto Prosseda
What was the name of the 1945 movie released about Chopin?	A Song to Remember
What is the name of the actor who received and Oscar nomination for his role as Chopin?	Cornel Wilde
What year was  La valse de l'adieu released?	1928
Who starred as Chopin in Impromptu?	Hugh Grant
Chopins relations with whom have been fictionalized in movies?	George Sand
What 1945 film was a fictionalized accounting of the relationship between Chopin and Sand?	A Song to Remember
Who portrayed Chopin in A Song to Remember?	Cornel Wilde
Who portrayed Chopin in the 1928 film, La valse de l'adieu?	Pierre Blanchar
Who portrayed Chopin in the 1991 film, Impromptu?	Hugh Grant
When was the first fictionalized account of Chopin's life?	1901
Where was the first fictionalized account of Chopin's life created?	Milan
Who is responsible for the first fictionalized account of Chopin's life?	Giacomo Orefice
What is thought to be the first fictionalized work about Chopin?	Chopin
What style is the fictionalized "Chopin" in?	opera
Who wrote the fictionalized "Chopin?"	Giacomo Orefice
When was the fictionalized "Chopin" produced?	1901.
Where was the fictionalized "Chopin" produced?	Milan
An 1830 sonnet was written about Chopin by what man?	Leon Ulrich
Aside from George Sands what two French authors have written about Chopin?	Marcel Proust and André Gide
Leon Ulrich wrote about Chopin in what format?	sonnet
What is the earliest sighting of Chopin in Polish Literature?	sonnet on Chopin by Leon Ulrich
When did Ulrich do his sonnet on Chopin?	1830
In addition to Polish and French, what other language has numerous biogrpahies of Chopin?	English
The Warsaw Chopin Society holds the Grand prix du disque de F. Chopin how often?	every five years.
What is the name of the event that The Warsaw Chopin Society holds?	Grand prix du disque de F. Chopin
On Chopin's 200th anniversary critics of what publication made recommendations on recordings of Chopin's work?	The New York Times
Who organizes the Grand prix du disque de F. Chopin for notable Chopin recordings?	The Warsaw Chopin Society
How often is the Grand prix du disque de F. Chopin for notable Chopin recordings held?	every five years.
Upon Chopin's bicentenary, who recommended a list of who should perform Chopin?	The New York Times
What year was the earliest Chopin recording created?	1895
What is the title of the earliest known recording of Chopin's work?	Nocturne in E major Op. 62 No. 2
Who played the earlier known recording of Chopin's work?	Paul Pabst
What has stated that every pianist in the recording era has used Chopin's music?	The British Library
When did Pabst record his Chopin performance?	1895
Who has given a discography of pianists' representation of Chopin's pedagogic style?	Methuen-Campbell
What is the name of the oldest music essay competition?	International Chopin Piano Competition
What year was the International Chopin Piano Competition founded?	1927
Where is the International Chopin Piano Competition held?	Warsaw
How often is the International Chopin Piano Competition held?	every five years
The Fryderyk Chopin Institute of Poland includes approximately how many recordings of Chopin's work from Youtube?	1,500
What is the world's oldest monographic music competition?	the International Chopin Piano Competition
When was the International Chopin Piano Competition established?	1927
There are over 80 societies throughout the world that have been established because of Chopin and his music according to who?	The Fryderyk Chopin Institute of Poland
How many known works of Chopin's music were on YouTube up to the beginning of 2014?	nearly 1,500
What is the name of the ballet that included Chopin's work?	Chopiniana
Who choreographed a ballet which included Chopin's work?	Michel Fokine
Chopiniana later went by a different name, what is that name?	Les Sylphides
Who orchestrated Chopiniana?	Alexander Glazunov
What year was the Chopiniana released?	1909
Which 1909 ballet used Chopin's music?	Chopiniana
Who choreographed Chopiniana?	Michel Fokine
Who orchestrated Chopiniana?	Alexander Glazunov.
Sergei Diaghilev obtained additional orchestrations for subsequent productions, using which title?	Les Sylphides.
Where did Chopin head to during the Revolution of 1848?	London
Who provided the majority of funds for his concert tour in London?	Jane Stirling
Where did Chopin go in the spring of 1848?	London
What two people suggested the 1848 tour?	Jane Stirling and her elder sister
Who paid for most of the 1848 music tour of Chopin?	Jane Stirling
What was happening in April 1848 in Paris?	Revolution
What was Jane Stirling's national heritage?	Scottish
Where did Chopin stay while in London?	Dover Street
What company provided Chopin with a piano while in London?	Broadwood
Where was Chopin's initial performance?	Stafford House
What two notable guests were present during his premiere performance at Stafford House?	Queen Victoria and Prince Albert
What date did he perform with Viardot?	7 July
What steet did Chopin stay on in London?	Dover Street
What did Broadway provide for Chopin?	a grand piano.
What two dignitaries where at his first performance in London?	Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
In addition to hearing him play, what else did people seek from Chopin in London?	piano lessons
Who sang chopin arrangements on July 7 of the year Chopin was in London?	Viardot
Where did Jane Stirling invite Chopin?	Scotland
What doctor was with Chopin when he wrote out his will?	Adam Łyszczyński
Where was Chopin invited to in late summer?	Scotland
What city did Chopin perform at on September 27?	Glasgow
What did Chopin write while staying with Doctor Adam Łyszczyński?	will
When did Chopin last appear in public?	16 November 1848
Where was Chopin's last public performance?	Guildhall
Who were the beneficiaries of his last public concert?	Polish refugees.
What was the diagnosis of Chopin's health condition at this time?	terminal
Where was Chopin's last public performance?	London's Guildhall
Who did Chopin play for while she sang?	Delfina Potocka
In 1849 where did Chopin live?	Chaillot
Who was anonymously paying for Chopin's apartment?	Princess Obreskoff
When did Chopin return to Paris?	November
Chopin accompanied which singer for friends?	Delfina Potocka
Where did his friends found Chopin an apartment in 1849?	Chaillot
Who paid for Chopin's apartment in Chaillot?	Princess Obreskoff.
When did Jenny Lind visit Chopin?	June 1849
When did his sister come to stay with Chopin?	June 1849
In September 1849 where did Chopin take up residence?	Place Vendôme 12
Which family member came to Paris in June 1849?	his sister
Who accompanied Chopin's sister to Paris?	her husband and daughter
Who gave Chopin a loan in September for an apartment?	Jane Stirling
What did Parisian ladies consider proper etiquette when in Chopin's room?	to faint
Why did Chopin request being cut open after his death?	fear of being buried alive
What did Chopin reply to the doctor when asked is he was suffering?	"No longer"
Who made Chopin's death mask?	Clésinger
Why did Chopin want his body opened when he died?	fear of being buried alive
What did Solange's husband make hours after Chopin's death along with his death mask?	a cast of his left hand.
What is listed as Chopin's official cause of death?	tuberculosis
What was the name of Chopin's doctor?	Jean Cruveilhier
What has the Polish government not allowed to find true cause of death?	DNA testing
What was the cause of death on Chopin's death certificate?	tuberculosis
Who was Chopin's physician?	Jean Cruveilhier
Other possiblities for Chopin's death include cirrhosis, alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency, and what?	cystic fibrosis
Who has denied testing Chopin's DNA to determine the actual cause of death?	the Polish government.
Where was Chopin's funeral held?	Church of the Madeleine
How long was Chopin's funeral delayed?	two weeks
How many people arrived for Chopin's funeral?	Over 3,000
Where was Chopin's funeral held?	the Church of the Madeleine in Paris
How long was Chopin's funeral delayed?	two weeks
How many people arrived without an invitation?	Over 3,000
What song was sung at Chopin's funeral?	Mozart's Requiem
Who was the organist at Chopin's funeral?	Louis Lefébure-Wély
Who led Chopin's funeral procession?	Prince Adam Czartoryski
What was played at his graveside?	Funeral March from Chopin's Piano Sonata No. 2
What Mozart song was sung at Chopin's funeral?	Mozart's Requiem
Who was the organist for Chopin's funeral?	Louis Lefébure-Wély
Which cemetery was Chopin buried in?	Père Lachaise Cemetery
Who led the funeral procession?	Prince Adam Czartoryski
What was played at Chopin's graveside?	the Funeral March from Chopin's Piano Sonata No. 2
Who sculpted Chopin's tombstone?	Clésinger
What is the name of the muse carved on Chopin's tombstone?	Euterpe
How much did Chopin's funeral cost?	5,000 francs
Who paid for Chopin's funeral?	Jane Stirling
Chopin's sister Ludwika took his heart back to Warsaw preserved in what?	alcohol
Who designed Chopin's tombstone?	Clésinger.
How much did Chopin's funeral and monument cost?	5,000 francs
Who paid for Chopin's funeral?	Jane Stirling
Who took Chopin's heart to Poland?	sister
Who ended up with the 200 letters from Sand to Chopin?	Sand
How many of Chopin's works still exist?	Over 230
All of his pieces include what instrument?	piano
How many Chopin pieces are known to have survived?	Over 230
Only a few of Chopin's pieces involve more than the piano, including piano concertos, songs and what?	chamber music.
Whose piano method did Chopin teach his students?	Clementi
Whose piano method did Chopin use with his students?	Clementi
Who did Chopin say were the two most important composers in his own music influences?	Bach and Mozart
Chopin looked to Beethoven, Mozart, Clementi and who for his own music education?	Haydn
Who is credited with creating the nocturne?	John Field
Chopin was the first person to create what as singular concert pieces?	ballades and scherzi
What new genre di John Field invent?	nocturne
Chopin was first in writing what for concerts?	ballades and scherzi
What musical concept did Chopin exploit?	concert étude
What three other musicians were developing the new genre?	Liszt, Clementi and Moscheles
How many polonaises were published while Chopin lived?	seven
How many polonaises were published after Chopin died?	nine
Chopin was credited for making what more internationally known?	mazurkas
What is different about Chopin's waltzes versus a ballroom waltz?	faster tempos
What did Chopin add to the modern dance of his era?	greater range of melody and expression.
Chopin's Polish dance music was developed for what type of hall?	concert hall
What was Chopin responsible for making popular with Euorpeans?	the mazurka
How many Chopin polonaises were published after his death?	nine
What dance music of Chopin was written more for recitals than ballrooms?	waltzes
What is another title Op. 10, No. 12 has garnered?	the Revolutionary Étude
What is the only piece Chopin gave an actual title to?	Funeral March
The Funeral March was written as part of what piece?	Sonata No. 2
How many instrumental works did Chopin give a descriptive name to?	one
What descriptive name was Op. 10, No. 12 given?	Revolutionary Étude
What descriptive name was Op. 64, No. 1 given?	Minute Waltz
What was the last number Chopin gave to an opus?	65
Who was Chopin's musical executor?	Julian Fontana
How many unfinished pieces did Julian Fontana make into eight more opus numbers?	23
Op. 74 is made up of how many Polish songs?	17
What is the last opus number that Chopin used?	65
Who grouped 23 unpublished pieces and published them as Opp. 66-73 in 1855?	Julian Fontana
When was Op. 74 published?	1857
The Kobylańska Catalogue was named for who?	Krystyna Kobylańska
Pieces published after what year stopped receiving opus numbers?	1857
What have pieces published after 1857 been given rather than opus numbers?	alternative catalogue designations
What is the current musicologist reference for Chopin's pieces?	the Kobylańska Catalogue
What is the shortened reference for the Kobylańska Catalogue?	KK
Who compiled the Kobylańska Catalogue?	Krystyna Kobylańska.
Who released the first collection of Chopin's works?	Breitkopf & Härtel
Who edited the Polish "National Edition" of Chopin's works?	Jan Ekier
Maurice Schlesinger and Camille Pleyel were what to Chopin?	original publishers
Where did Chopin's work start t oshow up?	popular 19th-century piano anthologies.
What was the name under scholarly publications of Chopin's work form 1937 to 1966?	Paderewski
Who edited the Polish National Edition?	Jan Ekier
What is central to Chopin's process?	Improvisation
Rosen suggests that a central part of Chopin's uniqueness is how he handles what?	the four-bar phrase
What is central to Chopin's creativeness?	Improvisation
Who wrote that "improvisation is designed for an audience"?	Nicholas Temperley
What did Rosen suggest was important about chopin's personality?	his flexible handling of the four-bar phrase as a structural unit.
What piece does J. Barrie Jones pinpoint as a great example of Chopin's palette?	the Barcarolle Op. 60
What does J. Barrie Jones feel stands supreme of Chopin's concert pieces?	the four ballades and four scherzos
What form does Temperley feel that Chopin's ballades and scherzos are based on?	departure and return
Chopin's mazurkas contain more of what than his other compositions?	folk features
What form are Chopin's mazurkas and waltzes in?	straightforward ternary or episodic form, sometimes with a coda.
Which of Chopin's works shows more folk aspects?	mazurkas
What type of bass do Chopin's mazurkas exhibit?	drone bass
What does Chopin's Op. 63 No. 3 have that is rare?	a canon at one beat's distance
What time are Chopin's polonaises written in?	triple time
Chopin's ability to create an advanced polonasises surpassed even two of his teachers, Zywny and who?	Elsner
Chopin's polonaise often have what kind of rhythm in their melodies?	martial
Chopin's polonaises needed what kind of playing technique?	formidable
How many nocturnes did Chopin compose?	21
What is it about the middle of Chopin's nocturnes that increases their drama?	agitated expression
Chopin's nocturnes were more structured than who?	Field
What year did Chopin meet Field?	1833
Which type of Chopin's compositons were difficult for perfomers due to their middle sections?	nocturnes
What pieces of his did Chopin use to teach his technique?	études
What form are most of Chopin's études in?	straightforward ternary
Chopin often taught his piano technique using what form of music he wrote?	études
What piece of Bach's did Chopin take inspiration for his preludes?	The Well-Tempered Clavier
Who suggested that Chopin's preludes were not intended to be played as a group?	Kenneth Hamilton
What was described as "the beginning of studies" by Schumann?	The preludes
What inspired Chopin for his preludes?	J.S. Bach's The Well-Tempered Clavier
Kenneth Hamilton suggests that the preludes may not have been meant as a group but rather as what?	generic preludes to others of his pieces
Who did a recording where Étude Op. 10 No. 5. follows relude Op. 28 No. 7?	Ferruccio Busoni
How many movements are No. 2, Op. 35 and No. 3, Op 58 in?	four
What two people claimed that Op 58 was "worthy of Brahms"?	Kornel Michałowski and Jim Samson
How many movements are in No. 2, Op. 35 and No. 3, Op 58?	four
Which movement was found lacking in musicality by Schumann?	The last movement
According to music historians, which sonata is similar to German tradition and worthy of Brahms?	Op. 58
Chopin's chord progressions are similar in style to what other composer?	Claude Debussy
What likely arose due to Chopin's technique with keyboards?	harmonic innovations
Who wrote about Chopin's "novel harmonic effects"?	Temperley
What was Chopin's style based upon?	independent finger technique
Who wrote about a Chopin 1841 recital?	Léon Escudier
What writing of Chopin talks about everything about piano playing has to do with proper fingering?	his Projet de méthode
According to J. Barrie Jones who was the only true successor to Chopin?	Karol Szymanowski
Many people were considered influenced by Chopin's what?	national modes and idioms
Who was Alexander Scriabin's teacher?	Nikolai Zverev
Who was Chopin's worthy successor according to Jones?	Karol Szymanowski
Who was devoted to the music of Chopin?	Alexander Scriabin
Who was Alexander Scriabin's teacher?	Nikolai Zverev
Who wrote that the current large concert style conflicts with Chopin's preference of intimate performances?	Jonathan Bellman
What did Chopin tend to avoid?	rigid procedures
What has been falsely credited to Chopin?	"always crescendo to a high note"
What did Chopin tell a student is given up in concerts?	hearing in them all the most beautiful things of art
Who wrote about Chopin's "chromatic embroidery"?	Berlioz
Who wrote that Chopin's music, when played by him, became a "colorful wreath of flowers"?	Hiller
Chopin's compositions are often played with what?	rubato
What does rubato mean?	the practice in performance of disregarding strict time
In Chopin's music where strict timing is disregarded, what is it called?	rubato
What type of Chopin's music had the most disregard for strict timing according to Charles Rosen?	mazurkas
According to who did Chopin demand strictly sticking with rhythm?	Friederike Müller
Which student said Chopin made sure his students knew his legato, cantabile style of playing?	Friederike Müller
According to Friederike Müller, Chopin insisted his students have the strictest adherence to what?	rhythm.
Chopin was noted as introducing music to what?	sense of nationalism
What year did Schumann review Chopin's piano concertos?	1836
In his review Schumann made note of Chopin's emotions for what?	Poland
Why did Schumann say the Poles were in mourning?	the failure of the November 1830
A biography on Chopin released under Franz Liszt's name was likely written by who?	Carolyne zu Sayn-Wittgenstein
Chopin was able to bring about a new sense of nationalism with his music because of his mazurkas and what?	polonaises
Who wrote a glowing review of Chopin's love for his country through his music in 1836?	Schumann
Schumann described Chopin's music as cannons buried in what?	flowers
Though Franz Liszt is credited with Chopin's 1863 biography, who probably actually wrote it?	Carolyne zu Sayn-Wittgenstein
Who said that Chopin's familiarity with Polish music was more "urbanised"  than true folk music?	Barbara Milewski
George Golos references what two musicians when claiming Chopin's nationalism was overrated?	Michał Kleofas Ogiński and Franciszek Lessel
Who said Chopin's works were modeled after Bach, Beethoven, Schubert and Field?	Richard Taruskin
William Atwood suggested that Chopin's music wasn't purposely patriotic but what?	intuitive
A modern commentator, William Atwood, feels Poles not only sought solace in Chopin's music but also found them a source of strength as they continued to fight for what?	freedom
Where were Poles scattered to?	Europe and the New World
Arthur Hutchings stated that Chopin's lack of what made him special?	Byronic flamboyance
Who were two of Chopin's contemporaries?	Liszt and Henri Herz
What place was considered lucky for Chopin to have arrived at considering how much he charged for piano lessons?	Paris
Who said Chopin was unlike his romantic contemporaries Liszt and Henri Herz?	Arthur Hutchings
In what suite did Schumann name a work for Chopin?	Carnaval
What piece of Chopin's work was dedicated to Schumann?	Ballade No. 2 in F major
How many of Chopin's Polish songs did Liszt transliterate for piano?	six
With who did Chopin feel comfortable speaking of folk music with?	Alkan
What was recognized about Chopin from his musical peers?	qualities as a pianist and composer
What Schumann suite contained the name of a piece Schumann named for Chopin?	Carnaval
What piece did Chopin dedicate to Schumann?	Ballade No. 2 in F major
What other musician shows to have elements of Chopin in his work?	Liszt
Who dedicated his 1915 piano Études to Chopin?	Debussy
For what publisher to Debussy edit Chopin's music for?	Jacques Durand
Who was a student of Chopin's former students and actually recorded some Chopin music?	Raoul Koczalski
What music did Debussy play a lot at the Paris Conservatoire?	Chopin's
Who were Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain?	Mainland Chinese scholars
What important trade did the Ming Dynasty have with Tibet?	horse trade
During what years did the Mongol leader Kublai Khan rule?	1402–1424
Who did the Yongle Emperor try to build a religious alliance with?	Deshin Shekpa
Deshin Shekpa was the head of what school?	the Karma Kagyu school
The Tibetan leaders had a diplomacy with what neighboring state?	Nepal
What did the Tibetans use against Ming forays?	armed resistance
Who were the armed protectors for the Gelug Dalai Lama?	the Mongols
Which regime did Güshi Khan help establish?	the Ganden Phodrang
When was the Mongol-Tibetan alliance started?	1578
In what century did the Tibetan Empire fall?	the 9th century
Who signed multiple peace treaties with the Tang?	The Yarlung rulers of Tibet
What did one of the treaties between the Tang and Tibet help fix?	the borders between Tibet and China
Who was the Tangs biggest rival?	Tibet
What year did Tang and Tibet sign a treaty to fix the borders?	821
When did the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period of China take place?	907–960
When did the Song dynasty take place?	960–1279
What dynasty was concerned with countering northern enemy states?	Song dynasty
Who ruled the Liao dynasty?	the Khitan
Who ruled the  Jin dynasty?	Jurchen
Which ruler took Western Xia under their control?	Genghis Khan
Who was Genghis Khan's successor?	Ögedei Khan
What years did Ögedei Khan rule?	1229–1241
Who invaded Tibet?	Ögedei Khan
Who was the Mongol prince?	Godan
Who was the leader of the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism?	Sakya Pandita
Who was the regent of the Mongol Empire?	Töregene Khatun
In what years was Töregene Khatun the regent of the Mongol Empire?	1241–1246
How many states were ruled by myriarchies?	thirteen
What title did prince Kublai rule as from 1260 to 1294?	Khagan
Who was the superior of prince Kublai?	Ögedei Khan
Who became the second Karmapa Lama?	Karma Pakshi
With whom did Kublai Khan have a unique relationship with?	the Phagpa lama
When did Kublai Khan conquer the song dynasty?	1279
When did the Yuan dynasty rule?	1271–1368
Which dynasty ruled all of china?	the Yuan dynasty
What did Khubilai claim for a while?	universal rule
Where did Khubilai seek support as Emperor?	China
What year was the Sakya viceregal regime eradicated?	1358
Who placed the Sakya viceregal regime position of authority?	the Mongols in Tibet
Who eradicated the Sakya viceregal regime?	the Phagmodru myriarch Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen
Which dynasty became ruler of Tibet?	the Phagmodrupa Dynasty
Who created the Ming Dynasty?	Zhu Yuanzhang
Who caused the Yuan dynasty to fall?	the Red Turban Rebellion
Who ruled as the the Hongwu Emperor?	Zhu Yuanzhang
What years did Zhu Yuanzhang rule as the Hongwu Emperor?	1368–1398
Who did the Hongwu Emperor send convoys to?	Yuan officeholders
Who was the fourth Karmapa Lama?	Rolpe Dorje
Who rejected an invitation by the Hongwu Emperor?	Rolpe Dorje
What did the the Hongwu Emperor want to continue to promote?	the Buddhist link between Tibet and China
Who did Rolpe Dorje send as envoys to court in Nanjing?	disciples
Who created a law that did not allow Han Chinese to learn the beliefs of Tibetan Buddhism?	Ming government
What years did the Yongle Emperor reign?	1402–1424
Who worked towards obtaining a extension of relations with Tibet?	the Yongle Emperor
What years did the Qing dynasty rule?	1644–1912
what year was the history of Ming produced?	1739
What did the Ming dynasty create?	É-Lì-Sī Army-Civilian Marshal Office
How many Qianhu offices were there?	seventeen Qianhu offices
where was the É-Lì-Sī Army-Civilian Marshal Office established?	western Tibet
How many princes of Dharma were assigned by the Ming court?	three
Who established the Tibetan law code?	Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen
Who was the Phagmodru ruler?	Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen
who was a professor of the University of Washington?	Turrell V. Wylie
Who had a large amount of contacts with china during Yuan?	Tibet
Who believed that Tibet barely had any diplomatic relations with the Ming?	Morris Rossabi
Who supported van Praag's beliefs?	historian Tsepon W. D. Shakabpa
Who did not agree with van Praag and Shakabpa?	Wang Jiawei and Nyima Gyaincain
Who believed that the Ming court had full sovereignty over Tibet?	Wang and Nyima
What year did Wang and Nyima believe that the Mongol Prince Punala went to Nanjing?	1371
What did the lamas called themselves?	princes
What edicts did the Ming issue?	imperial edicts
Who wrote the book The Story of Tibet?	Journalist and author Thomas Laird
who colonized India and New Zealand?	the British
Who's viewpoint does Thomas Laird believe Wang and Nyima present?	the government viewpoint of the People's Republic of China
How did the The Columbia Encyclopedia describe the Yuan dynasty?	A Mongol dynasty of China
How did the Encyclopedia Americana describe the Yuan Dynasty?	the line of Mongol rulers in China
What did Thomas Laird dismiss the Yuan dynasty as?	a non-Chinese polity
Who wrote the book Khubilai Khan?	Rossabi
When did the yuan dynasty start and end?	1271 to 1368
When did Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan reign?	1311–1320
During the Yuan what existed between China and Tibet?	a licensed border market
Who was granted higher status than the Han Chinese majority?	the Mongols and other ethnicities
Who abolished the policy council?	the Ming
What was the Tibetan leader  Choskunskyabs  appointed as?	the General of the Ngari Military and Civil Wanhu Office
Who governed most areas of Tibet?	Ming dynasty's Ü-Tsang Commanding Office
Where is the China Tibetology Research Center located?	Beijing
Who was the Director of the History Studies Institute?	Chen Qingying
How many households were the offices of Qianhu in charge of?	1,000 households
How many households were the offices of Wanhu in charge of?	10,000 households
What was the name of the Tibetologist?	John Powers
Who did the Ming emperors send invitations to?	ruling lamas
When the lamas received an invite from the emperors, who did they send instead?	subordinates
What was the western regions composed of?	the Tarim Basin and oasis of Turpan
Who believed that they were the true Han Western representatives?	foreign officials
What title was given by the Yuan court to Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen ?	Education Minister
What Tibetan title was hardly ever mentioned when referring to Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen?	Degsi
What dynasty kept a Central-local government relation with the Yuan imperial court?	Phagmodrupa Dynasty
What two people claim the title of Education Minister was often seen next to Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen's name in Tibetan texts?	Wang and Nyima
Who wrote in their will that they received loving care from the emperor in the east?	The Tai Situpa
Who divided Central Tibet into districts?	Changchub Gyaltsen
Who strongly believed Changchub Gyaltsen wanted to restore the glories of its Imperial age to Tibet?	Van Praag
What university was Lok-Ham Chan a professor at?	the University of Washington
What did Lok-Ham Chan claim  Changchub Gyaltsen wanted to remove?	all traces of Mongol suzerainty
Who did the Hongwu Emperor grant the title Initiation State Master to?	Sagya Gyaincain
Who suggested to the emperor that an official title be granted to second Phagmodru ruler?	the Ming officer of Hezhou
Who was the second Phagmodru ruler?	Jamyang Shakya Gyaltsen
Who told the emperor that the situation in Dbus and Gtsang were under control?	the Ming officer of Hezhou
Where were the envoys sent?	to the Ming court
Who lost their power over Tibet?	the Phagmodrupa
What year did the Phagmodrupa lose their power over Tibet?	1434
What year did the 5th Dalai lama start to dominate over Tibet?	1642
What did the other families fail to establish?	hegemonies
The Ming Dynasty granted what titles to lamas of schools?	the Karmapa Kargyu
Who did the Ming Dynasty decline titles from after receiving invitations?	Mongol
Who was the founder of the Gelug school?	Je Tsongkhapa
Who invited Je Tsongkhapa to come pay tribute?	the Ming Yongle Emperor
Who wrote the letter declining the Emperor's invitation?	Tsongkhapa
When did the Ming first request Tsongkhapa to come to court?	1407
When did the Ming court send a second request to Tsongkhapa?	1413
Who did Tsongkhapa send in his place to Nanjing?	his disciple Chosrje Shākya Yeshes
When was Chosrje Shākya Yeshes sent to Nanjing?	1414
Who believed the Ming reappointed old Yuan dynasty officials in Tibet?	Dawa Norbu
Who did the Ming appoint titles to?	eastern Tibetan princes
What didn't the Ming send to replace the Mongols when they left Tibet?	an army
What does Yiu Yung-chin claim the Ming did not possess?	Tibet
What was the name of the  eunuch?	Yang Sanbao
Where did the Yongle Emperor send Yang Sanbao?	Tibet
When did Yongle Emperor send Yang Sanbao into Tibet?	1413
Why did Yongle Emperor send Yang Sanbao into Tibet?	the allegiance of various Tibetan princes
Why did the emperor pay a small fortune in gifts?	to maintain the loyalty of neighboring vassal states
Who did the Gelug exchange gifts with?	the Ming court
Until what year frame did the Gelug exchange gifts with the the Ming?	1430s
What was the Gelug not mentioned in?	the Mingshi or the Mingshi Lu
Regardless of their sectarian affiliations, who did the Ming grant titles to?	various lamas
Who was the viceregal Sakya regime overthrown by?	the Phagmodru myriarchy
Who believed that the Ming had no real authority over Tibet?	Melvyn C. Goldstein
What years did the Rinpungpa regime start and end?	1435–1565
Who believed that the titles given to Tibetan leaders did not confer authority?	Melvyn C. Goldstein
What years did the Tsangpa start and end?	1565–1642
What year did the Jianwen Emperor reign start and end?	1398–1402
Who aided the Yongle Emperor?	the Buddhist monk Yao Guangxiao
Who was Yongle Emperor's father?	the Hongwu Emperor
When did the Yongle Emperor invite Deshin Shekpa to his court?	March 10, 1403
Who did the Yongle Emperor send to Tibet?	Hou Xian and the Buddhist monk Zhi Guang
Why did the Yongle Emperor send Hou Xian and Zhi Guang to Tibet?	to seek out the Karmapa
When did Hou Xian and Zhi Guang return to Nanjing?	1407
Where did Hou Xian and Zhi Guang travel through on their way to the Karmapa?	through Qinghai or via the Silk Road to Khotan
When did Deshin Shekpa travels start?	1403
Where did the Yongle Emperor greet the Karmapa?	Nanjing
Who did the Emperor give the place of honor at his left to?	the Karmapa
Who sat on a lower platform than the Tibetan cleric?	Kublai
Who showed a great amount of respect to Deshin Shekpa?	the Yongle Emperor
At what temple did the ceremonies for the Yongle Emperor's deceased parents take place?	Linggu Temple
Where was the Linggu Temple located?	Nanjing
What title was Deshin Shekpa given at Nanjing?	Great Treasure Prince of Dharma
Who did Deshin Shekpa persuade the Yongle Emperor to give the title to?	religious leaders of other Tibetan Buddhist sects
Who imposed on the military might on Tibet in the past?	the Mongols
Hok-Lam Chan states that Deshin Skekpa was only invited for what purpose?	religious purposes
What was said to be the  Yongle Emperor plans?	to send a military force into Tibet
Why was the Yongle Emperor said to have been planning to send military forces into Tibet?	to forcibly give the Karmapa authority over all the Tibetan Buddhist schools
Who convinced the Yongle emperor not to send military forces into Tibet?	Deshin Shekpa
Who did the Yongle Emperor have a conflict with?	Jianwen Emperor
Who aided the legitimacy of the Yongle Emperor's rule?	Deshin Shekpa
What served as a legitimizing tool for the emperor's succession to the throne?	Deshin Shekpa's miracles
According to Norbu who failed to realize the significance of the religious aspect of the Ming-Tibetan relationship?	Chinese Communist historians
What were the items of tribute?	Buddhist artifacts
Who believe that the Ming dynasty did not exercise any direct political control over Tibet?	Josef Kolmaš
What years did the Zhengtong Emperor reign?	1435–1449
Who maintains an edict of the Zhengtong Emperor?	The Information Office of the State Council of the PRC
Who was the edict addressed to?	the Karmapa
Who had a message delivered to them by Zhengtong?	Great Treasure Prince of Dharma
When was the edict written?	after the latter's agent had brought holy relics to the Ming court
Who did the Ming cut off all relations with?	the Karmapa hierarchs
What year did the Ming cut off the Karmapa hierarchs?	1446
When did  Deshin Shekpa  die?	1415
Who did the Ming court think the representatives were sent by?	the Karmapa
Why did Yongle order the construction?	to facilitate trade with Tibet
What did Yongle want to trade with Tibet?	tea, horses, and salt
where did the trade route pass through?	through Sichuan and crossed Shangri-La County in Yunnan
Why does Van Praag believe the Ming court set up a diplomatic delegation with Tibet?	to secure urgently needed horses
What shops were catered to the Tibetan market?	Silk workshops
What visual images and symbols were on furnishings from the silk workshops?	Tibetan Buddhist
who were the Tibetan areas were ruled by?	the Ming
Wang and Nyima believed horses were collected from Tibet as what kind of tax?	a mandatory "corvée" tax
Who did the Ming trade horses with?	Tibet
Who was the leader of the Tümed Mongols?	Altan Khan
Who did Altan Khan overthrow?	the Oirat Mongol confederation's hegemony
Who did Altan Khan make peace with?	the Ming dynasty
Who convinced the Ming to reopen their border markets in 1573?	Altan Khan
When did the Hongwu Emperor use military force in Tibet?	the 14th century
When was the Marquis Mu Ying commissioned to quell?	November 1378
How many Tibetan prisoners did Mu Ying capture?	30,000
How many animals did Mu Ying capture?	200,000
Who was ordered to force a Tibetan assault into Sichuan?	Ming general Qu Neng
What did the mid Ming dynasty discussion focus mainly on?	recovery of the Ordos region
Who used the the Ordos region as a place to stage raids?	the Mongols
Where were the Mongols trying to raise?	Ming China
Why did P. Christiaan Klieger believe that the Ming court supported high Tibetan lamas?	to help stabilize border regions and protect trade routes
What policy does Luciano Petech and Sato Hisashi claim the Ming held towards the Tibet?	divide-and-rule
When did the Ming hold the divide and rule policy?	after the Sakya regime had fallen
Who did Yongle Emperor fail to build a solid relationship with?	fifth Karmapa
Who did the Yongle Emperor give patronage to?	many different Tibetan lamas
Who were the Rinpungpa leaders related to?	the Phagmodrupa
When did the the prince of Rinbung occupy Lhasa?	1498
What was the most important event to the Gelug?	New Years ceremonies and prayers
When was Gelug was given the right to conduct the New Years prayer?	1518
When did the Zhengde Emperor rule?	1505–1521
Who's company did the Zhengde Emperor enjoy?	the company of lamas
Who was the 8th Karmapa Lama?	Mikyö Dorje
Who said Tibet  wasn't an integral part of of China?	Chinese writers of the early 20th century
What does Sperling claim did not have any control over Tibet?	China's intervening Ming dynasty
Since what century has Sperling described Ming and Tibet's relation being problematic for China?	the 13th century
When was the Manchu Qing dynasty invasion?	the 18th century
During Which dynasty does Josef Kolmaš claim Tibet was considered an organic part of China?	the Qing dynasty
Josef Kolmaš  states that Tibet became subject to what government?	the Chinese central government
Who does P. Christiaan Klieger claim to have had a mutual role of religious prelate?	the Tibetan lamas and Mongol khans
Who does P. Christiaan Klieger believe undertook the former imperial tributaries?	the Republic of China and its Communist successors
Where does P. Christiaan Klieger work?	the California Academy of Sciences in San Francisco
Who was the  vice royalty of the Sakya regime established by?	the Mongols
The Sakya regime established what kind of relationship between the Tibetans and Mongol converts?	patron and priest relationship
When was Tibet included into the territory of Yuan dynasty's China?	the 13th century
Who was said to have gained the right to rule Tibet?	the Ming dynasty
When was China Daily started?	1981
Who does the article claim had two itinerant high commands over Tibet?	the Ming
According to article Tibet has remained under what jurisdiction?	the central government of China
When did the Jiajing Emperor reign?	1521–1567
What ideology was sponsored at the Ming court?	the native Chinese ideology of Daoism
Who stopped their trips to Ming China?	the Tibetan lamas
Who was the Grand Secretary under Jiajing?	Yang Tinghe
Who broke the eunuch influence at court?	Yang Tinghe
Who was Zhengde's successor?	Jiajing
What establishment did the politics at court shift in favor of?	Neo-Confucian establishment
Which embassy did the Neo-Confucian establishment reject?	the Portuguese embassy
Who did the Neo-Confucian establishment have animosity towards?	Tibetan Buddhism and lamas
Evelyn S. Rawski claims that Ming's relationship with Tibetan prelates ended during who's reign?	Jiajing
What region did the Tumed Mongols move into?	the Kokonor region
Which frontier did the Tumed Mongols raid?	the Ming Chinese frontier
The presence of the Altan Khan in the west reduced whos influence?	the Ming
When did Altan Khan make peace with the Ming dynasty?	1571
Who did Altan Khan invite to meet him in Amdo?	the third hierarch of the Gelug—Sönam Gyatso
What practice did Altan Khan put to an end?	the native Mongol practices of shamanism and blood sacrifice
Who did Altan Khan persuade to convert to Gelug Buddhism?	the Mongol princes and subjects
What did Altan Khan threaten the Mongol princes and subjects with if they did not convert?	execution
Who did the Mongol princes ask to grant them titles?	the Dalai Lama
Why did the Mongol princes ask for titles?	Committed to their religious leader
Who was Altan Khan's nominal superior?	Tümen Khan
To make the Mongol-Tibetan alliance stronger who became the 4th Dalai Lama?	the great-grandson of Altan Khan
Who was the first Dalai Lama to have political control over Tibet?	the 5th Dalai Lama
When did the 5th Dalai Lama gain political control over Tibet?	In 1642
Who was given the grandiose title?	Sonam Gyatso
Who granted Sonam Gyatso the title of grandiose?	Altan Khan
Who did Sonam Gyatso send gifts to?	Zhang Juzheng
Who was the Ming Chinese official?	Zhang Juzheng
Where did Sonam Gyatso die?	Mongolia
Who did the Ming dynasty showed favors to?	the third Dalai Lama
What was the the third Dalai Lama allowed to do?	pay tribute
What title was Sonam Gyatso granted in 1587?	the title Dorjichang or Vajradhara Dalai Lama
In 1653 who did the Qing emperor grant a title to?	the fifth Dalai Lama
In 1713 who did the Qing emperor grant a title to?	the fifth Panchen Lama
What title was the fourth Dalai Lama granted?	Master of Vajradhara
Who was the fourth Dalai Lama?	Yonten Gyatso
When did the Wanli Emperor grant the title Master of Vajradhara to Yonten Gyatso?	1616
Who did the Wanli Emperor invite to Beijing in 1616?	Yonten Gyatso
Why didn't Yonten Gyatso make it to Beijing?	he died
Who's presence increased in Tibet?	the Mongols
What were the Mongols trying to reclaim?	their old vassal of Tibet
When did the conquest of Tibet reach its peak?	1642
Who's lack of concern helped the Mongols jump at a chance to reclaim their old vassal of Tibet?	the Ming court
When were the Rinbung princes overthrown?	1565
Who took control of the whole of Central Tibet?	Karma Phuntsok Namgyal
When did Karma Phuntsok Namgyal reign?	1611–1621
Who did Ü-Tsang king have an alliance with?	the Karmapa
Who refused an audience with the Ü-Tsang king?	The fourth Dalai Lama
Who did the 5th Dalai Lama beg for help from?	the Mongol prince Güshi Khan
What role did Güshi Khan take on?	protector
Which enemies did Güshi Khan defeat?	the Gelugpas
Where did Güshi Khan resettle his tribe?	Amdo
When did the  Ü-Tsang forces surrender?	1642
Who did Güshi Khan organize a welcome ceremony for?	Lozang Gyatso
What did Güshi Khan present as a gift to the Dalai Lama?	his conquest of Tibet
Who did Güshi Khan enthrone the ruler of Tibet?	the Dalai Lama
Who did Güshi Khan grant the governing authority to?	the regent Sonam Chöpel
The title of 'King of Tibet belonged to whom?	Güshi Khan
Who did the the Chinese Ming dynasty fall to?	the rebellion of Li Zicheng
According to Kolmaš who accepted an invite from a Manchu to send envoys to the capital at Mukden?	the Dalai Lama
Who was said to have treated the Dalai Lama as an independent sovereign of Tibet?	Shunzhi
Who tried to spread their territory into Tibet?	the Dzungar Mongols
Who helped the Tibetan?	the Kangxi Emperor
When did the Kangxi Emperor occupy Lhasa?	1720
When was The Qing dynasty garrison established in Tibet?	1751
When did the Qianlong Emperor reign?	1735–1796
Which company produces the iPod?	Apple
When was the original iPod released?	October 23, 2001
How many different types of iPod are currently available?	three
What kind of device is the iPod?	portable media players
The iPod Touch uses what kind of interface?	touchscreen
In what year was the first iPod released?	2001
What company manufactures the iPod?	Apple
How many versions of the iPod currently exist?	3
Which is the smallest version of the iPod?	Shuffle
In what year was the iPod most recently redesigned?	2015
In addition to playing music, what other function can the iPod perform?	data storage
What is the smallest data capacity for an iPod product?	2 GB
What is the largest data capacity for an iPod product?	128 GB
Which iPod product features the smallest data storage capacity?	iPod Shuffle
Which current iPod product features the largest data storage capacity?	iPod Touch
What's the storage capacity of the iPod Shuffle?	2 GB
What's the storage capacity for the iPod Touch?	128 GB
What Apple program is used to communicate between computers and portable devices?	iTunes
Which operating systems are compatible with iTunes?	Apple Macintosh and Microsoft Windows
What's the name of the software used to manage music and other media on Apple devices?	iTunes
Prior to iOS 5, how many apps were required to play music and videos on iPhone and iPad?	one
In mid-2010, which Apple device had higher sales than iPod?	iPhone
With what iOS release did Apple standardize media apps on all their products?	iOS 5
In what year did iPhone sales surpass those of iPods?	2010
What are the titles of the standard media apps on current Apple devices?	"Music" and "Videos"
What processor model is used in the iPod Touch?	A8
Which generation of iPod Touch was made availalbe in July of 2015?	sixth
What's the most recent generation of iPod Touch?	sixth
In what year was the most recent iPod Touch released?	2015
What type of processor does the current iPod Touch use?	A8
In how many colors is the current iPod Touch available?	5
In what year was the iPod first introduced?	2001
In what year did iPod sales show improvement?	2004
Which Apple engineer led original iPod design group?	Jon Rubinstein
What radio was the primary inspiration for the look of the iPod?	Braun T3 transistor radio
What was the storage capacity of the first iPod?	5 GB
in what year was the original iPod released?	2001
How large was the hard drive on the original iPod?	5 GB
What other popular music player did Apple compare their new product to?	the Walkman
What is the name of Apple's hardware engineering chief who helped design the iPod?	Jon Rubinstein
Who manufactured the hard drives for the first iPods?	Toshiba
Which company worked with Apple in creating the user interface for the iPod?	Pixo
What was the name of the font used prior to the release of the iPod Mini?	Chicago
In what year was the 6th gen iPod Classic released?	2007
The 6th gen iPod Classic and 3rd gen iPod nano featured which font?	Helvetica
Who supervised the design and implementation of the iPod user interface?	Steve Jobs
What software did Apple use as the basis for their iPod software?	PortalPlayer
What typeface does the current iPod use?	Helvetica
In what year was a special edition of the iPod produced?	2006
For what musical group was a special edition of the iPod first made?	U2
What color was the metal on the U2 version of the iPod?	black
What type of media was included with purchase of the U2 version of the iPod?	video
Of what band did Apple present a special edition iPod 5G?	U2
What color was the special U2 iPod model?	black
In what year did apple release the special U2 model of the iPod?	2006
Apple was involved in a lawsuit with which company in 2007?	Burst.com
Who previously applied for a patent for an iPod-like device?	Kane Kramer
In what country did Kane Kramer apply for his patent?	UK
In what year did Kane Kramer apply for his patent?	1981
What did Kane Kramer call the device for which he wanted a patent?	IXI
What patent holding company sued Apple in 2007?	Burst.com
What was the name of the previously-patented music player from 1981?	IXI
Who was the holder of the previous patent for the "plastic music box"?	Kane Kramer
Who came up with the name for Apple's portable mp3 player?	Vinnie Chieco
What was Vinnie Chieco's profession?	freelance copywriter
What film inspired the name of the iPod?	2001: A Space Odyssey
Who first trademarked the iPod name?	Joseph N. Grasso
In what year was Apple given rights to the iPod name?	2005
What movie inspired the iPod name?	2001: A Space Odyssey
What was the name of the copywriter that proposed the name "iPod"?	Vinnie Chieco
Who held the original trademark for the iPod name?	Joseph N. Grasso
When were images of new iPod colors leaked?	mid-2015
Who leaked the photos of new iPod colors?	Pierre Dandumont
What version of iTunes contained the leaked photos of new iPod colors?	12.2
What was the latest version of iTunes as of mid-2015?	12.2
Who first leaked the photos of the new iPod color scheme?	Pierre Dandumont
What audio deficiency was found in the 3rd gen iPods?	weak bass response
What kind of headphones could partially mitigate the bass response issues of the 3rd gen iPods?	high-impedance
What is an example of a device that could entirely mitigate the bass response issues of the 3rd gen iPods?	external headphone amplifier
What part of audio output was substandard on 3rd generation iPods?	bass
What component was to blame for the weak bass of the 3rd generation iPod?	undersized DC-blocking capacitors
What acoustic element could be distorted by different audio settings in iPods prior to 2007?	Bass
Name four sound profiles that would result in bass distortion on pre-2007 iPods.	R&B, Rock, Acoustic, and Bass Booster
What specific problem caused the issue with bass distortion?	clipping
iPods released before what year had issues with distorted bass?	2006
What EQ settings were known to have issues with bass distortion?	R&B, Rock, Acoustic, and Bass Booster
What type of sensory issue was a concern prior to the release of 5th gen iPods?	hearing loss
In what markets did 6th gen iPods limit the highest volume of the player?	EU
What was the limit imposed on how loud the iPod could play sounds in the EU?	100 dB
In what country did Apple have to recall iPods?	France
What is the highest volume output level of European 6th-generation iPods?	100 dB
What country originally pulled iPods due to higher-than-allowed volume levels?	France
What was the first type of connection used by the iPod to charge and transfer files?	FireWire
What was an alternate method of charging the iPod?	power adapter
What type of connector was originally required to upload songs or recharge the iPod?	FireWire
In which generation did iPod start providing compatibility with USB?	third generation
What iPod feature allowed for USB connections with the device?	30-pin dock connector
Which generation of iPod Classic was the first to abandon use of FireWire in transferring files?	fifth
Starting with which generation of iPod Nano was FireWire charging functionality no longer available?	fourth
What kind of connection is provided on the iPod Shuffle for both audio output and file transfer?	3.5 mm minijack
Which generation iPod was the first to include the 30-pin dock connector?	third generation
Which model of iPod combined the headphone jack and data port?	Shuffle
What interface was gradually phased out for both charging and data transfer?	FireWire
What interface replaced FireWire in later iterations of the iPod?	USB
Which iPod accessory was made by Apple but is no longer produced?	iPod Hi-Fi
What are two companies that make iPod accessories?	Belkin and Griffin
What part of the iPod is needed to communicate with peripherals?	dock connector
What is the condition for third parties using the dock connector?	paying royalties
The majority of peripherals for iPod are produced by what kinds of companies?	third parties
What's the name of the now-discontinued accessory manufactured by Apple, that connected via the iPod's dock connector?	iPod Hi-Fi
What new connector did Apple unveil on September 12, 2012?	Lightning
What other Apple product was unveiled on September 12, 2012?	seventh generation iPod Nano
How man pins did the pre-Lightning dock connecter use?	30
How many pins did the Lightning connector have?	8
On how many sides of the Lightning connector are the pins located?	both sides
What's Apple's code name for the newer 8-pin dock connector?	Lightning
What was the first iPod Touch generation to feature the Lightning connector?	fifth generation
What is the name of an Apple-produced iPod accessory?	iPod Hi-Fi
What is an example of an iPod accessory made work exercise?	Nike+iPod pedometer
What are six companies that made some of the first peripherals for the iPod?	Griffin Technology, Belkin, JBL, Bose, Monster Cable, and SendStation
What can A/V cables be used to connect the iPod to?	TV
Who manufactures a pedometer accessory for the iPod?	Nike
Which company manufactures the iPod Hi-Fi accessory?	Apple
What company was first to create a means of connecting the iPod to an automobile?	BMW
In what year did Apple reveal that it would provide compatibility with a wide range of auto manufacturers?	2005
Which company provides the ability to connect to iPods as a standard feature in their automobiles?	Scion
Which car company released the first automobile interface for the iPod?	BMW
Which car company first offered iPod connectivity as a standard feature on their whole product line?	Scion
What companies have developed iPod interfacing for their stereo systems?	JVC, Pioneer, Kenwood, Alpine, Sony, and Harman Kardon
What type of transmitter is used in the iTrip?	FM
What has become a standard inclusion in cars for several different auto companies?	audio input jacks
Which type of iPod car integration product is illegal in certain countries?	FM transmitters
What audio integration feature has become standard on many car models?	audio input jacks
In 2007, which airlines made deals to include iPod connections on their planes?	United, Continental, Delta, and Emirates
Where can people using iPods on planes view the device's interface?	individual seat-back displays
What are two airlines that considered implementing iPod connections but did not join the 2007 agreement?	KLM and Air France
Which airlines first agreed to install seat connections for iPods?	United, Continental, Delta, and Emirates
In what year did airlines first start to accommodate the iPod?	2007
What is the name of an audio format developed by Apple?	Apple Lossless
Which product enabled users to view images on the device?	iPod photo
What Microsoft media format is not natively supported by Apple devices?	WMA
What does DRM stand for?	Digital Rights Management
What computer OS did iPod software exclusively work with at launch?	Mac OS
What are some examples of audio formats supported by the iPod?	MP3, AAC/M4A, Protected AAC, AIFF, WAV, Audible audiobook, and Apple Lossless
What was the first model to support JPEG and other still image formats?	iPod photo
How many hosts are recognized by an iPod the first time they're used?	one
What will be erased if an iPod is set to sync with a different computer?	library
What must an iPod be connected to before iTunes can synchronize?	host computer
How many buttons do most iPods use?	five
On what part of newer iPods can you find the buttons?	click wheel
Where are the controls located on the 3rd gen iPod Shuffle?	earphone cable
What kind of interface does the iPod touch use instead of the click wheel?	touch screen
What other device shares the interface used by the iPod Touch?	iPhone
Most iPods feature how many buttons?	five
The 3rd generation of which iPod model had its controls only on the earphone cable?	Shuffle
Which other Apple product does the iPod Touch share an interface and OS with?	iPhone
When was the Apple iTunes Store launched?	April 29, 2003
What program is required to access the iTunes Store?	iTunes
When were videos made available through the iTunes store?	October 12, 2005
When did Apple begin selling entire films through the iTunes store?	September 12, 2006
In what year was the iTunes store established?	2003
In what year did videos first become available on iTunes?	2005
When were full-length moved added to the iTunes store?	2006
When the iTunes store was launched, what type of file format was used?	AAC
How many computers were allowed to play files that used the FairPlay DRM system?	five
In what category could files without digital rights management be found on the iTunes store?	iTunes Plus
When did Apple reveal that most of the iTunes selection was free from DRM?	January 6, 2009
By what time did Apple project its entire catalog would be free of DRM?	April 2009
What was the original format for purchased audio files on iTunes?	AAC
What was the name of the DRM system originally used by Apple and iTunes?	FairPlay
What was the name of the premium service that offered higher quality and DRM-free songs?	iTunes Plus
In what year was DRM completely eliminated from the iTunes offerings?	2009
What are two stores which sell files with DRM not compatible with iPods?	Napster and MSN Music
For what device's sales does Apple leverage the iTunes store?	iPods
The iPod can play music from other online stores as long as they don't contain what feature?	DRM
What company ended its deal with Apple's music store in July of 2007?	Universal Music Group
What entity did Universal have a contract with prior to July of 2007?	iTunes Store
In what year did Universal Music Group let their contract with iTunes lapse?	2007
What was the name of the event at which the iTunes Wi-Fi store was launched?	The Beat Goes On...
On what date was the iTunes Wi-Fi Music Store launched?	September 5, 2007
In what year was the iTunes Wi-Fi Music Store introduced?	2007
Which Apple device has the ability to sync with iTunes via the phone network?	iPhone
On what devices can video games be used?	iPods
What was included on the first iPod?	Brick
Who created Brick?	Steve Wozniak
What are three games, in addition to Brick, which have been included with the iPod?	Parachute, Solitaire, and Music Quiz
What is another phrase meaning hidden feature?	easter egg
What was the first, hidden game included with the original iPod?	Brick
What other games were later added to the original iPod?	Parachute, Solitaire, and Music Quiz
In what year did the iTunes store begin allowing users to buy video games?	2006
Which version of iTunes was introduced with the ability to purchase games?	iTunes 7
What was the first generation of iPod Classic on which games like Mahjong and Tetris could be played?	5th generation
On which generation of iPod Nano can games be played?	4th generation
In what year did iTunes 7 launch, along with a plethora of additional games?	2006
Which generation iPod was required to enjoy the new games available on iTunes 7?	fifth
What are the names of companies producing video games for Apple's MP3 player?	Namco, Square Enix, Electronic Arts, Sega, and Hudson Soft
What market can Apple participate in now that it has a variety of games available for iPod?	video game handheld console market
What two publications have covered iPod games?	GamePro and EGM
What format is used for iPod game files?	.ipg
What file format is being covered up by the use of ipg files?	.zip
What does SDK stand for?	software development kit
What is the only operating system on which iPhone SDK-made games can be played?	iOS
What file format are iPod games distributed in?	.ipg
An app produced with the iPhone SDK can only run on what devices?	iPod Touch and iPhone
Is the Apple SDK available to third-party game publishers?	not
What kind program is commonly used to move files between iTunes and an iPod?	iTunes
What kind of other applications enable communication between iTunes and an iPod?	third-party
Rather than copying media files directly to it, what software must be used for this purpose so that they are accessible?	iTunes
What kind of security determines if files moved to a computer can be played?	DRM
What minimum version of iTunes is required to transfer purchased media from an iPod to an authorized computer?	iTunes 7
In what kind of folder are files located in the iPod?	hidden
On what kind of operating system can hidden iPod files be accessed?	host
What method of file recovery is used to retrieve data from the iPod?	manual
In what year did Apple face multiple intellectual property lawsuits?	2005
What did the 2005 lawsuits accuse Apple of doing?	patent infringement
What other companies were named in the suit filed by Pat-rights?	Sony, RealNetworks, Napster, and Musicmatch
On whose behalf did Pat-rights take Apple to court?	Ho Keung Tse
Which company sued Apple for breach of a "music jukebox" patent in 2005?	Advanced Audio Devices
Which Apple technology did Pat-rights complain breached their patent in a lawsuit?	FairPlay
What interface component did Apple attempt to patent in 2005?	rotational user inputs
When did Apple receive a decision on its attempt to patent rotational user inputs?	August 2005
Which competitor sued Apple over rights to part of the software user interface?	Creative Technology
What was the name of the patent over which Creative asserted its ownership?	Zen Patent
From which entity did Creative request an investigation into Apple importing their devices to the US?	United States International Trade Commission
What interface feature did Apple unsuccessfully try to patent?	rotational user inputs
Which rival company sued Apple in 2005 and 2006?	Creative Technology
When did Creative and Apple come to an agreement over their intellectual property issues?	August 24, 2006
How much money did Apple have to pay to Creative as a result of their agreement?	$100 million
What program did Creative join in order to make iPod peripherals?	Made for iPod
How much did Apple pay to Creative Technologies to settle their 2006 suit?	$100 million
What's the name of the program by which 3rd parties sell iPod accessories?	the Made for iPod program
What share of the US digital music player market does iPod hold?	90%
When did iPod become the leader in digital music device sales?	2004
How much of the market did iPod claim as of January 2007?	72.7%
Who reported Apple's market share in 2007?	Bloomberg Online
Approximately what percentage of the hard drive-based music player sales does iPod have since 2004?	90%
Approximately what percentage of the overall music player market does the iPod line have?	70%
What did the iPod's US market share peak at in 2005?	74%
When did HP unveil their own edition of the iPod?	January 8, 2004
What does HP stand for?	Hewlett-Packard
What major retailer sold HP-branded iPod devices?	Wal-Mart
HP-branded iPods accounted for what share of iPod purchases?	5%
What kind of terms and conditions led HP to leave the iPod market?	unfavorable
Which computer company sold iPods from 2004-05 as part of a license agreement with Apple?	HP
How many iPods did Apple reveal it sold in April of 2007?	hundred million
How much of Apple's revenue was generated by iPod purchases in Q2 of 2007?	32%
What is an item that owners of iPods may also purchase?	Mac computers
How much revenue did Apple announce for Q2 2007?	$5.2 billion
In which year did Apple top sales of 100,000,000 iPods?	2007
As of 2007, what percentage of Apple's revenue came from iPod sales?	32%
What was Apple's revenue for Q3 2007?	$6.22 billion
Desktop computers made up how much of Apple's revenue in the third quarter of 2007?	19.22%
How much money did Apple make in 2007?	$3.5 billion
What was the value of Apple's cash assets at the end of 2007?	$15.4 billion
With the help of strong iPod sales, how much profit did they turn in 2007?	$3.5 billion
When did Apple reveal it had achieved its highest quarterly earnings to date?	January 22, 2008
What was Apple's highest quarterly profit as of Q1 2008?	$1.58 billion
How much of Apple's revenue resulted from purchases of laptop computers in Q1 2008?	21%
What percentage of Apples revenue in 1Q08 came from iPods, more than doubling the percentage of notebook sales?	42%
Who was Chief Financial Officer of Apple in July of 2009?	Peter Oppenheimer
From what year did iPod purchases begin to continuously decline?	2009
How much revenue did iPod sales account for in Q4 2008?	14.21%
Approximately how many total iPods had been sold by late 2009?	220 million
Which was the first year since iPod's introduction that no new model was released?	2013
What rank did iPod achieve among various computer products in 2006?	fourth
What kind of reviews do iPods tend to get?	favorable
What two companies use the AAC format for music files?	Sony Ericsson and Nokia
What file format is not supported by Sony Ericsson and Nokia?	WMA
Which publication praised iPods for revolutionizing the industry?	PC World
Which phone manufacturers adopted the AAC file format to become better iPod-compatible?	Sony Ericsson and Nokia
Which PC magazine praised the iPod for having "altered the landscape for portable audio players"?	PC World
Aside from recreational use, in what other arena have iPods found use?	business
What are two purposes for which iPods are used in business?	communication and training
What is the name of a company that uses iPods as part of its training?	Royal and Western Infirmaries
Where is Royal and Western Infirmaries located?	Glasgow, Scotland
What University gave an iPod to first year students in 2004?	Duke
What publication lauded the iPod for enabling people to listen to thousands of songs on a portable player?	Entertainment Weekly
Which major university began issuing iPods to all incoming freshmen starting in 2004?	Duke
Which magazine placed the iPod on its Best of the Decade list for the 00's?	Entertainment Weekly
What period of music did the iPod help bring to a close?	the Album Era
In which industry did the iPod have a major impact?	music industry
What did the iPod promote that prompted a big change in the music industry?	digital music storage
The ease of collecting singles with the iPod and iTunes is credited with ending what "era" in pop music?	the Album Era
How long were 5th generation iPods marketed as being able to function before needing to be charged?	14 hours
Which website criticized Apple's battery life claims?	MP3.com
In what year was Apple sued for issues relating to its battery life?	2003
Discrepancy in what spec brought about a class action suit against Apple in 2003?	battery life
How many hours of real-time battery life did the 5th-generation iPod test at, compared to its advertised 14 hours?	8 hours
Whose directions can be followed to interact with iPod batteries?	third-party vendors
What did Apple originally tell consumers to purchase when their iPod batteries no longer worked?	refurbished replacement iPod
What kind of battery does the iPod use?	lithium-ion
Which iPod component did Apple somewhat inconveniently made non-replaceable?	batteries
What type of rechargeable battery does Apple use in its iPods?	lithium-ion
What did Apple launch on November 14, 2003?	battery replacement program
How much did iPod owners originally have to pay for replacement batteries?	$99
What was needed to replace an iPod Nano battery?	soldering tools
What generation saw iPod batterys being affixed with glue?	Fifth generation
In what year did Apple begin a formal battery replacement program?	2003
What was the original price for a replacement battery from Apple?	$99
Which iPod model has its battery soldered into the unit?	Nano
What part of the iPod Nano was the cause of the overheating issue?	battery
What program allowed users to exchange iPod Nanos which suffered from overheating problems with new safe models?	Apple product replacement program
What are two subjects of criticism of iPods?	short life-span and fragile hard drives
What website ran a survey to learn how often iPods ceased working?	MacInTouch
How often did MacInTouch discover iPods stopped working, according to their survey?	13.7%
When did iPod owners take issue with the fragility of the iPod screen?	late 2005
What did Apple include with the iPod to resolve the screen problem?	protective sleeves
Which type of iPod storage proved more reliable than hard drive storage?	flash memory
The first generation nano suffered from which component getting damaged easily?	screen
What publication revealed information about the working conditions of iPod labor?	The Mail on Sunday
What governs iPod manufacturers' labor policies?	Apple's Code of Conduct
What percentage of the time did The Mail on Sunday claim workers labored for at least seven straight days?	25
Which British tabloid accused Apple of unfair worker conditions in 2006?	The Mail
What percentage of Apple's manufacturing employees worked over 60 hour weeks?	35%
Who did Apple partner with to monitor its labor policies?	Verité
What organization did Apple join to monitor its labor policies?	Electronic Industry Code of Conduct Implementation Group
What company was found to be violating Apple's labor policies?	Foxconn
Where was the Foxconn plant located?	Longhua, Shenzhen
What was the name of Apple's manufacturing company that was accused of overworking its employees?	Foxconn
What auditor company did Apple hire to oversee worker conditions following the controversy?	Verité
In what year did Foxconn workers first unionize?	2006
In what year did Chinese Foxconn emplyees kill themselves?	2010
What disappeared in 2009 prior to the suicide of a Foxconn employee?	Apple prototype
In what year did several Foxconn workers commit suicide?	2010
What attribute of the United States could be thought to lead more international and less domestic employment opportunities?	innovation
To work as a boot disk for a Mac, what file system must an iPod be formatted with?	HFS+
If connected to a Windows PC when first set up, what file system will an iPod be formatted with?	FAT32
What category of game is Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess?	action-adventure
What consoles can be used to play Twilight Princess?	GameCube and Wii
When was Twilight Princess launched in North America?	November 2006
When could GameCube owners purchase Twilight Princess?	December 2006
What company developed Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess?	Nintendo
What year was the Legend of Zelda:Twilight Princess originally planned for release?	2005
What year was the Wii version of Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess released?	2006
Who is the main character of the story?	Link
What land does Link serve to protect?	Hyrule
What character helped Link in Twilight Princess?	Midna
Who is the protagonist is Legend of Zelda?	Link
What is the name of the mysterious creature that assists Link?	Midna
This storyline takes place alternate from what storyline?	The Wind Waker
What accolade did Twilight Princess receive after its release?	Game of the Year
Under which brand was Twilight Princess for the Nintendo Wii published?	Nintendo Selects
When is the HD version of Twilight Princess slated for launch?	March 2016
At the time of release which episode of the Legend of Zelda series was considered the greatest entry?	Twilight Princess
How many Game of the Year awards did Twilight Princess receive?	several
What year was Twilight Princess the most critically acclaimed game?	2006
What year will the game release a high-definition port for the Wii U console?	2016
What are the three main activities in The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess?	combat, exploration, and item collection
Twilight Princess uses the control setup first employed in which previous game?	Ocarina of Time
What can be used to shoot without the need to manually target enemies?	L-targeting
What is Link's main weapon?	sword
What secondary weapon in Twilight Princess is analogous to a weapon featured in previous games?	Clawshot
What genre of game is Twilight Princess?	action-adventure
Twilight Princess follows the control scheme introduced in what game?	Ocarina of Time
What 2 main weapons does Link use in combat?	sword and shield
What control can be used while targeting that allows the player to forego manual targeting?	L-targeting
Many different types of interaction can be controlled by how many buttons?	one
Where can players see what action will be performed in different scenarios?	on-screen display
If Link is not moving, where will he put the projectile he's carrying?	on the ground
What mechanic allows one button to serve many functions?	context-sensitive button mechanic
What shows what action the button will trigger?	on-screen display
Where is the speaker located on the Wii console?	Wii Remote
What sound do users here when uncovering secrets in the game?	chime
What part of the Wii is employed to use weapons?	Wii Remote
Aside from the sword, what is another weapon that Link can use?	Nunchuk
How many weapons can be equipped by Link if playing Twilight Princess on a GameCube?	two
The Wii version makes use of what kind of sensors?	motion
What device on the Wii allows for sounds of a bowstring to be heard?	Wii Remote
How many dungeon instances are provided in Twilight Princess?	nine
What does Link fight in dungeons?	enemies
What provides a bridge between the different dungeons?	overworld
What is the name of Link's steed?	Epona
What must Link solve throughout the game?	puzzles
Who must Link fight at the end of a dungeon level?	boss
What connects the dungeons?	overworld
What form does Link take in the Twilight Realm?	Wolf
What is Link's main form of offense in wolf form?	biting
Hostile spirits are also known as what?	Poes
Who provides helpful information to Link?	Midna
Link's wolf form is faster than what other form?	human
What does Link transform into when he enters the Twilight Realm?	Wolf
Who is Midna?	small imp-like creature
What are Poes?	enemy ghosts
What does AI stand for?	artificial intelligence
What is a game whose enemies have more rudimentary programming than those in Twilight Princess?	The Wind Waker
What do enemies do to defeated companions?	react
What feature of the enemies in Twilight Princess is more advanced?	artificial intelligence
Who can enemies detect from a greater distance than in previous games?	Link
Through what can Link's reaction and mood can be discerned?	nods and facial expressions
Which person has the most spoken dialogue in the game?	Midna
Who provided the basis for Midna's voice?	Akiko Kōmoto
What country does Akiko Komoto come from?	Japan
What does Link say when attacking?	grunts
How does Link express emotions?	nods and facial expressions
What character has the most voice acting?	Midna
Who does the voice of Midna?	Akiko Kōmoto
What is Link's job at the start of Twilight Princess?	ranch hand
What do the Bulbins take from Ordon?	children
Who releases Link from the Realm of Twilight?	Midna
What does Link have to gather in order to complete each area?	Tears of Light
Where is Link working as a ranch hand?	Ordon Village
Who attacks the village?	Bulblins
What must Link collect?	Tears of Light
What does Link assist Midna in collection?	Fused Shadows
Who attacks Link and Midna when they've finished their collection tasks?	Zant
What weapon can transform Link back to his original self?	Master Sword
Who saves Midna?	Zelda
Where do the Zoras come from?	Lanayru
What does Link help Midna find?	Fused Shadows
Who ambushes Link and Midna?	Zant
What does Link discover he needs to find to return to human form?	Master Sword
Who sacrifices herself to save Midna?	Zelda
What does Link obtain that gives him control over his transformations?	Shadow Crystal
Where does Midna take Link after he acquires the Master Sword?	Mirror of Twilight
Who was the Mirror of Twilight used to fight prior to Zant?	Ganondorf
Where is Ganondorf located after Zant's defeat?	Hyrule Castle
Whose body is used as a proxy by Ganondorf in order to fight Link?	Zelda's
What allows Link to switch between his two forms?	Shadow Crystal
What is the only known gateway between Twilight Realm & Hyrule?	Gerudo Desert
Who is revealed as the true ruler of Twilight Realm?	Midna
Who did Zant form a pact with?	Ganondorf
What does Ganondorf transform into?	beast
What possession of Midna does Ganondorf destroy?	helmet
Where does Link depart from at the end of the game?	Ordon Village
Which character helps Link get Ganondorf off of his horse?	Zelda
To what part of his body does Link deliver the killing blow to Ganondorf?	chest
Who resurrects Midna after the fight with Ganondorf?	Light Spirits
Who does Midna teleport?	Link and Zelda
What does Ganondorf crush?	Midna's helmet
What does Midna destroy?	Mirror of Twilight
In what year did Nintendo reveal the start of development on what would become Twilight Princess?	2003
At what event was a potential follow-up to The Wind Waker mentioned?	Game Developers Conference
What region of the world did Nintendo want to design the next Legend of Zelda game for?	North American
What was one feature that could not be implemented in Ocarina of Time?	horseback combat
What year did Nintendo announce a new Legend of Zelda was in the works for Gamecube?	2003
Who was the director that unintentionally announced a Zelda game was in the works?	Eiji Aonuma
What was the specific area of gameplay that had not been done in Ocarina of Time?	horseback combat
How long did it take to implement riding horses in a believable manner?	four
Where did Nintendo preview the horseback riding feature?	Electronic Entertainment Expo 2004
What console was home to the sequel for The Wind Waker?	Nintendo DS
What was the name of the second Wind Waker game?	Phantom Hourglass
When did the company release a trailer of the horseback riding aspect?	2004
What does Link morph into in A Link to the Past?	rabbit
Aonuma left the Twilight Princess development team to work on which other game?	The Minish Cap
What was the working name for the Wii prior to release?	Revolution
Who proposed that the Wii Remote be used in the control scheme for Twilight Princess?	Miyamoto
Who created the script for the story scenes?	Mitsuhiro Takano
What device seemed well-suited for Link's arrow shooting ability?	Wii Remote
What kind of interface was used for in-game archery?	pointing-based
What was the originally-planned launch year for Twilight Princess?	2005
Which Nintendo employee was confident in the potential of developing two versions of Twilight Princess?	Satoru Iwata
What was the original release date for Gamecube?	2005
What console boasted compatibility with the Wii?	GameCube
Where did Nintendo provide a limited number of Twilight Princess previews?	E3 2005
At E3 in 2005, what console did Nintendo reveal the next Zelda game would be developed for?	Wii
When did Nintendo announce Zelda would appear on the Wii?	At E3 2005
What kind of movement interfaced with the sword in Twilight Princess?	swinging gesture
Who provided information about the game's controls in December of 2005?	NGC Magazine
What ended up not being supported in the GameCube version of Twilight Princess?	Wii controller
In what year did Nintendo reveal that the two different releases of Twilight Princess were planned for launch at the same time as the Wii?	2006
How long was the GameCube version of Twilight Princess delayed?	a month
What magazine mentioned players would be able to use the Revolution controller?	NGC Magazine
When did Nintendo announce both versions of Twilight Princess would be available at the Wii launch?	E3 2006
What did early users find hard to use about the game?	control scheme
Using items in the game took over the controls used for what weapon?	sword
Who wanted gestures implemented for sword control?	E3 attendees
When Twilight Princess was finally released for Wii, in what hand did Link wield his sword?	right
What features did Aonuma work to improve after the demo complaints?	comfort and ease
Who wrote the music for Twilight Princess?	Toru Minegishi and Asuka Ohta
Who was in charge of overseeing audio production?	Koji Kondo
Who worked adapting the score for performance by an orchestra?	Michiru Ōshima
Who wrote the music used in the game's trailer and demo?	Koji Kondo
Who created orchestral arrangements for the game?	Michiru Ōshima
Who was to conduct the ensemble that would perform the pieces?	Yasuzo Takemoto
What kind of instruments are favored by Kondo?	live
How many people would be in the orchestra Kondo imagined using for the soundtrack?	50
When was the soundtrack of Twilight Princess made available?	November 19, 2006
Which publication was associated with the soundtrack release?	Nintendo Power
Who made the requests for Kondo to use orchestral music throughout the game?	Media
When were track versions of the game's sountrack released?	November 19, 2006
What were replicas of the Master Sword and Hylian Shield bundled with?	soundtrack
What kind of error was found in Twilight Princess for Wii?	buffer overflow vulnerability
What does ELF stand for?	Executable and Linkable Format
Which issue of the Wii Menu fixed the issue with Twilight Princess?	4.0
What was the name of the hack discovered?	Twilight Hack
What versions of the Wii Menu prevented copying the exploited files?	3.3 and 3.4
What version of the Wii patched the hack vulnerability?	4.0
Which company is responsible for the HD version of Twilight Princess?	Tantalus Media
For which console is Twilight Princess HD being made?	Wii U
When were plans for Twilight Princess HD revealed?	November 12, 2015
On what date is Twilight Princess HD scheduled for Australian release?	March 5, 2016
What is the name of the remastered game?	The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess HD
What company is developing the remaster?	Tantalus Media
What kind of functionality will the remaster feature?	Amiibo
When will the game be released in America?	March 4, 2016
What special item is included with certain versions of Twilight Princess HD?	Wolf Link Amiibo figurine
Which two Amiibo figures reload Link's stock of arrows?	Link and Toon Link
Which two Amiibo figures heal Link?	Zelda and Sheik
Which Amiibo figure makes Link lose more health when attacked?	Ganondorf
What is the name of the area that players with the Wolf Link Amiibo can access?	Cave of Shadows
What will special bundles of the game contain?	Wolf Link Amiibo
What is the level called that the special Amiibo will unlock?	Cave of Shadows
What characters will be able to replenish arrows?	Link and Toon
What figures restore health?	Zelda and Sheik
What company included the soundtrack as a reward for ordering the game prior to release?	GameStop
How many tracks were recorded on the preorder CD?	20
In what areas is the content of the GameStop bonus CD provided for all versions of the game?	Japan, Europe, and Australia
What was included as a Gamestop preorder item?	CD
What kind of scores did Twilight Princess receive from many video game review sources?	perfect
Which sites gave the Wii copy of Twilight Princess scores of 95% and 95?	GameRankings and Metacritic
Who counted the game among the best ever made?	GameTrailers
What was the reception of Twilight Princess?	universal critical acclaim
What scores did it receive from major game publications?	perfect
What is the average score of Twilight Princess on Metacritic?	95
What reviewer called Twilight Princess "One of the greatest games ever created"?	GameTrailers
Which publications reported some issues with the graphics of Twilight Princess?	IGN and GameSpy
Which journalist criticized the Wii version for its controls?	Jeff Gerstmann
Which game publication does Jeff Gerstmann work for?	GameSpot
Which game journalist was perturbed by a lack of voiced dialogue?	Javier Glickman
Which publication does Javier Glickman write for?	Hyper
What 2 critics suggested the game had blurry textures and low resolution?	IGN and GameSpy
What critic considered the CD to be the best of the generation?	Gaming Nexus
Who specifically commended the game for the very long quests?	Javier Glickman
The version of Twilight Princess fo which console won three IGN awards?	GameCube
What was Twilight Princess's rank among all Nintendo games according to Nintendo Magazine?	16th
Where did Twilight Princess place among Wii titles according to IGN?	4th
Where did Twilight Princess rank on Nintendo Power's list of Nintendo games in the 2000s?	third
What 2 critics gave Twilight Princess awards for Best Graphics and Best Story?	IGN and Nintendo Power
What award did Game Critics Awards and GameSpy give Twilight Princess?	Best Console Game
What place did the game take in Nintendo's Official list of 100 Greatest Nintendo Games of All Time?	16th
What place did IGN give the game on the Wii console?	4th
What is the name of the area which includes most countries not located in North, Central or South America?	PAL
How many units of the Wii version of Twilight Princess had been purchased by the end of March 2011?	5.82 million
How many units of the GameCube version of Twilight Princess had been purchased by the end of March 2007?	1.32 million
What region is Twilight Princess the best -selling Zelda entry?	PAL region
How many copies of the game had been sold as of March 2011?	5.82 million
How many copies of the game had been sold on Gamecube as of March 2007?	1.32 million
Who wrote and provided art for a Twilight Princess comic book series?	Akira Himekawa
The Twilight Princess manga was only available in what country?	Japan
Who published the Twilight Princess comic book series?	Shogakukan
What kind of device can access the Twilight Princess manga?	mobile
Which company made Spectre?	Eon Productions
Who is the star of Spectre?	Daniel Craig
What role does Daniel Craig play in Spectre?	James Bond
What 007 movie did Sam Mendes previously direct?	Skyfall
How much money did it take to make Spectre?	$245
How many James Bond films has Eon Productions produced?	twenty-four
Which Bond film was the most expensive ever made?	Spectre
How many films has Daniel Craig appeared in as James Bond?	four
Which two movie studios distributed the James Bond film Spectre?	Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Columbia Pictures
Who directed Spectre?	Sam Mendes
What group is the enemy of the protagonist?	Spectre
Which movie was Spectre originally featured in?	Diamonds Are Forever
Which three personalities from previous films appear in Spectre?	M, Q and Eve Moneypenny
Which actor plays the role of Mr. Hinx?	Dave Bautista
What role is performed by Monica Bellucci?	Lucia Sciarra
Which recurring James Bond characters appear in Spectre?	M, Q and Eve Moneypenny
What actress portrays Dr. Madeleine Swann in Spectre?	Léa Seydoux
What actor portrays Mr. Hinx in Spectre?	Dave Bautista
When was Diamonds are Forever released?	1971
On what date was Spectre first shown in the UK?	26 October 2015
Where was the first screening of Spectre?	Royal Albert Hall in London
What was the US release date for Spectre?	6 November 2015
What were two subjects of accolades for Spectre?	action sequences and cinematography
For what category did Spectre receive a Golden Globe award?	Best Original Song
What was the first James Bond film to be screened at IMAX theaters?	Skyfall
What was the theme song for the James Bond film Spectre?	Writing's on the Wall
On what holiday do insurgents plan to detonate a bomb?	Day of the Dead
Who removed James Bond from active service?	M
Who is M's rival?	C
What group does C support England joining?	Nine Eyes
Which character is promoted to M?	Garreth Mallory
Which holiday was the terrorist bombing planned for?	Day of the Dead
Which two intelligence groups merged to form Joint Intelligence Service?	MI5 and MI6
What does Bond take from Marco Sciarra?	his ring
Where does Bond go after his suspension?	Rome
What group did Sciarra belong to?	Spectre
Who is the head of Spectre?	Franz Oberhauser
What is Mr. Hinx's job?	assassin
Who performs research for Bond?	Moneypenny
Where does Sciarra's funeral take place?	Rome
Who is the leader of Spectre?	Franz Oberhauser
What is the name of the Spectre assassin who tracks Bond?	Mr. Hinx
Which member of Spectre had been presumed to be dead?	Franz Oberhauser
What is White suffering from when Bond finds him?	thallium poisoning
Who is White's daughter?	Dr. Madeline Swann
How does White deal with his condition?	commits suicide
Where does JAmes find Dr. Swann?	Hoffler Klinik
Where is L'Americain located?	Tangier
What is Mr. White dying of?	thallium poisoning.
Who does Mr. White ask James Bond to protect?	his daughter, Dr. Madeline Swann
Where is the L'Americain hotel?	Tangier.
Who kidnaps Dr. Swann?	Hinx.
What method of transportation is used to get to Oberhauser's base?	train
Who is the link between Oberhauser and Bond?	Hannes
What did Oberhauser call himself after he faked his death?	Ernst Stavro Blofeld
After staging his own death, what name did Hanz Oberhauser begin to use?	Ernst Stavro Blofeld
Where is Bond brought after he is kidnapped?	the old MI6 building
Who does Bond meet in the MI6 building?	Blofeld
Where does Blofeld get arrested?	Westminster Bridge
Who does M fight with?	C
Who prevents Nine Eyes from going online?	Q
Which characters falls to their death, M or C?	C
What did SPECTRE originally stand for?	SPecial Executive for Counter-intelligence, Terrorism, Revenge and Extortion
Who fought over the movie rights for Thunderball?	Ian Fleming and Kevin McClory
In what year did McClory and Fleming reach an agreement?	1963
Which movie was a modern version of Thunderball?	Never Say Never Again
What was the name of a proposed remake of Thunderball that was never made?	Warhead 2000 A.D.
In what year did Fleming settle with McClory?	1963
What was the name of the remake of Thunderball?	Never Say Never Again
Which Bond novel first featured Spectre?	Thunderball.
Who ended up with ownership of Spectre?	MGM
What was Spectre's original name?	SPECTRE
Which company is Danjaq, LLC associated with?	Eon Productions
In what year were rights to Spectre worked out?	2013
Which film studio won the full copyright film rights to Spectre?	MGM
How was the Spectre acronym originally written?	Spectre
What is the name of the LLC sister company of Eon Productions?	Danjaq
What company was targeted by leaks of company information?	Sony Pictures Entertainment
Who was responsible for leaks of Sony movie projects?	hackers
Which film writer's work was included in leaks of Spectre information?	John Logan
Which company verified contents of the leaked information?	Eon Productions
When did hackers get into the Sony Pictures e-mail system?	November 2014
Who wrote the early drafts of the script for Spectre?	John Logan
What company confirmed that an early version of the Spectre script had been leaked?	Eon Productions
Which actor portrayed Franz Oberhauser?	Christoph Waltz
In what year was Hannes Oberhauser identified as a guardian of James Bond?	1983
Who were the writers of Spectre?	Neal Purvis and Robert Wade
Which group in previous Bond films was changed to be a part of Spectre instead of its own entity?	Quantum
What is the name of the short story in which Hannes Oberhauser appeared?	Octopussy
Who was Bond's full time guardian?	Charmian Bond
In which Bond story did the name Oberhauser first appear?	Octopussy
What actor portrayed Franz Oberhauser?	Christoph Waltz.
In which movie was the Quantum organization first introduced?	Quantum of Solace
Quantum is a division of what other organization?	Spectre
What is the name of a location in Spectre which draws its inspiration from an Ian Fleming short story?	Hildebrand Rarities and Antiques
Who wrote the book Colonel Sun?	Kingsley Amis
What short story inspired the name Hildebrand Rarities and Antiques?	The Hildebrand Rarity
"The Hildebrand Rarity"  is from what short story collection?	For Your Eyes Only
Which character tortures Bond?	Blofeld
What is the name of the MI6 safehouse?	Hildebrand Rarities and Antiques
When were the actors in Spectre announced?	December 2014
Which actor portrayed M?	Ralph Fiennes
Which actress portrayed Eve Moneypenny?	Naomie Harris
Which actor portrayed Q?	Ben Whishaw
Which actor portrayed Bill Tanner?	Rory Kinnear
How many times has Daniel Craig portrayed James Bond in films?	four
Which actor portrays Bill Tanner?	Rory Kinnear
Which three actors reprised supporting roles for Spectre?	Ralph Fiennes, Naomie Harris and Ben Whishaw
Who did Christoph Waltz portray in Spectre?	Franz Oberhauser
What is Franz Oberhauser's other name?	Ernst Stavro Blofeld
Who played Severine in the previous Bond film?	Bérénice Lim Marlohe
In what movie was Mr. White originally supposed to die?	Quantum of Solace
How old was Monica Bellucci when she filmed Spectre?	fifty
Which actress was cast in the role of Severine in Skyfall?	Bérénice Lim Marlohe
In what movie was it originally planned to kill the character Mr. White?	Quantum of Solace.
How many actual people were used for the opening sequence of Spectre?	fifteen hundred
Which actor portrayed Marco Sciarra?	Alessandro Cremona
Estrella was played by which actress?	Stephanie Sigman
When was the opening scene of Spectre filmed?	February 2015
Where was the pre-title scene in Spectre filmed?	Mexico
In which country were the scenes with Detlef Bothe shot?	Austria.
Who was cast as Marco Sciarra?	Alessandro Cremona
What character did Stephanie Sigma portray?	Estrella
Who was the last person to direct two James Bond movies in a row before Mendes?	John Glen
Who served as production designer for Spectre?	Dennis Gassner
Who did Hoyte van Hoytema replace as cinematographer?	Roger Deakins
Which two consecutive Bond films did Mendes direct?	Skyfall and Spectre
Which film had a larger production staff, Spectre or Skyfall?	Spectre
Which Bond film is Daniel Craig listed as a co-producer?	Spectre
Who directed The Living Daylights and Licence to Kill?	John Glen
Neal Purvis and Robert Wade have worked on how many Bond films?	six
What were three sites used for filming Spectre?	London, Mexico City and Rome
What kind of film was used to shoot the movie?	Kodak 35 mm
Where did initial shoots for the film take place?	Pinewood Studios
How long did it take to film Spectre?	seven months.
What type of film was used?	Kodak 35 mm film stock
In what film studio was some of the film shot?	Pinewood Studios
When did Spectre begin production in Austria?	December 2014
When did the Austrian filming of Spectre finish?	February 2015
What location was the focus of the Austrian leg of Spectre's production?	Ice Q Restaurant
What part of his body did Craig injure?	knee
What building was used in the film as the Hoffler Klinik?	Ice Q Restaurant
Where was the Hoffler Klinik supposed to be located?	Austrian Alps.
Near what glacier in Austria was filming done?	Rettenbach glacier
What are two landmarks in Rome used in filming Spectre?	Ponte Sisto bridge and the Roman Forum
Which group was responsible for the C-X75s featured in Spectre?	Williams
For which auto maker did Williams first develop the C-X75?	Jaguar
How many engines did the C-X75 originally have?	four
Where in England were scenes shot that represented a location in Rome?	Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire
What bridge in Rome was a filming location?	the Ponte Sisto bridge
What two cars were featured in a chase scene along the banks of the Tiber River?	Aston Martin DB10 and a Jaguar C-X75
Which Formula One racing team developed the C-X75's used for filming.	Williams
What company did the Williams Formula One team originally build the C-X75 prototype for?	Jaguar.
Where did Spectre filming take place after Rome?	Mexico City
Which celebration was featured in the Mexico City part of the production?	Day of the Dead
Which areas were shown in the Day of the Dead scene in Spectre?	the Zócalo and the Centro Histórico district
How many additional actors were needed for the shoot in Mexico City?	1,500
Where were the scenes featuring planes shot?	Palenque
What festival was included in the scenes shot in Mexico?	the Day of the Dead festival
What type of helicopter was used for the flight scenes?	a Messerschmitt-Bölkow-Blohm Bo 105 helicopter
Where in Mexico were the Day of the Dead scenes shot?	Zócalo and the Centro Histórico district
Where did Craig go to deal with his injury?	New York
When did Craig go back to work?	22 April
In what city did Daniel Craig have minor surgery to repair his knee?	New York
Which bridges were shut down because of filming?	Westminster and Lambeth Bridges
Which organization provided water for weather effects?	London Fire Brigade
Which river was used in some of the shoots taking place in London?	Thames
Where is MI6 based?	Vauxhall Cross
Filming closed which two bridges in London?	Westminster and Lambeth Bridges
Who helped the filmakers simulate rain while shooting in London?	The London Fire Brigade
Where were the scenes of Ralph Fiennes in a restaurant shot?	Covent Garden.
Where stunt scenes on the Thames shot during the day or the night?	night
Which three locations in Morocco were used in filming?	Oujda, Tangier and Erfoud
What Guinness record was set during the filming of Spectre?	Largest film stunt explosion
Who was the Guinness record attributed to?	Chris Corbould
How long did it take to shoot Spectre?	128 days
Where did production go to after leaving London?	Morocco
What Guinness World Record does the film hold?	Largest film stunt explosion
How many day did filming take	128 days.
The Guinness World record was credited to which production designer?	Chris Corbould
How much money were possible changes to the Mexico City section of the film rumored to have saved the production?	$20 million
Which Bond producer would not confirm that the film had been changed to accommodate Mexican authorities?	Michael G. Wilson
In what other country, besides Mexico, did the film experience administrative issues with local authorities?	India
Which country did Skyfall move its pre-title sequence filming to?	Istanbul
Who wrote the music for Spectre?	Thomas Newman
When was the soundtrack of Spectre first available for purchase in the UK?	23 October 2015
What company published the Spectre soundtrack?	Decca Records
Who composed the score for the film?	Thomas Newman
Which record label was the soundtrack album released on?	Decca Records
Did Thomas Newman compose the score after filming or during filming?	during filming.
When was the theatrical trailer of the movie released?	July 2015
What was the name of the song played during the opening credits?	Writing's on the Wall
How many recording sessions did it take to complete the song?	one
Which version of the theme was used in the actual movie?	demo
Who is the vocalist on Writing's on the Wall?	Sam Smith
When was the main theme of Spectre made available in digital format?	25 September 2015
What song was the Spectre theme comapred to unfavorably?	Skyfall
What former Bond theme singer was the subject of extensive activity on Twitter when the Spectre theme was released?	Shirley Bassey
What group wrote music for the film that ended up not being used?	Radiohead
What artist performed the theme song for Skyfall?	Adele
The release of Writing's on the Wall caused what name to trend on Twitter?	Shirley Bassey
Which English band also composed a song for the film?	Radiohead
Which companies revealed Spectre's official car?	Aston Martin and Eon
How many DB10s were made for the movie?	10
Which team displayed the Bond logo during the Mexican Grand Prix?	Williams F1
What were the two DB10s that were not needed for filming used for?	promotional work
How many DB10's were produced?	10
What logo did the Williams race team have on their cars for the 2015 Mexican Grand Prix?	007
Images of what item were posted by Eon while the movie was being made?	clapperboards
For what film did Eon first use this method of promotion?	Skyfall
On which social media accounts was the film promoted?	Eon's official social media accounts.
What other Bond film was promoted on social media?	Skyfall
What comedy production did Spectre actors appear in?	Comic Relief's Red Nose Day
On what TV station did Red Nose Day appear?	BBC One
In what month was the preview of Spectre released in movie theaters?	July
When was the first teaser trailer of Spectre released?	March 2015
What show did several members of the cast and crew appear on in March 2015?	Comic Relief's Red Nose Day
Who wrote the comedy sketch for the cast and crew?	David Walliams and the Dawson Brothers
Where was the first showing of Spectre held?	Royal Albert Hall
On what date was Spectre first shown for general audiences?	26 October 2015
What movie prompted IMAX to show Spectre?	Skyfall
What film opening was changed so it didn't compete with Spectre?	Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation
Which film had a wider release in the UK, Skyfall or Spectre?	Spectre.
How much money had Spectre made by 2/21/2016?	$879.3 million
How much revenue did Spectre generate from the United States, Mexico and Canada by 2/21/2016?	$199.8 million
How much revenue did Spectre produce from the British, Scottish, and Irish market by 2/21/2016?	$138.1 million
How much did Spectre make in its first week?	£41.7 million ($63.8 million)
Which movie previously had the highest earnings for its first seven days?	Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
What movie did Spectre unseat as having the highest earnings for IMAX screenings in the UK?	Avatar
How much money did Spectre gross on it's opening day in the UK?	$9.2 million
What film previously held the UK record for highest first week opening gross?	Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
Spectre passed which movie to become the highest grossing IMAX release in the UK?	Avatar
Spectre passed which movie to have the largest per screen opening average?	The Dark Knight
Terrorist activity in what French city impacted Spectre's earnings?	Paris
How much more did Spectre earn compared with Skyfall in the Indian market?	4%
In Paris, what movie has generated more ticket revenue than Spectre?	Spider-Man 3
How much did Spectre make in its opening in South Korea?	$8.2 million
What is the only film to have a higher ticket sale in Paris than Spectre?	Spider-Man 3
What movie did Spectre beat to become top movie of the year in Switzerland?	Minions
How many Imax screens showed Spectre on its opening weekend in the US and Canada?	374
How much money did Spectre make in its first weekend in the US and Canada?	$70.4 million
How much money did preview showings generate in the US and Canada?	$5.25
Which film grossed more money for its opening weekend in the North American market, Skyfall or Spectre?	Skyfall
How many IMAX screens was Spectre shown on in North America?	374
What day of the week was Spectre released in North America?	Thursday
On what day and month was Spectre released to the Chinese market?	12 November
How much more money did Spectre make during its first weekend in China than Skyfall?	198%
By the weekend after its China release, how much had revenue decreased?	75%
How much had Spectre made in its first month in China?	$84.7 million
Spectre came in second in opening day gross in China behind what movie?	Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation
How much money did Spectre gross after four weekends in China?	$84.7 million
What was Metacritics score for Spectre?	60 out of 100
How many individual ratings contributed to Metacritics score?	48
What percentage of Spectre reviews did Rotten Tomatoes find to be in favor of the film?	64%
Who did CinemaScore ask for input on the film?	Audiences
What percentage of review on Rotten Tomatoes were positive?	64
What was the movie's rating on Metacritic?	60 out of 100
Who gave Spectre a perfect rating in The Daily Telegraph?	Robbie Collin
A writer for which publication rated the film 7.2/10?	IGN
What score did Mark Kermode give Spectre?	four out of five stars
How many stars did Mark Kermode of the Guardian aware Spectre prior to its release?	four out of five
Which journalist considered Spectre the worst James Bond movie in three decades?	Scott Mendelson
Which writer for the San Francisco Chronicle awarded Spectre with a perfect score?	Mick LaSalle
What score did the writer from the Chicago Tribune give to Spectre?	75
The reviewer from Variety compares Spectre to which other Bond movie?	Skyfall
Which Atlantic writer gave a negative review of Spectre?	Christopher Orr
What adjective did Lawrence Toppman use to describe Craig's portrayal of James Bond?	Bored
What publication does Alyssa Rosenberg write for?	The Washington Post
What was the catch phrase Lawrence Toppman of the Charlotte Observer used for the film?	Bored, James Bored
Whic organization is responsible for filtering movie content in India?	Indian Central Board of Film Certification
Which social media site was used for complaining about the Indian censoring?	Twitter.
Christoph Waltz's appearance in future Bond movies is contingent on the appearance of which other actor?	Craig
When will work being on the follow-up to Spectre?	spring 2016
When will the sequel to Spectre being development?	spring 2016.
In what year did the earthquake in Sichuan occur?	2008
What was the earthquake named?	the Great Sichuan earthquake
How many people were killed as a result?	69,197
What year did the Sichuan earthquake take place?	2008
What did the quake measure?	8.0 Ms and 7.9 Mw
What day did the earthquake occur?	May 12
What time of the day did the quake happen?	02:28:01 PM China Standard Time
How many people died?	69,197
Which far away cities in other countries could feel the earthquake?	Beijing and Shanghai
What was the focal depth of the earthquake?	19 km
How long after the earthquake were aftershocks felt?	months after
What is another name for the earthquake in Sichuan?	the Wenchuan earthquake
Where was the epicenter of the earthquake?	Wenchuan County, Sichuan
How far was it from Chengdu?	80 kilometres
What was the focal depth of the quake?	19 km
How many people were confirmed dead?	69,197
How many people were confirmed dead only in the Sichuan province?	68,636
How many people were left homeless because of the earthquake?	4.8 million
How many people lived in the affected area?	15 million
How much money was dedicated to rebuild ravaged areas?	1 trillion RMB
How many people died in Sichuan Province?	68,636
How many were injured in Sichuan?	374,176
How many people are listed as missing?	18,222
How many people are homeless because of the quake?	4.8 million
How high could the homeless number possibly go?	11 million
Where was the epicenter?	Wenchuan County, Ngawa Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture
How long did the earthquake last?	2 minutes
What percentage of buildings were destroyed?	80%
What was the magnitude of the earthquake?	8.0 Ms and 7.9 Mw
How long did the main tremor last?	2 minutes
What percentage of buildings were destroyed during the quake?	almost 80%
On what fault did the earthquake occur?	Longmenshan fault
Where is the Longmenshan fault located?	along the border of the Indo-Australian Plate and Eurasian Plate
How long did the rupture last?	120 sec
How deep was the focus of the earthquake?	10 km
Along what fault line did the quake happen?	Longmenshan fault
On which fracture did the quake focus?	Yingxiu-Beichuan fracture
When wasmost of the energy released during the initial eruption?	first 80 sec.
What was the most displacement caused by the earthquake?	9 meters
When was the confidential written report sent to the State Seismological Bureau?	April 30, 2008
When was Geng's drought-earthquake correlation theory released?	1972
What did researcher Geng Qingguo say was sent to the State Seismological Bureau?	written report
What did this report warn about?	significant earthquake in Ngawa Prefecture
What was the predicted time of the quake?	around May 8
What did Geng long try to establish as a relationship with earthquakes?	droughts
What did an official with the Seismological Bureau deny receiving?	reports predicting the earthquake
How large was the displacement?	up to 9 meters
Who warned of possible seismic activity in the area beforehand?	Tom Parsons
What did the United States Geological Survey show as the amount of displacement?	9 meters
How long was the fault where the quake occurred?	240 km long
How deep is the fault?	20 km deep
Where on the fault is the possibility of future earthquakes increased?	northeastern and southwestern ends
What did Tom Parsons consider as the risk factor for strong future quakes?	high risk
How many people were killed in the Hanshin earthquake?	6,000 people
How did Yuji Yagi say the quake happened?	in two stages
What fault tore in two places?	Longmenshan Fault
Besides the population density, what else contributed to the severity of the quake?	shallowness of the epicenter
How much greater was the energy of this quake than that released in the earthquake of 1995 in Japan?	30 times
Why did the seismic waves travel so far?	firmness of the terrain
How many aftershocks were there?	Between 64 and 104
When were the aftershocks recorded?	within 72 hours of the main quake.
When did the latest magnitude 6 aftershock occur?	on August 5, 2008
How many aftershocks were there within 72 hours?	Between 64 and 104
What do the Chinese say is the total number of shocks after the quake?	42,719
What did the strongest aftershock measure?	6.4 MS
How many shocks ranged from 4.0 MS to 4.9 MS?	246
At what date did the most recent aftershock above 6 MS occur?	August 5, 2008
When did this earthquake occur?	August 30, 2008
Where did this earthquake occur?	southern Sichuan
Why was it not included in the series?	because it was caused by a different fault.
Where should you look for more details?	2008 Panzhihua earthquake
Where was the August 30, 2008 quake?	southern Sichuan
What was the magnitude of the southern Sichuan quake?	Ms 6.1
What earthquake happened in southern Sichuan?	Panzhihua earthquake
Who published the map of the earthquakes intensity?	CEA
What was the intensity scaled at?	XI
What does the China Seismic Intensity Scale call the earthquake?	very destructive
How did the USGS rate the earthquake?	very disastrous
What town was closest to the main epicenter?	Yingxiu, Wenchuan
Where is the Longmenshan Fault located?	the eastern border of the Tibetan Plateau
What is the average slip in the Beichuan Fault?	3.5 metres
How large was the slip 30 km northeast of the fault?	3 metres
What was the vertical average slip on the Guanxian-Anxian fault?	2 metres
What was the horizontal average slip on the Guanxian-Anxian fault?	2.3 metres
Where is the Longmen shan fault located?	Tibetan Plateau
Where are the Beichuan and Guanxian-Anxian Faults?	Longmen Shan Fault System
What was the average vertical slip in the Beichaun Fault?	3.5 metres
What was the horizontal slippage in the Beichuan Fault at the epicenter?	3.5 metres
What was the horizontal slippage perpendicular to the fault?	4.8 metres
Where were office buildings evacuated?	Shanghai's financial district
How did a receptionist describe the atmosphere after the evacuation?	calm
How long were workers in Ford Plant evacuated for?	10 minutes
Which airport was shut down?	Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport
When did the airport re-open?	May 12
What happened to office buildings in Shanghai?	evacuated
Which airport was shut down?	Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport
Why were flights delayed and diverted?	disruption in air traffic services
What were they using the airport to stage for?	relief operations
Where did the reporters say they saw cracks on walls of some buildings?	in Chengdu
Where were office towers evacuated?	Beijing
Where did a cargo train derail as a result?	Hui County, Gansu
What happened to the cargo train?	caught on fire
What was reported in Chengdu?	cracks on walls
What was evacuated in Beijing?	office towers
What part of the Olympic area was not damaged?	venues
Where did a cargo train derail?	Hui County, Gansu
Why did the train catch fire?	rail was distorted
How many highways leading into Wenchuan were damaged?	All of the highways
What percentage of building collapsed in Beichuan?	80%
Where did two chemical plants collapse?	Dujiangyan
How many students out of the 900 in the school, survived the collapse?	60
What highways into Wenchuan  were damaged?	All of the highways
What did the damaged roadways cause to the rescue operations?	delayed arrival
How many of the buildings in Beichuan collapsed?	80%
What leaked liquid ammonia in Shifang?	two chemical plants
How many of the 900 students buried in a Dujiangyan school collapse survived?	fewer than 60
Where were the exchanges based?	southwestern China
What metal rose in value?	Copper
What natural resource dropped in value?	oil
What did the Shanghai Stock Exchange do?	suspended trading
Where were companies located that had their stock trading suspended?	southwestern China
What metal rose due to speculation?	Copper
Besides the Shanghai Stock Exchange, what other exchange suspended trading of southwestern China stock?	Shenzhen Stock Exchange
What kinds of telecommunications were cut?	mobile and terrestrial
What capabilities were cut to the entire Sichuan area?	internet
How long did it take for these capabilities to be restored?	months
What was cut after the earthquake?	telecommunications
Where were the internet cut?	Sichuan area
Who restored communications over a period of months?	the government
What internet services were decreased in the area?	news and media websites
What services were finally online again?	major news and media
How many base stations did China Mobile have suspended?	2,300
How many Unicom towers were suspended?	more than 700
How many China Mobile base stations stopped working?	2,300
Besides power disruption, what caused telecommunications to be suspended?	traffic congestion
How many wireless communications failed in Sichuan?	Half
Whose service in Wenchuan was cut off?	China Unicom
How many of China Unicom's towers were cut?	700
What place could officials not contact?	the Wolong National Nature Reserve
How many pandas live at the Reserve?	around 280
How many British visitors to the Reserve left unharmed?	31
How many pandas were injured?	2
What nature center was cutoff?	Wolong National Nature Reserve
How many pandas escaped the reserve?	Six
How many security guards died at the reserve?	five
What famous panda was killed under the rubble?	Mao Mao
What power plant was damaged?	Hydropower Plant
How far away was the plant located from the epicenter?	20 km east
How many troops were allocated to Zipingpu?	2,000
How many dams were damaged?	391
What power plant was damaged by the earthquake?	Zipingpu Hydropower Plant
How near to the epicenter was the power plant?	20 km
What has a recent inspection found about the damage to the power plant?	less severe
What might possibly collapse upstream from the power plant?	Tulong reservoir
What is the total number of dams damaged?	391
How many deaths were reported?	69,180
How many deaths were reported only in the Sichuan province?	68,636
How many people were listed as missing?	18,498
How many people were injured?	374,176
How many earthquake relief workers were killed?	158
How many died in Sichuan?	68,636
What is the total tally of known deaths caused by the earthquake?	69,180
What is the number of missing persons?	18,498
How many people were injured?	374,176
What were the 158 relief workers doing when they were killed?	tried to repair roads
How many survivors were there from Yingxiu?	2,300
Where is Yingxiu located?	in Wenchuan
How many people in total lived in Yingxiu?	9,000
How many people were killed in Beichuan County?	3,000 to 5,000
How many people were injured in Beichuan County?	10,000
How many survivors were there in the town of Yingxiu?	2,300
What was the previous population of Yingxiu?	about 9,000
How many residents were killed in Beichuan County?	3,000 to 5,000
How large was the number of injured in Beichuan County?	10,000
What is the number of schools that collapsed in Dujiangyan?	Eight schools
What is poor about inland areas such as Sichuan?	Health care
Who was the Vice Minister of Health?	Gao Qiang
What did Gao Qiang tell reporters in Beijing?	public health care system in China is insufficient
How economically forward has this area been?	neglected and untouched
Where is health care poor in China?	inland areas
What did the Vice Minster of Health call the public health system in China?	insufficient
What should the government of China be responsible for providing to earthquake survivors?	medical treatment
How many school children died due to shoddy construction?	thousands
How many schools collapsed in Mianyang City?	seven
How many people were buried in the collapsed schools?	1,700
How many school buildings collapsed in the province?	7,000
How many students were buried in a school in Hanwang?	700
What caused the deaths of many school children?	shoddy construction
How many schools collapsed in Mianyang City	seven
How many people were buried under rubble in Mianyang City?	1,700
How many school buildings fell in the entire province?	7,000
How many were killed at the Juyuan Elementary School?	600
When did an investigation occur under school casualties?	December 2008
When was the official tally of students killed in the earthquake released?	May 7, 2009
How many students were killed in Xinhua?	5,335
How many students were disabled in Xinhua?	546
What date were the official numbers of students killed in the earthquake released?	May 7, 2009
Who kept a blog about the school deaths?	Ai Weiwei
What is the total of school children killed?	5,335
How many children are disabled?	546
Where did the Chinese government decide that parents who had lost children could go for free treatment?	fertility clinics
How many people were left without housing?	5 million
How many people could be potentially without housing?	11 million
How many animals were killed?	12.5 million
How many pigs died in Sichuan?	1 million
Because of the earthquake, how many people did not have housing?	at least 5 million
How many people might actually be homeless?	11 million
How much livestock was lost?	12.5 million animals
How many pigs died from the earthquake in Sichuan ?	a million
Who was a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Georgia Tech?	Reginald DesRoches
What is the profession of Reginald DesRoches?	professor of civil and environmental engineering
When did China create a seismic design code for building?	1976
What catastrophe inspired them to make a building design code/	Tangshan earthquake
What happened days following the disaster?	an international reconnaissance team of engineers was dispatched to the region
What did the team of engineers do?	make a detailed preliminary survey of damaged buildings
What did their findings show?	a variety of reasons why many constructions failed to withstand the earthquake.
After the quake what kind of international team was sent to the area?	team of engineers
What was the team sent to China to make?	survey of damaged buildings
What kind of reasons do their findings show?	variety of reasons
What areas were the hardest hit?	the poorer, rural villages
Who was an assistant professor of civil engineering and geophysics at the California Institute of Technology?	Swaminathan Krishnan
What part of China did the earthquake occur in?	rural part
What did Swaminathan Krishnan mean when he said the buildings were just built?	not designed
What manner of building codes are there in China?	very strong
What were many of these old buildings built without?	regulations
What is an estimate of the economic loss from the quake?	$75 billion
What damage did the major Sichuan cities have?	minor damage
What is an estimate of losses to economics?	US$75 billion
Whose is this one of the costliest disasters in history of?	Chinese history
Which cities in Sichuan had minor damage?	five largest cities
How many buildings collapsed as a result of the May 27th aftershocks?	420,000
How strong was the May 25 aftershock in Qingchuan county?	6.0 Mw
How many people were injured in the May 25 aftershock?	1000
How many homes were destroyed because of the May 27 aftershocks?	more than 420,000
During the May 27 aftershock, how many people were injured?	63
Where was the aftershock of August 5 that caused widespread hill slides?	Qingchuan, Sichuan
Who was the executive vice governor?	Wei Hong
How many homes were rebuilt?	200,000
How many homes were left without permanent shelter?	1.94 million
How many schools were reconstructed?	1,300
Who spoke about the dead and missing people on November 21, 2008?	Wei Hong
How many people did Wei Hong say were dead or missing?	90,000
How many homes had been rebuilt?	200,000
How many houses were still under construction?	685,000
How many families were still without permanent homes?	1.94 million
Who flew to the earthquake area 90 minutes after it hit?	Premier Wen Jiabao
What was Premier Wen Jiabao's background in?	geomechanics
What did Jiabao oversee in the region?	the rescue work
How many troops were dispatched by the Chengdu military?	50,000
How soon after the earthquake was Premier Wen Jiabao on his way to the area?	90 minutes after
How many medical teams were sent to Wenchuan county?	ten
How many troops were sent to the area for relief work?	50,000
Besides the rough terrain, why was it difficult to get to the area?	proximity of the quake's epicenter
What did the National Disaster Relief Commission initiate?	Level II emergency contingency plan
What does a Level II emergency contingency plan cover?	the most serious class of natural disasters
When did the plan rise to Level I?	at 22:15 CST, May 12
What level alert was instated for the quake?	Level II emergency
What class of disasters is a level II emergency?	most serious
What level was the disaster set at 22:15 CST, May 12?	Level II
What department initiated the emergency contingency plan?	National Disaster Relief Commission
How many people were in the earthquake emergency relief team?	184
How many of the relief team were from the State Seismological Bureau?	12
How many of the team were from the military?	150
How many of the team were from the police?	22
What kind of team left Beijing to go to Wenchuan?	earthquake emergency relief
How many people comprised the relief team?	184
How many soldiers were from the Beijing Military?	150
Where did 22 of the relief team come from?	Armed Police General Hospital
How did the relief team travel to Wenchuan county?	in two military transport planes
What did the China Digital Times report?	a close analysis by an alleged Chinese construction engineer
Who was the construction engineer known as?	Book Blade
Where was an article reported about the scandal?	China Digital Times
What was the name of the person who published a report in the China Digital Times?	Book Blade
What was June 1, 2008 called?	Children's Day
Where were most of the surviving children?	living in relief centres
What did these children do on that day?	performed ceremonies
Where did parents go to mourn their children?	rubble of schools
When is Children's Day?	June 1
Where were surviving children living?	in relief centres
How much did central state-owned enterprises donate?	more than $48.6 million
How much did China National Petroleum Corp and Sinopec donate?	10 million yuan
How much have Central state enterprises donated?	48.6 million
How much did China National Petroleum and Sinopec donate?	10 million yuan each
How much did China receive in donated money and goods?	$457 million
How many countries donated?	19 countries
How many international organizations donated?	four
What country was the largest aid donor to China?	Saudi Arabia
How much financial assistance did Saudi Arabia give China?	€40,000,000
How much money was donated from foreign sources?	83 million
What country was the largest aid donor to China?	Saudi Arabia
How many international organizations made donations?	four
What did the State Council establish in 2008?	a counterpart support plan
How long did the plan last?	3 years
What did the state council set up in 2008?	counterpart support plan
What is the basis for this plan?	one province to one affected county
How long is the plan due to last?	3 years
What is the cost per province's budget?	one percent
What was concluded about the construction?	that the sudden shift of a huge quantity of water into the region could have relaxed the tension between the two sides of the fault, allowing them to move apart, and could have increased the direct pressure on it, causing a violent rupture
What structure did an article contemplate could have caused the quake?	Zipingpu Dam
What was the affect of the dam on the stresses in that area?	25 times more
Who disregarded warnings about dams in the area?	The government
What type of area is Sichuan?	seismically active
What have researchers been denied?	access to seismological and geological data
What did the earthquake allow?	opportunities for researchers to retrofit data in order to model future earthquake predictions
What did the professors predict?	the time of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake
What did they try to establish?	time prediction method
What did they collect to use in this method?	statistics
What was stated in the press conference?	that earthquake prediction was a global issue
What do many geologists believe about earthquake prediction?	no proven methods exist
What kind of issue is earthquake prediction?	a global issue
What was received before the quake occurred?	no prediction notification
What did  seismologist Gary Gibson have to say about the prediction of the quake?	did not see anything
When was a Seismic Risk Analysis published?	In 2002
Who published the Seismic Risk Analysis?	Chen Xuezhong
Who published a Seismic Risk Analysis Study?	Chen Xuezhong
In what year did Chen Xuezhong publish an earthquake study?	2002
What strength did he predict the next quake in Sichuan to be?	over 7.0
How long had it been since an earthquake of similar magnitude?	over 30 years
How long since the Sichuan area has had  a severe quake?	30 years
Does the scientific community agree that earthquake prediction is possible?	no consensus
People wanted to know if the study of what math could produce better predictions?	statistics
What is not an established science?	Earthquake prediction
What department was ready to join the rescue effort by Wednesday?	the Taipei Fire Department
How many Tibetan villagers were stranded?	over 300
What was the reason that many rescue teams could not join the relief efforts?	the traffic problem
What action did the Red Cross recommend ?	donating cash
What problem continued to stop rescue teams from reaching affected areas?	landslides
Where were the soldiers under commander Yang Wenyao trying to go?	Tibetan village of Sier
What natural disasters were occurring in Wenchuan County?	landslides
How many helicopters were deployed?	20
How many militia reservists joined in on rescue efforts?	15,600
How many survivors were found?	around 3,000
How many troops parachuted into Mao County?	15
What were the biggest difficulties in reaching affected areas?	heavy rain and landslides
How many helicopters were sent to deliver aid to the affected areas?	20
By May 13, how many troops had been added to the rescue efforts?	15,600
How people were reported to be survivors in Yingxiu Town?	around 3,000
How many persons were still unaccounted for in Yingxiu?	around 9,000
What did Premier Wen Jiabao order?	the deployment of an additional 90 helicopters
How many helicopters were provided by the PLAAF?	60
How many helicopter were to be provided by the civil aviation industry?	30
How many aircraft were there in total?	over 150
What is the total number of aircraft used in the relief operation?	over 150
How many helicopters came from the PLAAF?	60
Who provided the other 30 helicopters?	civil aviation industry
What kind of operation did this massing of aircraft produce?	non-combat airlifting
What Foundation wanted to aid Beijing?	the Tzu Chi Foundation
Where was the foundation based?	Taiwan
When did Beijing agree to aid from Taiwan?	late on May 13
What was the first group from outside China to join in the relief operation?	Tzu Chi Foundation
What did China say they would accept?	international help
What did China need help for?	cope with the quake
Who made a direct chartered cargo flight?	China Airlines
What date did the cargo flight leave?	May 15
When did a rescue team depart?	May 16
How did the move the relief supplies from Taiwan to the stricken area?	chartered cargo flight
From what airport did the chartered flight leave?	Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport
Where did the chartered flight from Taiwan land?	Chengdu
What Red Cross team left Taipei on May 16	rescue team
Where did the Red Cross team from Taiwan land?	Chengdu
What did the US share?	satellite images of the quake-stricken areas
Who did the US share the satellite images with?	Chinese authorities
How many Chinese troops were involved in the rescue efforts?	135,000
When did groups from South Korea, Japan, and others arrive in China?	May 16
What did the U.S. share with China?	satellite images
What was included in the the Air Force C-17 supplies?	tents and generators
How many Chinese troops and medics were involved in the relief efforts?	135,000
What was extensively used to pass information to aid rescue and recovery efforts?	The Internet
What did the Xinhua news agency set up?	an online rescue request center
What was the purpose of this online rescue request center?	to find the blind spots of disaster recovery
Where did rescue helicopters have trouble landing?	Wenchuan
What was used as a communications aid in the relief efforts?	The Internet
Who set up an online site to focus on blind spots in recovery?	news agency Xinhua
What person suggested a landing spot for helicopters near the epicenter?	a student
What kind of information were websites set up to store?	contact information
On what date did a rescue helicopter crash with no survivors?	May 31
What was done for the anniversary?	a moment of silence
Where did the government open access to?	the sealed ruins of the Beichuan county seat
How long was it opened for?	three days
What did China do to mark the first anniversary of the quake?	a moment of silence
What will the Beichuan county seat be used for?	earthquake relic museum
What kind of event were given to raise money for quake survivors?	several concerts
What is the Beichuan museum meant to remind people of?	the terrible disaster
What was also donated?	blood
What companies received the money?	China Unicom and China Mobile
After the quake, people from where in China made donations?	all over mainland China
What caused long lines in most major cities?	donated blood
What were the Chinese setting up to take in donations?	booths
How did a lot of people donate using mobile phones?	text messaging
How much had the Chinese government designated by May 16?	$772 million
How many tents were flown to the region?	557
How many quilts were flown to the region?	2,500
How much were both supplies worth?	788,000 yuan
What county were the supplies flown to?	Wenchuan County
How many tents did the Sichuan Ministry provide for the homeless?	30,000
What group took tents and quilts to Wenchuan county?	Red Cross Society of China
How much has the Amity Foundation designated for disaster relief?	US$143,000
How many tents did the Sichuan Ministry of Affairs provide?	30,000
What were all these tents and quilts for?	those left homeless
What foundation had already begun relief work in the area?	The Amity Foundation
How many schoolrooms collapsed in the quake?	7,000
What catch-phrase was invented as a result of collapsed schools?	tofu-dregs schoolhouses
Why did so many schools collapse during the earthquake?	inadequately engineered
What are the estimations of how many schoolrooms collapsed?	over 7,000
What has the citizenry started calling these type of schools?	tofu-dregs schoolhouses
What can illegal children be registered as in place of their dead siblings?	legal replacements
What did CCTV-1 host on the evening of May 18th?	four-hour program called The Giving of Love
Who was the show hosted by?	Bai Yansong
How large were the donations from the program?	Donations of the evening totalled 1.5 billion Chinese Yuan
How much did Jackie Chan donate to support?	$1.57 million
What was the name of the music video that Jackie Chan made for the event?	Promise
What was the program that CCTV-1 hosted?	The Giving of Love
What did the donations total for the program?	US$208 million
What company gave the most?	CCTV
How much did actor Jackie Chan donate?	1.57 million
What was the name of Chan's music video?	Promise
What did a professor at the Peking University say about the handling of the earthquake?	This is the first time [that] the Chinese media has lived up to international standards
What did Myanmar block after Cyclone Nargis?	foreign aid
What did a Peking professor say about Chinese media coverage?	up to international standards
Who praised Chinese media coverage as being democratic?	Los Angeles Times
In which previous catastrophe not live up to international standards?	1976 Tangshan earthquake
What formed behind blockages?	quake lakes
How many quake lakes formed?	34
How many of the lakes were a danger to people?	28
What was the magnitude of the Sichuan earthquake?	7.9
What blocked many of the area's rivers?	large landslides
What formed behind the blocked rivers?	quake lakes
By May 27, how many earthquake lakes had formed up behind landslide debris?	34
What had to be evacuated due to potential flooding?	Entire villages
Where was the most precarious quake lake located?	Mount Tangjia in Beichuan County, Sichuan
How could you only get to this quake lake?	by foot or air
What machinery was airlifted into the location?	tractors
How many people were evacuated downstream?	200,000
What was the fear that caused 200,000 people to be evacuated from Mianyang?	the dam bursting
Where was the worst of the quake lakes located?	Mount Tangjia
Where is Mount Tangjia?	Beichuan County, Sichuan
How many soldiers had to travel to the area by foot?	1,200
Who declared the mourning period?	The State Council
What did the State Council declare a period of?	national mourning
This was the biggest display of mourning since the death of who?	Mao Zedong
When did the Chinese hold a moment of silence?	May 19, 2008
What came to a halt during the moment of silence?	Cars and trucks
How long was the national mourning for the quake victims to last?	three-day period
What was suspended for the duration of the mourning period?	Olympic torch relay
Where was the relay scheduled to take place?	Ningbo
What was suspended during the period of mourning?	Beijing Olympic torch relay
Where was the torch relay supposed to take place?	in Ningbo
What part of the relay did they change?	The route
Where was there a minute of silence during the relay?	Ruijin, Jiangxi
What colors did many websites convert their home pages to?	black and white
What did internet portals remove from their home pages?	all advertisements
Many of what shut down completely?	various gaming sites
What did the crowds in Tiananmen Square do after the moment of silence?	burst out cheering
What business closed in Macau?	Casinos
Who was the principal of Sangzao Middle School?	Ye Zhiping
What was the principal credited with?	proactive action that spared the lives of all 2,323 pupils in attendance when the earthquake happened
How many students attended the school?	2,323
How much money was used to strengthen the construction of the school?	400,000 yuan
What school principal strengthened his school?	Ye Zhiping
Where is the Sangzao Middle School?	Sangzao
The Sangzao school is one of the biggest in what county?	An County
How many years was Ye Zhiping involved in the school overhaul?	three-year period
Why were the schools inspected?	to gain first-hand material of construction quality
What was to be carried out at schools after the quake?	safety checks
Who has joined an official inquiry into the school scandal?	Chinese prosecutors
What investigation are the prosecutors pursuing?	professional crime
Where are the Chinese going to perform safety checks?	schools across China
What group reported that Chinese prosecutors were involved in investigating the schoolhouse collapses?	Reuters
What was given in exchange of signing the document?	money
What other methods were used to break up protests?	riot police
Who did the New York Times report was investigating the school collapses?	government officials
What are officials seeking to do about protesting parents?	limit protests
What are officials offering parents in exchange of protests?	money
What has happened to some who refuse to agree to not protest?	were threatened
What did officials order Chinese news media to stop reporting?	on school collapses
Who was a Sichuan school teacher?	Liu Shaokun
What was Liu's family told?	that he was being investigated on suspicion of the crime of inciting subversion
What was Liu Shaokun's profession?	Sichuan school teacher
Why was he investigated?	crime of inciting subversion
What did Liu Shankun do with the pictures he took of collapsed schools?	put them online
Where did he call the schoolhouses shoddy?	in a media interview
What was his assigned punishment ?	one year of re-education
When did the sentencing occur?	in 2007
When was the article published about the case?	January 2010
What did he think that the poor construction led to?	massive casualties
What did UNICEF report?	that China formally requested the support of the international community
What did foreign nations offer China because of the severity of the quake?	condolences and assistance
When did China formally ask for help from the international community?	May 14
What organization reported that China asked for help?	UNICEF
Why did the world community notice the need for help?	magnitude of the quake
How much did Yao Ming donate?	$214,000 and $71,000
How much did the Red Cross collect in donations?	$26 million
How much money had been donated by May 14?	10.7 billion yuan
What group donated the 10.7 yuan?	the Chinese public
What famous basketball player made two large donations to the crisis?	Yao Ming
How much has the Red Cross Society  collected?	26 million
What did Francis Marcus say of the Chinese relief effort?	swift and very efficient
What uncharacteristic attitude did China display?	openness
What kind of attitude did Burma display in response to a cyclone a few days earlier?	secretive
How long before the quake did Cyclone Nargis strike Burma?	10 days
What organization did Francis Marcus represent?	International Federation of the Red Cross
What did stations replace programming with?	live earthquake footage
What was the source of the live feeds?	CCTV-1
What about pay TV channels?	programmes suspended
What government blocked aid after Cyclone Nargis?	Myanmar
Over what scandal did the Chinese government lose in public opinion?	school construction scandal
What was the Chinese government first praised for?	response to the quake
What did parents accuse builders of doing?	cutting corners
As of July 17, 2008 what did parents complain of not receiving?	any reports
What kind of stories were being censored in the media?	poorly built schools
Who has ignored the school issue?	state-controlled media
Who gave instructions to ignore the school issue?	propaganda bureau
What media source has reported this happening?	The AP
Why are the buildings so shoddily built?	builders cut corners
What did builder's use in place of steel rods as re-inforcement?	thin iron wires
Who was supposed to inspect building to see if they met national standards?	supervising agencies
Who has not been brought to justice?	corrupt government officials
Who is still looking for compensation and justice?	many families
What has the government threatened people with to keep them from protesting?	threat of arrest
What media reported the threat of arrest?	the Times
What did many families lose in the earthquake?	their only child
What city in the United States has the highest population?	New York
In what city is the United Nations based?	New York
What city has been called the cultural capital of the world?	New York
What American city welcomes the largest number of legal immigrants?	New York
The major gateway for immigration has been which US city?	New York City
The most populated city in the United States is which city?	New York City
How many boroughs comprise New York City?	five
In what year were the five boroughs combined into one city?	1898
In 2014, what did the census estimate the population of New York City to be?	8,491,079
What is the size of New York City in square miles?	305
What is the population of New York's Combined Statistical Area?	23.6 million
How man boroughs does New York City contain?	five
The five boroughs of New York City are named what?	Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, the Bronx, and Staten Island
All five boroughs of New York City formed into one city on what date?	1898
What is the population of New York City as of 2014?	8,491,079
How many languages are spoken by the people of New York City?	800
What was the trading post that preceded New York City called?	New Amsterdam
What nation founded New Amsterdam?	the Dutch Republic
In what year did New York become the largest city in the United States?	1790
When did the English take over the area from the Dutch?	1664
In what year did New York cease the be the capital of the United States?	1790
When was New York City established?	1624
New Amsterdam became the title of New York City in what past date?	1626
The English occupied New York City beginning on what date?	1664
New York City is the biggest city in the United States since what historical date?	1790
How many tourists visited New York in 2014?	56 million
How many stations are operated by the New York City Subway?	469
In what borough is Wall Street located?	Manhattan
How many school and universities are in NYC?	120
NYC has the two largest stock exchanges in the world which are called what?	New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ
What island was once a part of Long Island?	Staten Island
During what period was the area around New York City located at the edge of an ice sheet 1,000 feet deep?	the Wisconsinan glaciation
Long Island and Staten Island were split in half by what geographical phenomenon?	ice sheet
What was the name of the Lenape homeland?	Lenapehoking
In what year did the first European arrive in the New York area?	1524
What was the name of the first European who arrived in the New York area?	Giovanni da Verrazzano
What was the name of Giovanni da Verrazzano's ship?	La Dauphine
What nation did Giovanni da Verrazzano serve?	France
What did Giovanni da Verrazzano call the area when he staked claim on it?	Nouvelle Angoulême
When was the first European to visit the area of NYC?	1524
Giovanni da Verrazzano's ship that sailed to New York was named what?	La Dauphine
Giovani da Verrazzano was an explorer from which country?	France
In what year did a Spanish expedition visit New York Harbor?	1525
Who commanded the Spanish expedition?	Estêvão Gomes
What was the nationality of Estêvão Gomes?	Portuguese
What monarch did Estêvão Gomes serve?	Charles V
What was the name of Estêvão Gomes's ship?	La Anunciada
The front of the Hudson River was named what by Estevao Gomes?	Rio de San Antonio
What was the first map to show the whole North American East coast?	Padrón Real
What was the name of the explorer who visited the area in 1609?	Henry Hudson
Who was Henry Hudson working for?	Dutch East India Company
In what year did the Netherlands claim the area between Delaware Bay and Cape Cod?	1614
How many days did Henry Hudson spend exploring the region?	ten
What did Henry Hudson call the river that is now called the Hudson River?	North River
Henry Hudson worked for which company in the 1600s?	Dutch East India Company
In what year was the land between Cape Cod and Delaware Bay claimed by the Dutch?	1614
Which explorer sailed his ship into New York harbor in 1609?	Henry Hudson
Where was Juan Rodriguez born?	Santo Domingo
What did the Dutch call Juan Rodriguez?	Jan Rodrigues
What was Juan Rodriguez's occupation?	trader
What is the street that is named after Juan Rodriguez?	Juan Rodriguez Way
During what season did Juan Rodriguez first come to New York?	winter
Who was the first non-Indian person to live in what is now NYC?	Juan Rodriguez
Which street in NYC today is now named after Juan Rodriguez?	Broadway, from 159th Street to 218th Street
On what island did the Dutch set up a settlement to trade furs?	Governors Island
On what island was Fort Amsterdam built?	Manhattan Island
In what year did construction begin on Fort Amsterdam?	1625
What person bought Manhattan from the Canarsie for the Dutch?	Peter Minuit
In what year did the Dutch buy Manhattan?	1626
New Netherland established a permanent European presence in what year?	1624
What year did building begin of Fort Amsterdam on Manhattan Island?	1625
What was the myth that Manhattan was bought for by General Peter Minuit ?	glass beads
What did the English call New Amsterdam after its capture?	New York
What was the regnal name of the Duke of York?	James II
What person gave up New Amsterdam to the English?	Peter Stuyvesant
What was Peter Stuyvesant's title?	Director-General
In what year did the English take over New Amsterdam?	1664
Who gave up New Amsterdam to the English without a fight in 1664?	Peter Stuyvesant
What was the regnal name of the Prince of Orange?	William III
What was the date of Anthonio Colve's capture of New York?	August 24, 1673
What did Colve call New York after he captured it?	New Orange
In what year did the Dutch give New York back to the English?	1674
August 24, 1673 is when which Dutch officer  took control of NYC?	Anthonio Colve
The Dutch gave back the island to which country in 1674 after their trade routes had been destroyed?	England
New York was called New Orange for a period based off which historical figure?	King William III
After what war did the English receive New Amsterdam?	Second Anglo-Dutch War
How many Lenape lived in the area in 1700?	200
What was the name of the island the English traded to the Dutch in return for New Amsterdam?	Run
In 1700, the Lenape Native American population had dwindled to how many?	200
After which war did England gain New York in exchange for Run, an Indonesian island?	Second Anglo-Dutch War
In 1730, what percentage of New York households were slave-holding?	42%
In 1730, what American city had the highest percentage of slaveholders?	Charleston, South Carolina
Near what square was the African Burial Ground unearthed?	Foley Square
What was being built that resulted in the discovery of the African Burial Ground?	courthouse
Which city in North America held the most slaves in the 1700s?	Charleston, South Carolina
When was as African burial ground discovered after the building of new courthouse?	1990s
In what year was John Peter Zenger tried?	1735
On what island did Zenger's trial occur?	Manhattan
In what year was Columbia University chartered?	1754
Under what king did the founding of Columbia University occur?	George II
What was the original name of Columbia University?	King's College
Which trial in Manhatten helped establish the right of freedom of the press?	John Peter Zenger
Columbia University of New York was founded in what year?	1754
The Stamp Act Congress had a meeting in 1765 in which US city?	New York
What was the biggest battle of the American Revolution?	Battle of Long Island
In what borough did the Battle of Long Island occur?	Brooklyn
In what month and year was the Battle of Long Island fought?	August 1776
About how many escaped slaves were in New York during the time the British occupied it?	10,000
In what year did the American Revolutionary War end?	1783
Which battle was the largest battle of the American Revolutionary war?	The Battle of Long Island
Which borough of New York was the Battle of Long Island fought?	Brooklyn
When did the English army start to retreat and evacuate NYC during the Battle of Long Island?	1783
On what date did the peace conference on Staten Island occur?	September 11, 1776
Who was the British representative at the Conference House meeting?	Lord Howe
What notable catastrophe took place under the British occupation?	Great Fire of New York
In what modern-day borough did the Great Fire happen?	Manhattan
What noted religious building was destroyed in the Great Fire?	Trinity Church
Who was the English general who met with Benjamin Franklin on Septermber 11, 1776?	Lord Howe
Which natural disaster happened after English occupation of Lower Manhattan?	the Great Fire of New York
In what year did New York become the United States capital?	1785
Who was the United States' first President?	George Washington
In what building did the Supreme Court of the United States first sit?	Federal Hall
On what street did the writing of the Bill of Rights occur?	Wall Street
What was the second largest city in the United States in 1790?	Philadelphia
Which organization made New York the national capital in 1785?	Congress of the Confederation
New York City became the first what under the new Constitution of the United States?	capital
The first president, George Washington, took office in what year?	1789
By which year, did New York City become the largest city in the United States?	1790
In what year did the state of New York pass a law to free the slaves?	1799
What borough was home to a notable population of free African-Americans?	Manhattan
Along with John Jay, who founded the New York Manumission Society?	Alexander Hamilton
In what year did the state of New York eliminate slavery?	1827
In 1840, about how many African-Americans lived in New York City?	16,000
The gradual abolition act in New York was formed in what year?	1799
When was slavery completely outlawed in the state of New York?	1827
What plan of 1811 spread a grid of streets across Manhattan?	Commissioners' Plan
In what year did the Erie Canal finish building?	1825
What political machine controlled New York politics in this era?	Tammany Hall
Along with German immigrants, immigrants of what nationality supported Tammany Hall?	Irish
The Erie Canal was finished being built in what year?	1825
What was the name of the first urban landscaped park in the United States?	Central Park
In what year was Central Park founded?	1857
Central park, in 1857, became the first park in America to become what?	first landscaped
What event brought many Irish immigrants to the United States?	Great Irish Famine
In 1860, approximately how many people of Irish extraction were in New York?	200,000
In 1860, what fraction of the city population was composed of Irish immigrants?	a quarter
In 1860, what percentage of the city population was composed of German immigrants?	25%
What events provoked the immigration of people from Germany?	revolutions
Which event brought upon a lot of Irish immigrants to NYC?	Great Irish Famine
How many immigrants that were Irish were living in New York in 1860?	Over 200,000
Who was the mayor of New York City in 1861?	Fernando Wood
What was the commutation fee to avoid being conscripted during the American Civil War?	$300
People of what ethnicity most visibly participated in the Draft Riots of 1863?	Irish
About how many people died during the Draft Riots of 1863?	120
What was the approximate African-American population of New York City in 1865?	10,000
The Draft Riots caused which building to burn down in 1863?	Colored Orphan Asylum
In what year was the modern City of New York founded?	1898
In what year did the subway begin operation?	1904
Portions of what modern-day borough were included in the County of New York?	the Bronx
The subway of New York was first available in what year?	1904
In what year did the General Slocum disaster occur?	1904
How many people died on the General Slocum?	1,021
In what building did the city's deadliest industrial disaster occur?	Triangle Shirtwaist Factory
How many people died in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire?	146
The growth of what organization was prompted by the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire?	International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union
A catastrophe in 1911 that killed 146 workers was called what?	Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire
How many non-white people lived in New York in 1890?	36,620
What was the name of the Prohibition-era African-American cultural flourishing in New York?	Harlem Renaissance
What was the population of people in New York that were not Caucasian in 1890?	36,620
In the early 1920s, what was the second most highly populated city in the world?	London
What is the term for a city with a population of over 10 million?	megacity
Who was mayor of New York during the Great Depression?	Fiorello La Guardia
For about how many years did Tammany Hall control New York political life?	eighty
In the 1930s, New York City had more than 10 million people becoming the first what in history?	megacity
When was construction finished on the United Nations Headquarters?	1952
Prior to New York, what city was the center of the world of art?	Paris
What artistic movement caused New York to overtake Paris as the global art center?	abstract expressionism
The headquarters what organization was done being build in 1952 in New York?	United Nations
The Stonewall riots are named after what building?	the Stonewall Inn
In what neighborhood did the Stonewall riots occur?	Greenwich Village
On what date did the Stonewall riots take place?	June 28, 1969
In what borough did the Stonewall riots happen?	Manhattan
What event provoked the Stonewall riots?	a police raid
Where did the Stonewall riots happen?	Stonewall Inn in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan
In what year did the population of New York first reach an all-time high in this period?	2000
In what year did the population of New York reach an all-time high for the second time in this period?	2010
What was the name of a new sector of the New York economy that appeared in the 1990s?	Silicon Alley
In what decade did the crime rate drop significantly?	1990s
In what decade was there a significant decline in industrial jobs?	1970s
Which decade did massive job losses happen in NYC due to industrial issues?	1970s
What was the name of the aircraft that crashed into the World Trade Center's North Tower on September 11, 2001?	American Airlines Flight 11
What was the name of the aircraft that crashed into the World Trade Center's South Tower on September 11, 2001?	United Airlines Flight 175
How many firefighters died in the World Trade Center attack?	343
On what date did the World Trade Center PATH begin operation?	July 19, 1909
How tall is One World Trade Center in meters?	541.3
The Hudson Terminal which was also demolished was build in what year?	1909
How many leader terrorists of Al Quada were involved with the 9/11 attacks directly that day?	10
What was the plane named that crashed into the World Trade Center?	American Airlines Flight 11
On what date did the Occupy Wall Street protests commence?	September 17, 2011
In what park did the Occupy Wall Street protests occur?	Zuccotti Park
In what borough did the Occupy Wall Street protests take place?	Manhattan
In what district of Manhattan were the Occupy Wall Street protests?	Financial District
The Occupy Wall Street protests that took place in Zuccotti Park was on which date?	September 17, 2011
What individual established the National Review?	William F. Buckley, Jr.
In what year was the National Review founded?	1955
What public figure defended New York in January 2016?	Donald Trump
A presidential candidate from what party derided the city for its liberalism?	Republican
In what geographical region of the United States is New York City located?	Northeastern
In what geographical region of New York state is New York City located?	southeastern
New York City is about half the distance between Washington DC and what city?	Boston
New York City is adjacent to what ocean?	Atlantic
What river is New York City located on?	Hudson River
New York City is at the base of which American river?	Hudson
The Hudson River flows into which body of water?	Atlantic Ocean
The three islands that make up New York city are named what?	Long Island, Manhattan, and Staten Island.
The Hudson River serves as a dividing line between New York and what state?	New Jersey
What river flows between the Hudson and East Rivers?	Harlem River
What is the city's sole fresh water river?	Bronx River
Into what body of water does the Hudson River terminate?	New York Bay
Between New York City and what city is the Hudson River an estuary?	Troy, New York
The Hudson River separates NYC from which US state?	New Jersey
The single only freshwater river in NYC is what river?	The Bronx River
Which river seperates The Bronx from Manhatten?	The Harlem River
What Manhattan development is the product of land reclamation?	Battery Park City
What is the total area of New York City in square miles?	468.9
In square miles, how much of the city's total area is composed of water?	164.1
In square miles, how much of the city's total area is land?	304.8
What is the name of New York City's highest point?	Todt Hill
On what island is New York City's highest point located?	Staten Island
How many square miles in NYC?	468.9
How many square miles are water in NYC?	164.1
How many square miles are land in NYC?	304.8
The highest peak in the city is what location?	Todt Hill
How many feet above sea level is Todt Hil?	409.8
What structure is an example of saltbox architecture?	Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House
In what borough is the Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House located?	Brooklyn
What building is the priciest office tower in the world?	One World Trade Center
In what borough is One World Trade Center located?	Manhattan
In what year did construction on the oldest part of Pieter Claesen Wyckoff House begin?	1656
The most expensive office tower built in the world today is what?	One World Trade Center
How many high-rises were present in New York City in 2011?	5,937
What city has the most high-rise buildings in the world?	Hong Kong
How many structures in New York City are over 100m tall?	550
In what year was the Woolworth Building completed?	1913
How many buildings in New York City are over 200m high?	50
NYC has the highest quantity of skyscrapers after which other world city?	Hong Kong
How many buildings located in NYC are at least 330 feet in height?	550
In what year was the Empire State Building completed?	1931
The Chrysler Building reflects what architectural style?	Art Deco
What floor of the Chrysler Building has sculptures of eagles at its corners?	61st
What building known for its bronze-tinted I-beams was completed in 1957?	Seagram Building
What is the full name of the organization known by the acronym AIA?	American Institute of Architects
Which animal decorates the corners of the Chrysler Building?	eagles
When was the Empire State Building constructed?	1931
When was the Chrysler building built in NYC?	1930
In what borough is the Riverdale neighborhood located?	the Bronx
In what borough is the Ditmas Park neighborhood located?	Brooklyn
In what borough is the Douglaston neighborhood located?	Queens
Brownstone rowhouse construction is most often associated with the period beginning in 1870 and ending in what year?	1930
Along with Tudor Revival, what is a common architectural style of single-family houses in New York?	Victorian
What type of housing structure makes up most of the large residential districts of NYC?	brownstone rowhouses
What event led to the decline in wooden construction in New York City?	the Great Fire of 1835
In the 19th century, New York city required water towers in the roofs of buildings that were more than how many stories tall?	six
What area was known for its garden apartments?	Jackson Heights
After the Great Fire of 1835, what became the most widespread building materials?	Stone and brick
To prevent high water pressures at lower elevations what were built on many of the city's buildings?	wooden roof-mounted water towers
When did the United States Geological Survey released its seismic hazard analysis?	July 2014
How many of New York's boroughs would be counted among the United States' ten most populated cities if they were independent?	four
How many boroughs does New York City have?	five
Which four boroughs of NYC would be among the the most populous cities in the US if they were independent cities?	Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, and the Bronx
What is the name of New York City's climate using the Köppen climate classification?	humid subtropical
How many sunny days does New York average each year?	234
How many hours of sunshine does New York receive every year?	2,535
The suburbs of the city lie between the humid subtropical and what other climate zone?	humid continental
What month in New York City is the coldest?	January
What type of climate does NYC possess?	humid subtropical
How many days on average does NYC get sunshine annually?	234
What planting zone does the city land in?	USDA 7b
What mountains serve as a barrier to keep New York City comparatively warmer in the winter?	Appalachians
What is New York City's daily January mean temperature in degrees celsius?	0.3
What is the average humidity in July as a percentage?	72%
On average, how often do New York temperatures exceed 90 degrees Fahrenheit each year?	17
On what date did New York record its highest temperature ever?	July 9, 1936
What is the highest temperature recorded in NYC?	106
When was the lowest temperature recorded in NYC?	1934
The highest temperature ever recorded in NYC was in what year?	1936
In millimeters, how much precipitation does New York receive a year?	1,270
In centimeters, what is the average winter snowfall?	66
When did Hurricane Sandy strike New York?	October 29, 2012
How many inches of precipitation does NYC get in a year?	49.9
Which natural disaster occurred on October 29, 2012 in NYC?	Hurricane Sandy
The mean snowfall between 1981 and 2010 in NYC has been how many inches?	25.8
What is the name of the New York City department that operates the park system?	New York City Department of Parks and Recreation
What is the state office that operates New York City parks?	New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation
What federal service operates New York City parks?	National Park Service
What city was rated as having the best park system by The Trust for Public Land?	Minneapolis
What city had the second highest ParkScore rating?	New York City
The 2013 ParkScore rating for NYC made NYC second in best park system to what other US city?	Minneapolis
How large is the Gateway National recreation Area in hectares?	10,521.83
About how large is the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge in acres?	9,000
What fort is located on the Rockaway Peninsula?	Fort Tilden
What park is located on the Rockaway Peninsula?	Jacob Riis Park
What body of water is Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge adjacent to?	Jamaica Bay
How many acres of land does Gateway Nation Recreation contain?	over 26,000
What body administers the Ellis Island Immigration Museum?	National Park Service
What is the common name for the General Grant National Memorial?	Grant's Tomb
In what neighborhood is the Stonewall Inn located?	Greenwich Village
What movement is the Stonewall Inn most famously associated with?	gay rights movement
The Statue of Liberty is taken care of by what organization?	National Park Service
The Statue of Liberty is also in what other US state?	New Jersey
Ellis Island is considered in New York state and which other?	New Jersey
Which landmark is considered the spark for LGBT rights?	Stonewall Inn
The landmark, General Grant National Memorial, is also called what?	Grant's Tomb
How many state parks exist in New York City?	seven
How large is Riverbank State Park in acres?	28
How many meters is Riverbank State Park elevated above the Hudson River?	21
How many New York state parks are within New York City?	seven
Riverbank State park's highest point is how high above the Hudson River?	69 feet
New York has approximately how many acres of parks?	28,000
How many miles of public beach are located in New York City?	14
What is the biggest public park in the city?	Pelham Bay Park
How large is Pelham Bay Park in hectares?	1,093
New York City has how many acres of land dedicated to parks?	over 28,000
How long are all the public beaches together in miles?	14
What is the largest park in New York City?	Pelham Bay Park
How many acres of land does Pelham Bay park have?	2,700
What is the name of the military base in New York City?	Fort Hamilton
In what year was Fort Hamilton founded?	1825
In what borough is Fort Hamilton located?	Brooklyn
What division is based at Fort Hamilton?	North Atlantic Division
What brigade is headquartered at Fort Hamilton?	1179th Transportation Brigade
The U.S. military has only one active location in NYC named what?	Fort Hamilton
When was Fort Hamilton built?	1825
Which borough can Fort Hamilton be found?	Brooklyn
Fort Wadsworth and Fort Totten are located in which area of New York City?	Queens
What was the population of New York City in 2014?	8,491,079
What is the US city with the second largest population?	Los Angeles
How many people moved to New York City between April 2010 and July 2014?	316,000
Approximately what percentage is New York City's population of the entire state's population?	40%
About what percentage is New York City's population of the New York metropolitan area's population?	40%
What is the population of NYC as of 2014?	8,491,079
The second largest city in the US is what?	Los Angeles
What percentage of people that live in the state of New York live in New York City?	40
How many people live in a square mile of New York City?	27,858
What is the population density of Manhattan per square kilometer?	27,673
Some cities in what county have a higher population density than New York City?	Hudson County
What percentage of the city's population is Caucasian?	44%
What percentage of the city's population is African-American?	25.5%
What ethnicity is growing the quickest in New York City?	Asians
What percentage of the population identifies as Hispanic?	28.6%
By what percentage did the non-Hispanic white population decrease?	3
As of 2010, what percentage made up white people in NYC?	44
Since what event did the first time black people decline in living in NYC?	the Civil War
Which race of people made it the highest growing ethnicity between 2000-2010 in NYC?	Asians
What percentage of Africans make up NYC?	25.5
How many immigrants arrived at Ellis Island from 1892 to 1924?	12 million
'Melting pot' was first used to describe neighborhoods in what area of the city?	Lower East Side
What ethnicity comprised the largest number of immigrants at the beginning of the twentieth century?	Germans
What percentage of the population was Caucasian in 1940?	92%
What was the ethnicity of the second largest group of immigrants in 1900?	Irish
Between 1892-1924, how many immigrants came through Ellis Island?	more than 12 million
In the year 1942, what percentage of white Americans made up New York City?	92
What percentage of the population was born outside the United States?	37%
From what country did the largest number of foreign-born immigrants originate as of 2011?	Dominican Republic
About how many immigrants from Bangladesh lived in the city in 2013?	74,000
What country was the second largest source of foreign-born New Yorkers in 2011?	China
What percentage of the population of NYC was born in another country?	37
What New York borough contains the highest population of Asian-Americans?	Queens
What borough housed the first Chinatown in New York?	Manhattan
As of 2012, what percentage of the New York City population was ethnically Chinese?	6.3%
What borough is home to a large Tibetan population?	Queens
What percentage of the New York City population is Japanese?	0.3%
How many non-Hispanic whites lived in New York City in 2012?	2.7 million
What is the non-Hispanic white population of Houston?	550,000
How many New Yorkers are of Polish ancestry?	201,000
How many New York City residents are of Greek heritage?	65,000
What borough has the largest population of ethnic Albanians?	the Bronx
NYC has the largest white population by how many people?	2.7 million
About how many people live in New York City's metropolitan area?	20 million
As of 2012, how many Jewish people lived in the New York metropolitan area?	1.5 million
What percentage of the total Indian-American population of the United States lives in the New York metropolitan area?	20%
How many Hispanic people live in the New York metropolitan area?	4.8 million
Approximately how many Chinatowns exist in New York City?	6
In 2013, how many people of Puerto Rican ancestry lived in New York City?	1.3 million
What nation provided the most legal immigrants to New York City in the Caribbean?	the Dominican Republic
Out of all African nations, which provided the most legal immigrants in 2013?	Egypt
Out of all nations in Central America, which provided the most legal immigrants in 2013?	El Salvador
Of all the countries in South America, which provided the most legal immigrants in 2013?	Ecuador
How many self-identified LGB people live in the New York metropolitan area?	568,903
On what date did New York legalize gay marriage?	June 24, 2011
How many days after gay marriage was legalized were gay marriages allowed to take place?	30
How many people identify as gay or bisexual in NYC?	568,903
Same-sex marriage became legal on what date in New York?	June 24, 2011
Since Gay marriage became legal, how many days did people have to wait to marry?	30
What percentage of New Yorkers are Christians?	59%
What percentage of New Yorkers follow the Catholic faith?	33%
About how many Jews live in New York City?	1.1 million
What borough has the largest population of Jewish people?	Brooklyn
What is the third most popular faith in New York City?	Islam
What was the most prominent religion in New York as of 2014?	Christianity
The second most prominent religion in New York is what?	Judaism
Half the population of Jews live in what borough of New York City?	Brooklyn
What percentage of people in 2014 had no religion?	24
The third most popular religion in NYC is what?	Islam
What is New York City's Gini Coefficient?	0.5
What borough has a Gini Coefficient of 0.6?	Manhattan
What previous mayor of New York is a billionaire?	Michael R. Bloomberg
In 2014, millionaires made up what percentage of New York City's population?	4.6%
What is the average weekly wage in Manhattan?	$2,749
The average weekly earnings for a worker in NYC was what in 2014?	2,749
By 2013, which city had the most billionaires living in the city?	New York City
What is the common name for New York's high technology sector?	Silicon Alley
Who created the Global Economic Power Index that ranked New York first?	The Atlantic
In what year did the Port of New York and New Jersey deal with unprecedented cargo volume?	2014
In what year was New York ranked first on the Global Economic Power Index?	2012
What fraction of New Yorkers in the private sector are employed by foreign companies?	One out of ten
What publication ranked New York first in the 2013 American Cities of the Future rankings?	FDi Magazine
What was the 2015 assessed value of all the property in New York?	US$914.8 billion
How much was Time Warner Center worth in 2006?	US$1.1 billion
What was the price per square foot of 450 Park Avenue when it sold in July 2007?	$1,589
What was the price per square meter of 660 Madison Avenue in June 2007?	$15,887
Of the top 10 zip codes with the most expensive housing prices in the United States, how many are in Manhattan?	six
Which building has the highest market value in NYC?	Time Warner Center
The previous record beaten by Park Avenue was for what real estate?	660 Madison Avenue
What is the popular name of New York's advertising industry?	Madison Avenue
About how many people work in the New York fashion industry?	180,000
About how much does it cost per year to pay workers in the New York fashion industry?	$11 billion
With Interpublic Group, what company has a combined annual revenue of roughly US$21 billion?	Omnicom Group
NYC's fashion industry employs how many people?	180,000
The Two highest advertising agencies in the world located in NYC are called what?	Omnicom Group and Interpublic Group
How many New Yorkers work in the food processing field?	19,000
What is the annual revenue of the food processing industry?	US$5 billion
In what borough is the garment business prominent?	Brooklyn
What dollar amount of chocolate does New York export annually?	US$234 million
Where is the "Chocolate District" located?	Brooklyn
In what borough is Godiva based?	Manhattan
What is the number one specialty food export of New York?	Chocolate
What type of food is NYC's leading food export?	Chocolate
Which one of the world's largest chocolate makers is stationed in Manhattan?	Godiva
As of 2013, how many people worked for a securities business in New York?	163,400
What percentage of New York private sector jobs are in the securities industry?	5
How much tax revenue does the securities industry generate?	US$3.8 billion
What is the average income in the New York securities industry?	US$360,700
What percentage of the city's wages does the securities industry provide?	22
22 Percent of NYC's total wages are from what industry?	The city's securities
On what street is the New York Stock Exchange headquartered?	Wall Street
What is the street address of NASDAQ?	165 Broadway
In 2012, how many investment banking fees were paid out to Wall Street?	$40 billion
In 2013-4, what percentage of New York state tax revenues came from the securities business on Wall Street?	19%
Who was the previous overseer of the London interbank offered rate?	British Bankers Association
The New York Stock exchange is located where in NYC?	Wall Street
The NASDAQ is located on what street in NYC?	165 Broadway
How many square meters of office space does Manhattan have?	46.5 million
About how many million square feet of office space is present in Midtown Manhattan?	400
How much office space did Manhatten possess in 2015?	500 million square feet
In what borough is Silicon Alley located?	Manhattan
What is the street address of the headquarters of Verizon Communciations?	140 West Street
How much did Verizon spend on fiber optic upgrades in New York City?	US$3 billion
Approximately how many tech sector jobs are in New York City?	300,000
The technology sector of work in NYC has how many employees in its service?	300,000
Along with Cornell University, what institution is involved in the building of Cornell Tech?	Technion-Israel Institute of Technology
What is the cost to build Cornell Tech?	US$2 billion
On what island is Cornell Tech located?	Roosevelt Island
About how much capital did Accelerator raise as of the middle of 2014?	US$30 million
How large is the Alexandria Center for Life Science in square meters?	65,000
In 2011, what school was built on Roosevelt Island?	Cornell Tech
How many tourists visited New York in 2011?	51 million
How many people came to visit New York in 2013?	54 million
What is the record number of tourists that have visited New York in a year?	56.4 million
How much money did tourism create for New York in 2014?	US$61.3 billion
How many tourists that visited NYC in 2014 broke the record?	56.4 million
How many tourists visited NYC in 2013?	54 million
What English phrase does I ❤ NY represent?	I Love New York
When was I ❤ NY first used in advertisements?	1977
Who owns the trademark to I ❤ NY?	New York State Empire State Development
What is the state song of New York?	I Love New York
I Love New York was established as advertising in what year?	1977
What is the state song of New York?	I Love New York
In what neighborhood does the Halloween Parade take place?	Greenwich Village
What company sponsors the Thanksgiving Day parade?	Macy's
At what location is a Christmas tree famously lit every year?	Rockefeller Center
Where in Central Park are performances offered at no cost?	Summerstage
In what borough is the Unisphere located?	Queens
About how many hotel rooms are there in Manhattan?	90,000
What was the percentage increase of Manhattan hotel rooms between 2013 and 2014?	10%
Who owns the Waldorf Astoria?	Anbang Insurance Group
What was the October 2014 purchase price of the Waldorf Astoria?	US$1.95 billion
The hotel that sold for the most money in 2014 was which in NYC?	Waldorf Astoria New York
How many hotel rooms are located in NYC as of the end of 2014?	90,000
Who bought the Waldorf Astoria hotel in NYC in 2014?	Anbang Insurance Group
The Waldorf Astoria hotel sold for how many dollars?	1.95 billion
Approximately how many feature films are made in New York City every year?	200
How many New Yorkers work in the television and film industry?	130,000
How much money does the New York film and television industry create every year?	$7.1 billion
What United States city is the second most popular for pilot episode location filming?	Los Angeles
Along with Warner Music Group, what top three record label is based in New York City?	Sony Music Entertainment
What city is North America's biggest media market?	New York City
Out of the top eight advertising agency networks in the world, how many are based in New York?	Seven
How many people work in the New York publishing industry?	25,000
Which New York-based newspaper has won the Pulitzer Prize for journalism?	The New York Times
Along with the New York Times, what national daily newspaper is based in New York?	The Wall Street Journal
What was the founding year of the New York Daily News?	1919
Who was the founder of the New York Post?	Alexander Hamilton
How many newspaper offices are located in New York?	More than 200
How many magazines can call NYC home?	350
How many national newspapers out of the three are from New York?	2
Which two national newspapers are located in New York?	The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times
When was the New York Daily News founded?	1919
Along with ABC and NBC, what other major broadcaster is based in New York?	CBS
What is the name of the city's public television service?	NYCTV
What comedy channel on cable television is headquartered in New York?	Comedy Central
What cable news channel is based in New York?	Fox News
What is the name of the first public-access TV channel in the country?	Manhattan Neighborhood Network
In what year did the Manhattan Neighborhood Network begin?	1971
What is the primary public television station in New York?	WNET
What is the largest public radio station in the US by audience size?	WNYC
In what year did the city cease to own WNYC?	1997
The public-assess TV channel that has been around the longest in the US in what?	Manhattan Neighborhood Network
When was the Manhattan Neighborhood Network created?	1971
The largest public radio station by listeners is what in New York?	WNYC
What city department runs the public school system?	New York City Department of Education
How many students are in New York City public schools?	1.1 million
About how many public schools are there in New York City?	1,700
How many high schools for gifted students does New York City have?	nine
How many students regularly attend schools in NYC?	1.1 million
How many highschools are specialized in NYC?	nine
What institution aids in the creation of charter schools in New York?	New York City Charter School Center
About how many private schools does New York have?	900
About how many students attend schools in the City University of New York system?	half million
What fraction of Manhattan residents graduated from college?	three out of five
What fraction of Manhattan residents have graduate degrees?	one out of four
The City University of New York system consists of how many institutions?	24
How many students in New York partcipate in higher education?	600,000
What is the largest library in the United States?	The New York Public Library
What is the second largest library in the US?	Queens Borough Public Library
What is the name of the library system in Queens?	Queens Borough Public Library
What is Brooklyn's public library system called?	Brooklyn Public Library
Along with Staten Island and the Bronx, what borough is served by the New York Public Library?	Manhattan
The largest municipal healthcare in the US is what?	New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation
How many hospitals does HHC operate?	11
What is the yearly revenue of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation?	$6.7 billion
How many patients are served annually by HHC?	1.4 million
How many uninsured New Yorkers take advantage of HHC?	475,000
In what year was the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation founded?	1969
How many nursing homes does HHC operate?	five
The public hospital that has been around the longest in the US is what?	Bellevue Hospital
Who is the president of HHC?	Ramanathan Raju
What was the first public hospital founded in the United States?	Bellevue Hospital
If the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom becomes sick in New York City, what hospital does he go to?	Bellevue Hospital
Who is the HHC president?	Ramanathan Raju, MD
In what state did the president of HHC previously work?	Illinois
What was the president of HHC's previous job title?	CEO
The largest police presence in the US is NYPD with how many people?	35,000
NYPD officers have a nickname that is known as what?	New York's Finest
What does the acronym NYPD stand for?	New York City Police Department
About how many police work for the NYPD?	35,000
What is the nickname given to New York City Police Department officers?	New York's Finest
What was the low record for homicides in 2014 in NYC?	328
What percentage decrease in violent crime did the city see between 1993 and 2005?	75%
As of 2002, to what city did New York have a comparable crime rate?	Provo, Utah
In what year did the city have less than 500 homicides?	2007
How many homicides were there in New York City in 2014?	328
In the first half of 2010, what percentage of shooting victims were African-American or Hispanic?	95.9%
The first major crime groups in NYC were in the 1820s known as what?	Forty Thieves and the Roach Guards
What group controlled the Mafia in New York in the 20th century?	the Five Families
The Forth Thieves and Roach Guards were two gangs that operated in what area of New York in the 1820s?	the Five Points
What was a notable 20th century gang in New York?	the Black Spades
What is the largest fire department force in the world?	Tokyo Fire Department
What is the second largest fire department force in the world?	The New York City Fire Department
What is the The New York City Fire Department's motto?	New York's Bravest
What does FDNY stand for?	New York City Fire Department
What city is home to the largest municipal fire department in the world?	Tokyo
How many firefighters work for the New York City Fire Department?	11,080
The FDNY employs about how many paramedics and EMTs?	3,300
What is the motto of the New York City Fire Department?	New York's Bravest
New York is home to what largest transportation system in the world?	subway systems
What types of fires can start in parks and woodlands?	brush fires
What is the address for The New York City Fire Department headquarters?	9 MetroTech Center
Which island is home to the Fire academy in NYC?	Randalls Island
Which borough of NYC is home to the The New York City Fire Department headquarters?	Brooklyn
What is the street address of the New York Fire Department headquarters?	9 MetroTech Center
In what borough is the FDNY headquartered?	Brooklyn
Where is the fire department's training academy located?	Randalls Island
What is the street address of the Bureau of Fire Communications alarm office in Brooklyn?	11 Metrotech Center
Jazz became popular during which decade in NYC?	1940s
Which decade did hip hop start to surface in NYC?	1970s
What was the name of the cultural development that defined the black American literary canon?	the Harlem Renaissance
What musical style was prominent in New York in the 1940s?	jazz
What artistic style was prominent in New York in the 1950s?	abstract expressionism
What was the name of the new musical style that emerged from New York in the 1970s?	hip hop
The fashion capital of the world is what city in the US?	New York City
One of the biggest fashion shows in the world is named what in New York?	New York Fashion Week
By what other name is abstract expressionism known?	the New York School
What is the name of the prominent fashion event that occurs in New York?	New York Fashion Week
Who ranked New York as the fashion capital of the world?	the Global Language Monitor
The Broadway Musical began in what decade?	1880s
Approximately how many galleries of art are in New York City?	500
Along with Broadway, what New York thoroughfare is associated with Broadway musicals?	42nd Street
Who was Hart's writing partner?	Harrigan
About how many cultural and artistic organizations are in New York City?	2,000
What technological development led resulted in elaborate stage productions?	electric lighting
How many people attended Broadway shows during the 2013-2014 season?	12.21 million
What is the nickname of the Times Square Theater District?	The Great White Way
What was the dollar amount of the tickets sold on Broadway in 2013-14?	US$1.27 billion
What was the percentage increase in the Broadway ticket revenue from 2012-3 to 2013-4?	11.4%
How many people attended a Broadway show in the 2013-4 season?	12.21 million
In 2012-3, what number of people saw a show on Broadway?	11.57 million
How many restaurants are there in NYC?	24,000
How many mobile food vendors operate in New York City?	4,000
How many restaurants is New York home to?	24,000
What public department inspects the restaurants of New York?	New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
According to Michelin, about how many fine dining restaurants exist in New York?	one thousand
The Brooklyn Dodgers were created in what year?	1882
Which four of the world's most expensive stadiums are located in NYC?	MetLife Stadium, the new Yankee Stadium, Madison Square Garden, and Citi Field
Which two sports stadiums of New York City were featured on US stamps?	the original Yankee Stadium and Ebbets Field
In what year were the Brooklyn Dodgers founded?	1882
What professional soccer organization is headquartered in New York?	Major League Soccer
How many professional sports leagues have their headquarters in New York?	five
About how many major professional sports teams have been based at one time or another in New York?	forty
NYC is known as the Capital of which sport?	Baseball
How many Major League Baseball World Series has NYC teams won?	35
It is one of only five areas to contain two teams of what sport?	Baseball
How many minor league baseball teams are there in NYC?	two
How many World Series have New York teams won?	35
How many Major League baseball league pennants have New York teams won?	73
How many professional baseball teams are located in New York?	two
How many times have two teams from New York played against each other in the World Series?	14
What is the nickname for a World Series where two New York teams play against each other?	Subway Series
The New York Giants and the New York Jets place at which stadium in NYC?	MetLife Stadium
When was the most recent superbowl held in NYC for football?	2014
Along what the New York Jets, what NFL team is based in New York?	New York Giants
What stadium do the New York Jets call home?	MetLife Stadium
What city is MetLife Stadium located in?	East Rutherford, New Jersey
What Super Bowl took place at MetLife Stadium?	Super Bowl XLVIII
In what year did a Super Bowl occur at MetLife Stadium?	2014
There are two hockey teams located in NYC. What are they?	The New York Islanders and the New York Rangers
Which town do the New Jersey Devils hockey team play?	Newark
In what city are the New Jersey Devils located?	Newark, New Jersey
What sport do the New York Rangers play?	Hockey
Along with the New York Rangers, what NHL franchise is based in New York?	New York Islanders
Which two national basketball teams play in NYC?	the Brooklyn Nets and the New York Knicks
New York City's women's basketball team is called what?	New York Liberty
The first college basketball championship took place in NYC in what year?	1938
What Women's National Basketball Association team is based in New York?	New York Liberty
What is the name of the collegiate basketball championship that takes place in New York?	National Invitation Tournament
In what year was the inaugural National Invitation Tournament?	1938
Along with the Brooklyn Nets, what NBA team is based in New York?	New York Knicks
Which borough of New York hosts the US Open Tennis championships?	Queens
The Wanamaker Mile is an event by which annual track and field meeting?	Millrose Games
The oldest, longest horse races in the US are located in NYC called what?	Belmont Stakes
Which years did NYC host the PGA golf championships?	1930 and 1939
The Amateur Boxing Golden Gloves are held at which location in NYC?	Madison Square Garden
In what borough is the National Tennis Center located?	Queens
What tennis Grand Slam event is held at the National Tennis Center?	United States Open Tennis Championships
How many people completed the New York Marathon in 2006?	37,866
What annual sporting competition features the Wanamaker Mile?	Millrose Games
At what venue does the Amateur Boxing Golden Gloves take place?	Madison Square Garden
A version of baseball played in city streets was nicknamed was in the 1930s?	Stickball
What street was renamed in the late 2000s to commemorate the street version of baseball?	Stickball Boulevard
In what borough is Stickball Boulevard located?	the Bronx
Which subway system is considered the largest in the world?	New York City Subway system
How many stations does the  New York City Subway system contain?	469
Which station is known as the world's biggest railroad station?	Grand Central Station
How many people rode the New York City Subway in 2014?	1.75 billion
What is the nickname given to Grand Central Terminal?	Grand Central Station
How many minutes does it take the average New Yorker to get to work?	38.4
What percentage of New Yorkers use public transportation to get to work?	54.6
What percentage of people living in Manhattan own a car?	22
In 2005, what percentage of New York residents used mass transit to get to work?	54.6%
What percentage of Americans drive cars to work?	90%
In minutes, how long does it take for the average New Yorker to get to work?	38.4
What percentage of New York households don't own an automobile?	52%
What percentage of Manhattan residents own an automobile?	22%
The busiest bus station in the world in the world is called what?	Port Authority Bus Terminal
How many buses visit the Port Authority Bus Terminal each day?	7,000
How many New Yorkers ride the bus on a daily basis?	200,000
What is New York's primary bus terminal?	Port Authority Bus Terminal
The three airports that have the most people come through them in NYC are which?	John F. Kennedy International Airport, Newark Liberty International Airport, and LaGuardia Airport
What is the second busiest airport in the New York metro area?	Newark Liberty International Airport
In 2011, what airport did the most international travelers in North America visit?	John F. Kennedy International Airport
What city is Stewart International Airport located close to?	Newburgh, New York
How many travelers visited JFK, LaGuardia and Newark Liberty in 2012?	109 million
The world's most popular ferry route is which in NYC?	The Staten Island Ferry
How many hours a day does the The Staten Island Ferry run?	24
In kilometers, how long is the Staten Island Ferry route?	8.4
Staring in State Island, in what borough does the Staten Island Ferry's route terminate?	Manhattan
How many passengers ride the Staten Island Ferry annually?	20 million
Which bridge in NYC is the busiest in the world?	The George Washington Bridge
The biggest suspension bridge in the US is what?	The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge
The bridge made with steel-wire is which in NYC?	The Brooklyn Bridge
The Brooklyn Bridge was the worlds largest until what date?	1903
What is the busiest bridge for cars in the world?	George Washington Bridge
Starting in Manhattan, the George Washington Bridge terminates in what New Jersey county?	Bergen
What is the longest suspension bridge in the United States?	Verrazano-Narrows Bridge
What style of architecture was used to design the Brooklyn Bridge?	neo-Gothic
In what year did the Brooklyn Bridge cease to be the world's longest suspension bridge?	1903
Which tunnel do 120,000 vehicles travel through a day in NYC?	The Lincoln Tunnel
The Holland Tunnel opened in what year?	1927
The Queens-Midtown Tunnel was finished in what year?	1940
Who was the first person to drive through The Queens-Midtown Tunnel?	President Franklin D. Roosevelt
How many vehicles utilize the Lincoln Tunnel daily?	120,000
What body of water is above the Lincoln Tunnel?	Hudson River
What borough is connected to New Jersey via the Lincoln Tunnel?	Manhattan
In what New Jersey city does the Holland Tunnel terminate?	Jersey City
Who drove through the Queens-Midtown Tunnel before anyone else?	Franklin D. Roosevelt
How many daily bicycle riders are there in NYC?	200,000
Each day, about how many New Yorkers bike?	200,000
About what percentage of New York City travel is done by bike or on foot?	21%
What company paid for 10,000 bikes for the city's bicycle sharing program?	Citibank
Research by what institution of higher learning showed that most New Yorkers support bicycle sharing?	Quinnipiac University
Who ranked New York as the most walkable large US city in 2015?	Walk Score
Who supplies NYC with drinkable water?	Catskill Mountains watershed
From what mountain range does New York's drinking water come from?	Catskill Mountains
How much is being spent on a water purification plant at the Croton Watershed?	US$3.2 billion
After the water purification plant at the Croton Watershed is built, how much more water will be added to the city's supply each day?	290 million gallons
What percent increase in water supply will the city see after the Croton Watershed plant is finished?	20%
In what geographical direction would a New Yorker travel to reach the Croton Watershed?	north
How many members are on the NYC city council?	51
How many terms can the mayjor of NYC serve in total?	three
What is the duration of a New York City councilperson's term?	four-year
How many councilors sit on the City Council?	51
How many terms in a row can a person serve as mayor?	three
What is the official journal of New York City?	the City Record
If someone serves three consecutive terms as mayor and wants to run again, how many years must they wait?	four
Which political party holds the majority of most office terms in NYC?	Democrats
In 2008, what percentage of voters were democrats?	67
Which US president became the first to receive over 80 percent of NYC votes?	Barack Obama
What was the last year that a republican candidate won all four boroughs of NYC?	1924
Which president won all of NYC in 1924?	Calvin Coolidge
What party are most public officials of New York members of?	Democratic Party
In November 2008, how many New Yorkers were registered as Democrats?	67%
In what year was the last presidential election when a Republican won New York City?	1924
How many boroughs did Barack Obama win in the 2012 presidential election?	five
What political party was Calvin Coolidge a member of?	Republican
As of 2012, how many physicians were working in New York City?	43,523
Where is the Cornell University/Technion-Israel Institute of Technology located?	Roosevelt Island
As of 2004, how many Nobel Prize winners had roots in New York institutions?	127
How many people are admitted to HHC institutions annually?	225,000
How many people visit HHC emergency rooms every year?	one million
How many people visit HHC clinics annually?	five million
What fraction of general hospital discharges receive treatment at HHC?	one-fifth
What fraction of emergency room visits receive treatment at HHC?	one third
Being exposed to what type of pollution has been theorized to increase aggression?	lead
The decrease in crime in New York is sometimes attributed to the decline of what street drug?	crack
Who commented on New York that "culture just seems to be in the air, like part of the weather"?	Tom Wolfe
In what library can the book New York, culture capital of the world, 1940–1965 be found?	the National Library of Australia
What institution of higher education has described New York as the cultural capital of the world?	Baruch College
Along with Latvia, the consulate of what country has called New York the cultural capital of the world?	Iceland
In what borough is the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts located?	Manhattan
In what part of Manhattan can you find Lincoln Square?	Upper West Side
In what square is the theater named after Lee Strasberg located?	Union Square
At what institution of higher education is the Tisch School of the Arts located?	New York University
In what New York park can one find performances at no cost?	Central Park
What New York thoroughfare is Museum Mile located on?	Fifth Avenue
In what borough is Museum Mile located?	Manhattan
When was the Guggenheim built?	1959
In what year was the grand opening of the Museum for African Art on 110th Street?	2012
In what part of Manhattan is the Museum Mile located?	Upper East Side
Along with New Yorkese, what is another name for the New York dialect?	Brooklynese
What sitcom did the Archie Bunker character feature in?	All in the Family
What actor performed the role of Archie Bunker?	Carroll O'Connor
What is the transliteration of the way in which New Yorkers are perceived to pronounce the name of their city?	New Yawk
What Major League Soccer franchise is based in New York?	New York City FC
What stadium does the New York City FC call home?	Yankee Stadium
In what city are the New York Red Bulls based?	Harrison, New Jersey
What famous soccer player played for the New York Cosmos?	Pelé
At what institution of higher education is James M. Shuart Stadium located?	Hofstra University
What fraction of United States rail riders call the New York City Metropolitan Area home?	two-thirds
How many rail lines are there on New York City's commuter rail network?	20
About how many stations does New York City's commuter rail network have?	250
The AirTrain has a station at what airport?	JFK International Airport
What Amtrak station in New York sees the most use?	Pennsylvania Station
In what borough is Pennsylvania Station located?	Manhattan
How many 24-hour rapid transit systems are located in New York?	three
What 24-hour rapid transit system is in Philadelphia?	PATCO Speedline
What 24-hour rapid transit system is outside the United States?	Copenhagen Metro
What does the acronym PATH stand for?	Port Authority Trans-Hudson
Along with the East Side Access project and 7 Subway Extension, what heavy-rail project is being built in New York City?	the Second Avenue Subway
About how many yellow cabs operate in New York?	12,000
Where does the aerial tramway that starts on Roosevelt Island terminate?	Manhattan Island
What industry is Broadway associated with?	the theater
What industry is Wall Street associated with?	finance
What industry is Madison Avenue associated with?	advertising
What New York street is associated with fashion?	Seventh Avenue
At what time are drivers in New York most likely to experience traffic jams?	rush hour
What geographical portion of Connecticut is linked to New York via highway?	southwestern
What part of New Jersey can be reached from New York by taking the expressway?	northern
What island is the borough of Brooklyn located on?	Long Island
Queens is located on what part of Long Island?	the west end
The borough of Staten Island is primarily located on what island?	Staten Island
What architectural style does the Throgs Neck Bridge reflect?	Structural Expressionism
The Queensboro Bridge utilized what type of construction?	cantilever
How many clean diesel and hybrid taxicabs did New York City have in 2010?	3,715
What percentage of the New York City cab fleet was clean diesel or hybrid in 2010?	28%
What percent reduction of greenhouse gases does Mayor de Blasio want to see by 2050?	80%
What is the name of a notable green office building in New York?	Hearst Tower
What legal case sought to compel the Environmental Protection Agency to regular greenhouse gases?	Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency
How long is Newtown Creek in kilometers?	6
How many cubic meters of oil is supposed to be in Newtown Creek?	110,000
What notable accidental fossil fuel discharge occurred at Newtown Creek?	the Greenpoint oil spill
What type of government does New York City have?	mayor-council
In what year did New York City adopt the mayor-council form of government?	1898
What numbered department of the Supreme Court is located in Brooklyn?	Second
In what borough is the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court located?	Manhattan
What branch of government are the administrative courts a part of?	executive
In what borough is the main courthouse of the District Court for the Southern District of New York located?	Manhattan
What federal district court has its main courthouse in Brooklyn?	the Eastern District of New York
What square is home to the US Court of International Trade?	Foley Square
What federal district court has jurisdiction over Staten Island?	the District Court for the Eastern District of New York
In what borough is the New York City Hall found?	Manhattan
Four-fifths of the ZIP codes that provide the highest amount of political contributions in the United States are located in what borough?	Manhattan
What ZIP code was responsible for the greatest amount of contributions in the 2004 presidential election for both candidates?	10021
How much money in cents does New York City receive for every dollar paid in federal taxes?	83
How much more money does the city give to the state of New York annually than it receives?	$11 billion
Each year, how much more money does New York City give to the federal government than it gets back?	$11.4 billion
What is the new name of the Sister City Program of the City of New York, Inc.?	New York City Global Partners
In what year did the Sister City Program of the City of New York, Inc. have its name changed?	2006
When did To Kill a Mockingbird first get circulated?	1960
What prize did To Kill a Mockingbird win?	Pulitzer Prize
Who wrote To Kill a Mockingbird?	Harper Lee
Who wrote the novel To Kill a Mockingbird?	Harper Lee
What year was To Kill a Mockingbird first published?	1960
Whom did Lee base the characters in To Kill a Mockingbird on?	her family and neighbors
To Kill a Mockingbird is widely read in which countries schools?	United States
What genre of book is To Kill a Mockingbird?	Southern Gothic novel
Some of the central themes of the book are what exactly?	racial injustice and the destruction of innocence
Which region of America was the novel set in?	Deep South
What has caused  the use of the novel in classrooms to be challenged?	racial epithets
Who gathered impressions of To Kill a Mockingbird from other authors and famous people?	Mary McDonough Murphy
In which year did British librarians rank To Kill a Mockingbird ahead of the Bible?	2006
When was To Kill a Mockingbird made into a movie?	1962
When did a play for the book begin to perform every year in Monroeville, Alabama?	1990
Who was the director of the adaptation of the movie?	Robert Mulligan
British librarians in 2006 ranked the book ahead of what famous volume?	Bible
Who wrote the screenplay for the 1962 film?	Horton Foote
Who directed the 1962 film?	Robert Mulligan
What is Harper Lee's hometown?	Monroeville, Alabama
When did Harper Lee pass away?	February 2016
What is the only other work Harper Lee published?	Go Set a Watchman
What is the name of Lee's second published work?	Go Set a Watchman
When was the second book published?	July 14, 2015
When did Lee die?	February 2016
Who did Harper Lee become childhood friends with?	Truman Capote
What year did Harper Lee pack up to go live in New York City?	1950
What job did Harper Lee start in New York City?	reservation clerk
Which state did Harper Lee spend her childhood?	Alabama
What year was Harper Lee born?	1926
Who was the famous writer Lee became close friends with?	Truman Capote
Where did Lee attend college?	Huntingdon College
Where did Lee attend law school?	University of Alabama
What publishing company bought To Kill a Mockingbird?	J. B. Lippincott
The first draft of To Kill a Mockingbird was named what?	Go Set a Watchman
Who was the editor who got their hands on the first draft of To Kill a Mockingbird?	Tay Hohoff
What was the name of  the editor who helped Lee finish her book?	Therese von Hohoff Torrey
What ailment did Harper Lee's mother suffer from?	mental illness
What profession did Harper Lee's father hold?	lawyer
Lee modeled the character Atticus after what laywer?	Her father
What date did To Kill a Mockingbird begin to circulate?	July 11, 1960
How long did Lee spend writing the book?	over two and a half years
What publication's partial reprinting gave the book wide public exposure?	Reader's Digest Condensed Books
Where is the setting for To Kill a Mockingbird?	Maycomb, Alabama
How many years does the story of To Kill a Mockingbird take place?	three
How many children does the protagonist, Atticus Finch, have?	two
Atticus Finch's children make friends with whom during the story?	Dill
What is the name of the town the story takes place in?	Maycomb, Alabama
In what historical era does the book take place?	the Great Depression
Who is the main character of the book?	Jean Louise Finch (Scout)
What was the name of the woman who was allegedly raped in the book?	Mayella Ewell
What is the name of Atticus' client in the rape trial?	Tom Robinson
Who stopped the mob by shaming them?	Scout, Jem, and Dill
What are the names of Atticus Finch's children in the book?	Jem and Scout
Where do Jem, Scout, and Dill observe the trial of Tom Robinson?	balcony
Where do the three children watch the trial?	the colored balcony
What happens to Tom when he attempts to escape prison?	shot and killed
Who did Bob Ewell attack during the story?	Jem and Scout
What event did Jem and Scout attend right before they were attacked at night?	Halloween pageant
Who saved Jem and Scout from Bob Ewell?	Boo Radley
Who attacked Scout and Jem?	Bob Ewell
Who rescued Scout and Jem?	Boo Radley
What was the name of the police officer who discovered Bob Ewell's body?	Sheriff Tate
According to Sheriff Tate's story, how did Ewell die?	fell on his own knife
Harper Lee has stated that To Kill a Mockingbird is not what genre of book?	autobiography
What year did Harper Lee's father represent two black men accused of murder?	1919
At what age did Harper Lee's mother die?	25
What titles did Lee's father maintain at the local newspaper?	editor and publisher
Where did Truman Capote live in relation to Lee?	next door
What year did Lee and Capote go to Kansas together?	1960
Murders were the base for which story that Capote wrote?	In Cold Blood
Who was the character Dill modeled after?	Truman Capote
What did Lee and Capote write their childhood stories on?	old Underwood typewriter
What term did Capote use to describe Lee and himself?	apart people
At what age was Lee when a white woman accused a black guy of rape?	10
What was the name of the black man who was accused of rape in Lee's town when she was 10?	Walter Lett
What was the name of the black teenager that Tom Robinson was supposedly based on?	Emmett Till
Emmett Till's death sparked which political movement in the '50s?	Civil Rights Movement
What purpose did Tom Robinson's trial serve in the book?	display Southern prejudices
Who's death was a catalyst for the Civil Rights Movement?	Emmett Till
What two forms of humor are most found in To Kill a Mockingbird?	Satire and irony
 Lee uses which writing styles to express humor in a tragic story?	parody, satire, and irony
Where does Jem trap a fellow peer of school in the story?	church basement
What is the name of the maid who works in the Finch's household?	Calpurnia
How does Scout respond to the audience?	distracted and embarrassed
What saves Scout's life?	ham costume
What genre of book is To Kill a Mockingbird typically called?	Southern Gothic and coming-of-age or Bildungsroman novel
What term did Lee use to describe the town's courthouse?	Gothic
Who does Scout revere above everyone else?	Atticus
What was the name of the neighbor that Jem speaks too after Tom Robinson's trial?	Miss Maudie
What des Jem struggle to understand?	separations of race and class
When did the Montgomery Bus Boycott take place?	1955
Many reviewers consider the second part of the book to be about what issue?	race relations
The main jurors in Tom Robinson's trial were all which race?	white
How did Tom Robinson die in the novel?	shot seventeen times
At the time of the novel's setting, what punishment was often received by black males for percieved sexual contact with a white woman?	death
Who comprised Tom's jury?	poor white farmers
How many times was Tom shot?	seventeen
Atticus is tasked with killing what animal in the novel?	a rabid dog
What is Atticus shooting the rabid dog symbolic of?	fight against the town's racism
Who does the cooking at the Finch's house?	Calpurnia
Who is Atticus Finch's sibling?	Aunt Alexandra
Who does Scout Tease and humiliate at their house?	Walter Cunningham
Which author did Lee aspire to be like?	Jane Austen
Both authors valued what over social standing?	individual worth
Are the Ewell's considered rich or poor?	poor
What two factors did Lee demonstrate intensified prejudice?	gender and class
The children's non-judgmental attitude gave them a greater understanding of what?	people's motives and behavior
Mrs. Dubose suffers from an addiction to what?	morphine
Who is the moral center of the novel?	Atticus
The novel explores various forms of what trait?	courage
Who has written the only biography of Harper Lee?	Charles Shields
Who wrote the only book length- biography of Harper Lee?	Charles Shields
According to Shields, which of the books lessons are fundamental and universal?	human dignity and respect for others
Who does Scout think could be lonelier than Boo Radley?	Mayella Ewell
Who are the main female role models for Scout during the story?	Calpurnia and Miss Maudie
Who are Scout's two primary female models?	Calpurnia and Miss Maudie
Who chastis Scout for the way she dresse and accuses her of ruining her family name?	Mrs. Dubose
Tomboy Scout grows up tto become what?	feminist
In the book, which character was expected of molesting their child?	Bob Ewell
Who was the only non-abusive father mentioned?	Atticus
Which character is chastised in the book for marrying a black woman?	Dolphus Raymond
Who does Charles Lamb speculate were once children?	Lawyers
What is another name for Scout's pink cotton penitentiary?	frilly clothes
Which animal serves as a symbol throughout the book?	Songbirds
Harper Lee's mother's maiden name was what?	Finch
Which bird does Atticus Finch say is a "sin to kill?"	mockingbird
According to Atticus, which bird is it a sin to shoot?	mockingbird
According to Miss Maudie, which bird is never harmful?	mockingbird
Symbolically, killing a mockingbird is killing what according to Edwin Bruell?	that which is innocent and harmless
Reader's Digest included To Kill a Mockingbird in what program of theirs?	Book of the Month Club
The book's availablity increased through inclusion in what book service?	Book of the Month Club
After one year when To Kill a Mockingbird first came out, how many languages has it been printed in?	ten
Up til today, how many languages has To Kill a Mockingbird been printed in?	40
How many copies has To Kill a Mockingbird sold since it first came out?	30 million
How many copies of the book have been sold?	more than 30 million
How many languages has the book been translated into?	more than 40
Public figure's impressions of the novel were formed into a book called what?	Scout, Atticus, and Boo
Who was Harper Lee's sister?	Alice Lee
What book compiled Adults'  impressions and their impressions as children about the novel?	Scout, Atticus, and Boo
Atticus Finch's integrity has become a model for which job?	lawyer
Atticus Finch is a model of what for legal professionals?	integrity
What year was a statue of Atticus build in Alabama?	1997
Harper Lee was given a membership to what in 2008?	Alabama State Bar
What did the Alabama State Bar bestow on Lee in 2008?	honorary special membership
To Kill a Mockingbird was first studied in American schools in what year?	1963
The American Library Associated ranked To Kill a Mockingbird where on its most frequently challenged books of 2000-2009?	21
In what year did the book become a subject of classroom study?	1963
According to The American Library Association, what rank did the book have among the most frequently challenged books from 2000 to 2009?	21
When was the first major controversy that surfaced from the book?	1966
What event in the novel was heavily criticized for being a plot device?	rape
In letters to local newspapers, what subplot in the book received the most complaints?	Mayella Ewell's attraction to Tom Robinson
According to the National Education Association, what was the only book to receive more complaints in 1968?	Little Black Sambo
What movement in the '60s did the novel help spark?	civil rights movement
Which book was credited with sparking the US Civil War?	Uncle Tom's Cabin
What other book did Mark Childress compare it to?	Uncle Tom's Cabin
Who was Truman Capote's father?	Archulus Persons
Who was speculated to have wrote the book instead of Harper Lee?	Truman Capote
What was the name of Harper Lee's sister?	Alice
Who was rumored to have written the book instead of Lee?	Truman Capote
Lee's notes to whom help disclaim this rumor?	her editor
Which year did To Kill a Mockingbird win the Pulitzer Prize?	1961
How many weeks did To Kill a Mockingbird remain on the bestsellers list when it won the Pulitzer Prize?	41
Paperback of the Year award from Bestsellers magazine was awarded when?	1962
When did Harper Lee begin refusing interviews and questions about the book?	1964
What major award did the book receive in 1961?	the Pulitzer Prize
In what year did Lee stop giving interviews about the book?	1964
Which year was Lee awarded an induction into the Alabama Academy of Honor?	2001
In 2004, the novel as been picked by how many communities for citywide reading programs more than any other book?	25
In 2001, what city's mayor picked To Kill a Mockingbird as their favorite book?	Chicago
Which city's mayor initiated a reading program with the book?	Chicago
By 2004, how many communities were using the book as part of their reading programs?	25
Which school granted Lee an honory doctorate in 2006?	University of Notre Dame
Which president of the US awarded Lee the Presidential Medal of Freedom?	George W. Bush
When did Lee receive a  Presidential Medal of Freedom?	2007
What university awarded Lee an honorary doctorate in 2006?	Notre Dame
In 2007, which president awarded Lee the Presidential Medal of Freedom?	George W. Bush
A movie adaptation of the book was released in what year?	1962
Who played Atticus Finch in the 1962 movie of the same title?	Gregory Peck
Which actor received An Oscar for his role of Atticus Finch in the 1962 movie of the book?	Gregory Peck
What item did Lee give the actor Gregory Peck after portraying Atticus Finch?	father's pocketwatch
Which one of Gregory Peck's relatives was named after Harper Lee?	grandson
What personal effect did Lee give to Peck?	her father's pocketwatch
Which one of Peck's relatives was named Harper in honor of Lee?	grandson
When did Lee randomly show up at the Los Angeles  Public Library?	May 2005
What did Peck's widow call Lee?	a national treasure
Who turned the novel into a play?	Christopher Sergel
When was the play for To Kill a Mockingbird first performed?	1990
What town labeled itself "The Literary Capital of Alabama"?	Monroeville
Who makes up the cast of the annual play based on the book performed in Monroeville?	townspeople
During the courtroom scene, what happens to the audience?	racially segregated
What country did Sergel's play tour around in and perform in 2006?	the UK
The play was the opening act for the starting of the 2013 season at which location?	Regent's Park Open Air Theatre
Who played Atticus Finch in the UK theater productions of the film in 2006 and 2011?	Duncan Preston
When was Go Set a Watchman introduced to the public?	July 14, 2015
Go Set a Watchman was finished in what year?	1957
How many years after To Kill a Mockingbird is the setting of Go Set A Watchman?	20
Who was Harper Lee's lawyer?	Tonja Carter
What is the earlier draft of the book titled?	Go Set a Watchman
What year was Watchman completed?	1957
How many years after Mockingbird was Watchman set?	20
What two serious moral issues are dealt with in the novel?	rape and racial inequality
Who is the protagonist of the novel?	Atticus Finch
What is Lee's strongest style of writing?	narration
What narrative technique does Lee use to combine the adult's perspective with the child's observations??	flashback
According to Lee, her book simply expressed a Christian code of honor and conduct inherit to whom?	all Southerners
Besides the children's fascination with Boo, the first part of the book was concerned about their feelings for what?	the neighborhood
Lee's detailed explanations of the characters' behaviors caused one writer to catagorize the book as what?	Southern romantic regionalism
Scout defined people doing the best they could with what they had as who?	fine folks
What drives the plot of the book more than the characters?	The South itself
Who is the main example of an innocent destroyed in the novel?	Tom Robinson
What  does Scout see symbollically as a mockingbird?	Boo Radley
According to Atticus, most people are how when you truly view them?	real nice
Reviewer R. A. Dave classified the novel how?	classical tragedy
What newspaper wrote that the novel has strong contemporary national significance?	The Chicago Sunday Tribune
Which reviewer called the book melodramatic and contrived?	Granville Hicks
Which Southern writer deemed it a child's book?	Flannery O'Connor
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie vompared Lee to whom?	William Faulkner
Rosemary  Goring connected Lee to whom?	Jane Austen
Who criticized Lee in The Wall Street Journal?	Allen Barra
Who wrote that the book forces readers to question issues without resolving them?	Akin Ajayi
Which character has some critics deemed a variation of a contented slave?	Calpurnia
According to one consultant, which group found the book demoralizing?	black students
Michael Lund criticized the novel for demonizing whom?	poor rural "white trash"
According to Diane McWhorter, every child in the South had to face what?	the harsh reality of inequality
McWhorter wrote that the existance of the book was what?	an act of protest
How do the citizens of Monroeville quote lines of the book?	like Scripture
What do the Monroeville townspeople call tourists to their town?	Mockingbird groupies
Where does solar energy come from?	the Sun
What kind of energy consists of the light and heat provided by the Sun?	Solar energy
What technologies are used to harness solar energy from the sun?	solar heating, photovoltaics, solar thermal energy, solar architecture and artificial photosynthesis
What is solar energy?	radiant light and heat from the Sun
How many terawatts of solar radiation does the Earth receive?	174,000
What percentage of solar radiation is reflected back by the atmosphere?	30%
The areas that people live in typically receive what range of kWh/m2 per day?	3.5 to 7.0
How many terrawatts of radiation does the earth receive?	174,000
How much of the solar radiation is reflected back into space?	Approximately 30%
What are the insolation levels of most populated areas?	150 to 300 watts per square meter or 3.5 to 7.0 kWh/m2 per day
Where is the solar radiation not reflected back to space absorbed?	clouds, oceans and land masses
The Earth's oceans cover what percentage of the globe?	71
What is the average temperature of the Earth's surface in Celsius?	14
What is the process by which green plants convert solar energy to stored energy?	photosynthesis
How much of the earth is covered by oceans?	about 71%
What is the cause of atmospheric circulation?	Warm air containing evaporated water from the oceans rises
How does the water vapor that rises in warm air turn into clouds?	When the air reaches a high altitude, where the temperature is low, water vapor condenses into clouds
What creates wind, cyclones and anti-cyclones?	The latent heat of water condensation amplifies convection
What is the process in which plants convert solar energy into stored energy called?	photosynthesis
Each year the Earth absorbs how much solar energy in exajoules?	3,850,000
In 2002, the Sun provided more energy in one hour than humans used in what span of time?	one year
How much energy in exajoules does photosynthesis capture each year?	3,000
Twice the amount of energy obtainable by all the non-renewable sources  on Earth can be provided by the Sun in what span of time?	one year
What is the amount of solar energy absorbed by the earth?	approximately 3,850,000 exajoules (EJ) per year
How much solar energy is captured by photosynthesis?	approximately 3,000 EJ per year
The amount of solar energy per year is twice as much as the energy that will ever be produced from what resources?	coal, oil, natural gas, and mined uranium combined
Where do the majority of renewable energies derive their energy from?	the Sun
How are solar technologies defined?	passive or active
What is one way that characterizes solar technologies as passive or active?	depending on the way they capture, convert and distribute sunlight
Which renewable energies do not acquire their energy from the sun?	geothermal and tidal
How do renewable energies acquire energy from the sun?	direct or indirect
Are supply side solar technologies generally active or passive?	Active
Are demand side solar technologies generally active or passive?	Passive
What is an active solar technique used to generate energy?	solar thermal collectors
What is an active solar technique used to generate energy?	designing spaces that naturally circulate air
What does an active solar technique do?	increase the supply of energy
What does a passive solar technique do?	reduce the need for alternate resources
What was the name of the inventor who built a solar engine in 1897?	Frank Shuman
In what year was the Sun Power Company formed?	1908
Shuman patented his solar engine system in what year?	1912
Who is Frank Shuman?	a U.S. inventor, engineer and solar energy pioneer
In what year did solar engine build his solar engine?	1897
What was the solar engine used to power?	steam engine
In what year was the Sun Power Company established?	1908
In what year did Frank Shuman patent his solar engine?	1912
Where did Shuman build the world's first solar thermal power station?	Maadi, Egypt
How many liters of water per minute did Shuman's engine pump in litres?	22,000
In what decade were Shuman's ideas about solar energy revived?	the 1970s
Where was the first solar thermal power plant built?	Maadi, Egypt
What was used to power the plants engine?	parabolic troughs
From what river did the engine pump water?	Nile River
What slowed down the growth of solar energy?	the outbreak of World War I and the discovery of cheap oil
When was the interest in solar energy restored?	the 1970s
According to Shuman, up to what percentage of domestic hot water can be  provided by solar heating systems?	70
What do Solar hot water systems use to heat water?	sunlight
How much hot water can be produced by solar heating systems in low geographical latitudes?	60 to 70% of the domestic hot water
What is a common type of solar water heater?	evacuated tube collectors
What type of solar water heater is used to heat pools?	unglazed plastic collectors
What was the total capacity of solar hot water systems in 2007 in gigawatts?	154
Over 90% of homes use solar hot water systems in which two countries?	Israel and Cyprus
What is the capacity of a solar hot water system?	approximately 154 thermal gigawatt
What country is the leader in the implementation of solar powered hot water systems?	China
What percentage of households use solar hot water systems in Israel and Cyprus?	over 90%
In what countries is the use to solar hot water used mainly for w=swimming pools?	United States, Canada and Australia
What percentage of energy in commercial buildings comes from HVAC systems?	50
How much energy does an HVAC system use in commercial locations?	30% (4.65 EJ/yr)
How much energy does an HVAC system use in residential locations?	50% (10.1 EJ/yr)
What can be used to balance out a portion of the energy used by HVAC systems?	Solar heating, cooling and ventilation technologies
Materials that can be used to store heat are known as what kind of mass?	Thermal
What is thermal mass?	any material that can be used to store heat
What are typical thermal mass material?	stone, cement and water
How is thermal mass used to keep buildings cool?	by absorbing solar energy during the day and radiating stored heat to the cooler atmosphere at night
What is a something that determines the size of thermal mass?	climates
What does thermal mass reduce the need for?	auxiliary heating and cooling equipment
What kind of system is a solar chimney?	passive solar ventilation
What is a solar chimney?	a passive solar ventilation system
What is a solar chimney made of?	a vertical shaft connecting the interior and exterior of a building
How can the performance of a solar chimney be improved?	by using glazing and thermal mass materials in a way that mimics greenhouses
The placement of deciduous trees on the Equator facing side of a building can have a negative effect on solar availability in which season?	winter
What is something that is used to control solar heating and cooling?	trees and plants
How much solar radiation is blocked by leafless trees?	1/3 to 1/2
Why should trees not be planted on the side of a building facing the equator?	they will interfere with winter solar availability
What side of a building should trees be planted without greatly affecting solar gain in the winter?	east and west
Horace de Saussure built the first box cooker in what year?	1767
Reflector cookers can reach temperatures in Celsius of up to what?	315
What are solar cookers used for?	cooking, drying and pasteurization
What are the 3 main categories of solar cookers?	box cookers, panel cookers and reflector cookers
Who created the box cooker?	Horace de Saussure
What is the typical temperature range for a box cooker?	90–150 °C (194–302 °F)
What do reflector cookers require to function?	direct light
The Solar Total Energy Project had a field of how many parabolic dishes?	114
Are transpired collectors more or less cost-effective than glazed collection systems?	more
What are some examples of solar concentrating technologies?	parabolic dish, trough and Scheffler reflectors
What was the first commercial solar concentrating system?	Solar Total Energy Project (STEP) in Shenandoah, Georgia, USA
What is one of the oldest uses of solar energy?	use of evaporation ponds to obtain salt from sea water
What are some items used to dry clothes without the use of electricity?	Clothes lines, clotheshorses, and clothes racks
What are Unglazed transpired collectors?	perforated sun-facing walls used for preheating ventilation air
In what year was a large scale solar distillation project constructed in Las Salinas?	1872
What is used to make saline or brackish water drinkable?	Solar distillation
By who was the first record of solar distillation done by?	16th-century Arab alchemists
When was the first large solar distillation plant created?	1872
How much water was produced by the plant?	22,700 L (5,000 imp gal; 6,000 US gal) per day
What is an example of a solar distillation design?	single-slope
Solar water disinfection is recommended by which organization?	the World Health Organization
How long should the plastic bottles filled with water be exposed to sunlight during Solar water disinfection?	a minimum of six hours to two days during fully overcast conditions
What does the World Health Organization say about Solar water disinfection?	a viable method for household water treatment and safe storage
How many people use Solar water disinfection to disinfect their drinking water?	Over two million people in developing countries
What is a possible negative effect of algae in water stabilization ponds?	toxic chemicals
For what reason would solar energy be used in a water stabilisation pond?	to treat waste water without chemicals or electricity
What is a reason why the water from a water stabilisation pond may be unusable?	algae may produce toxic chemicals
By what year is solar power expected to become the world's greatest source of electricity?	2050
When is solar power is foreseen to become the largest source of electricity?	2050
The largest solar power plant in the world is located in what desert?	the Mojave Desert
Less than 1% of the world's total grid electricity was generated by solar energy in what year?	2013
What is the largest solar power plant in the world?	354 MW SEGS CSP
Where is the largest solar power plant in the world located?	Mojave Desert of California
What are the largest photovoltaic solar power plants?	The 250 MW Agua Caliente Solar Project, in the United States, and the 221 MW Charanka Solar Park in India
In the 1880s, who constructed the first solar cell?	Charles Fritts
In what year was the crystalline silicon solar cell constructed?	1954
What has happened to photovoltaic in the past 20 years?	evolved from a pure niche market of small scale applications towards becoming a mainstream electricity source
What is a solar cell?	a device that converts light directly into electricity
Who created the first solar cell?	Charles Fritts
Who created the first solar cell using silver selenide in place of copper oxide?	Dr Bruno Lange
Who created the crystalline silicon solar cell?	Gerald Pearson, Calvin Fuller and Daryl Chapin
In all the different CSP systems, concentrated sunlight is used to heat what?	a working fluid
What do Concentrating Solar Power systems use?	lenses or mirrors and tracking systems
What is the heat generated from a Concentrating Solar Power system used for?	a heat source for a conventional power plant
What is one of the most developed Concentrating Solar Power technologies?	the Stirling dish
What do Concentrating Solar Power technologies have in common?	a working fluid is heated by the concentrated sunlight
Socrate's what is a classic example of passive solar design?	Megaron House
What is a common feature of passive solar architecture?	orientation relative to the Sun
What is produced when the features of passive solar architecture are customized to the environment?	well-lit spaces that stay in a comfortable temperature range
What is an example of passive solar design?	Socrates' Megaron House
What kind of equipment can improve system performance?	pumps, fans and switchable windows
UHI is an abbreviation of what?	Urban heat islands
A program in Los Angeles believes that with $1 billion, city temperatures could be reduced by approximately how many degrees in Celsius?	3
What are the metropolitan areas with higher temperatures than the surrounding areas called?	Urban heat islands
What materials absorb sunlight and create higher temperatures than natural materials?	asphalt and concrete
What is a way to reduce the high temperatures created in urban heat islands?	paint buildings and roads white and plant trees
During the Little Ice Age, what did English and French farmers use to increase collection of solar energy?	fruit walls
Vinters have adopted solar technology to do what?	power grape presses
Why do agriculture and horticulture seek to make the most use of the solar energy captured?	to optimize the productivity of plants
What are some techniques used to improve crop production?	timed planting cycles, tailored row orientation, staggered heights between rows and the mixing of plant varieties
What did French and English farmers do during the Little Ice Age to gain more solar energy?	employed fruit walls
What was the purpose of the fruit walls built by French and English farmers?	acted as thermal masses and accelerated ripening by keeping plants warm
When were the first greenhouses used?	Roman times
In what century were the first modern greenhouses constructed?	the 16th
What do greenhouses do with solar energy?	convert solar light to heat
What is one purpose of a greenhouse?	enabling year-round production and the growth (in enclosed environments) of specialty crops
What was one of the first uses of a greenhouse?	produce cucumbers year-round for the Roman emperor Tiberius
Where were the first modern greenhouses built?	Europe
What is the name of the solar powered car race held every two years?	The World Solar Challenge
What was the winner of the World Solar Challenge's average speed in 2007 in km/h?	90.87
What is The World Solar Challenge?	a biannual solar-powered car race
When was The World Solar Challenge started?	1987
What was the average speed of a winning solar powered car in 1987?	67 kilometres per hour (42 mph)
What was the average speed of a winning solar powered car by 2007?	90.87 kilometres per hour (56.46 mph)
What are some other similar car races that use solar powered vehicles?	The North American Solar Challenge and the planned South African Solar Challenge
The first practical solar boat was constructed in what year?	1975
When was the first solar powered boat made?	1975
Who first crossed the Pacific ocean using a solar powered boat?	Kenichi Horie
What was the name of the first solar powered boat that crossed the Atlantic ocean?	the sun21 catamaran
What altitude did the Solar Riser reach in feet?	40
What is the name of the aircraft circling the globe in 2015 via solar power?	Solar Impulse
When was the first unmanned flight by a solar powered plane made?	1974
When was the first solar powered manned flight made?	29 April 1979
When did the Solar Challenger cross the English Channel?	July 1981
Where did Eric Scott Raymond fly using a solar powered plane in 1990?	California to North Carolina
How long is the solar powered plane Solar Impulse able to remain in the air?	36 hours
What is a possible alternative to making carbon-based fuels from reduction of carbon dioxide?	hydrogen production from protons
What process converts solar energy into storable and transportable fuels?	Solar chemical processes
What solar process can be used to produce different fuels?	artificial photosynthesis
What is the name of the process under development at the Weizmann Institute?	The Solzinc process
The Solznic process produces what?	pure zinc
What has been a main area of solar chemical research since the 1970s?	Hydrogen production technologies
What is one of the thermochemical processes that has been explored besides electrolysis?	uses concentrators to split water into oxygen and hydrogen at high temperatures
What is the name of the process being developed by the Weizmann Institute?	Solzinc process
In what form do thermal mass systems store solar energy?	heat
What is the system called that can store solar energy in the form of heat?	Thermal mass systems
What are some of the materials used in thermal storage systems?	water, earth and stone
What is something that can be accomplished by a thermal mass system?	reduce overall heating and cooling requirements
Paraffin wax is an example of what kind of storage media?	thermal
The first Glauber's salt heating system was first used where?	The "Dover House"
What are some examples of phase change materials?	paraffin wax and Glauber's salt
What are the approximate temperatures that can be delivered by phase change materials?	64 °C or 147 °F
What was the name of the heating system that first used Glauber's salt?	Dover House
Why are salts good  for thermal storage?	they are low-cost, have a high specific heat capacity and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems
How much energy was the Solar Two able to store using salts?	1.44 terajoules (400,000 kWh)
Where do off-grid PV systems store excess electricity?	rechargeable batteries
What do off-grid PV systems use to store excess electricity?	rechargeable batteries
What are the programs that gives credit to households for delivering electricity to the grid called?	Net metering programs
How is the credit to households accomplished?	by 'rolling back' the meter whenever the home produces more electricity than it consumes
Why is a second meter usually unnecessary to monitor electricity use?	Most standard meters accurately measure in both directions
When water is released due to high demand, the pump become swhat?	a hydroelectric power generator
Pumped-storage hydroelectricity stores energy in what form?	water pumped when energy is available from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher elevation one
How is the energy stored by pumped-storage hydroelectricity recovered?	by releasing the water, with the pump becoming a hydroelectric power generator
The oil embargo in what year was a contributing factor to the reorganization of energy policies?	1973
What brought attention to solar technologies in the 1970s?	The 1973 oil embargo and 1979 energy crisis
What are the names of some of the incentive programs used to promote solar technology?	the Federal Photovoltaic Utilization Program in the US and the Sunshine Program in Japan
What is the name of the solar energy research facility in the US?	SERI, now NREL
What is the name of the solar energy research facility in Japan?	NEDO
What is the name of the solar energy research facility in Germany?	Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE
The solar water heaters introduced in the US in the 1890s saw growth until what time period?	the 1920s
Since 1999, what average rate has the solar water heating sector progressed at?	20% per year
When did the use of solar water heaters in the US first begin?	in the 1890s
Why did interest in solar water heating decrease in the 1980s?	falling petroleum prices
Growth of solar water heating development has averaged how much per year since 1999	20%
What was the estimated capacity of solar water heating and cooling in 2007?	154 GW
Which organization believes that solar energy can solve some of our most pressing issues?	The International Energy Agency
Who said that solar energy can help solve some of the most urgent problems in the world?	The International Energy Agency
ISO 9050 relates to standards for what?	glass in building
ISO 10217 relates to standards for what?	materials used in solar water heaters
What is the name of the standard related to glass in building?	ISO 9050
What is the name of the standard related to the materials used in solar water heaters?	ISO 10217
What are the technologies used to capture solar energy characterized as?	passive solar or active solar
What are some active solar techniques used to harness solar energy?	photovoltaic systems, concentrated solar power and solar water heating
What is an example of a passive solar technique?	orienting a building to the Sun
What was the total worldwide energy consumption in 2012?	559.8 EJ
What is solar energy's yearly potential?	1,575–49,837 exajoules (EJ)
What makes solar energy an appealing source of electricity>	The large magnitude of solar energy available
Who estimated the annual potential of solar energy in 2000?	The United Nations Development Programme
How will solar energy increase energy security?	through reliance on an indigenous, inexhaustible and mostly import-independent resource
What costs will solar energy lower?	the costs of mitigating global warming
What should the cost of incentives for producing solar energy be considered?	learning investments
What effect will solar energy have on the price of fossil fuels?	keep fossil fuel prices lower than otherwise
Why does the amount of usable solar energy differ from the amount near the planets surface?	geography, time variation, cloud cover, and the land available to humans
Why does geography have an effect of the amount of solar energy available?	areas that are closer to the equator have a greater amount of solar radiation
What is the process called that can increase solar energy in areas further away from the earth's equator?	photovoltaics
Why does time have an effect of the amount of available solar energy?	during the nighttime there is little solar radiation on the surface of the Earth for solar panels to absorb
What effect does cloud coverage have on the amount of solar energy available?	clouds block incoming light from the sun and reduce the light available for solar cells
Why does land availability have an effect on solar energy?	solar panels can only be set up on land that is unowned and suitable for solar panels
Why are roofs a good place for solar panels?	many people have discovered that they can collect energy directly from their homes this way
What factors were taken into account in the estimate published in 2000 on solar energy?	insolation, cloud cover, and the land that is usable by humans
What was the total potential of solar energy found in the estimate?	1,575–49,837 EJ per year
What is solar power?	conversion of sunlight into electricity
How is sunlight converted into electricity?	either directly using photovoltaics (PV), or indirectly using concentrated solar power (CSP)
What does a concentrated solar power system use?	lenses or mirrors and tracking systems
What is the purpose of a concentrated solar power system?	focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam
What method does the photovoltaics system use to turn light into electricity?	photoelectric effect
What has influenced the design since the beginning of architectural history?	Sunlight
Who first utilized solar architecture?	Greeks and Chinese
In which direction were the buildings built by the Greeks and Chinese facing?	toward the south
What is a solar balloon?	a black balloon that is filled with ordinary air
What happens when sunlight shines on a solar balloon?	the air inside is heated and expands causing an upward buoyancy force
What is the use of solar balloons typically limited to?	the toy market
Why is the use of solar balloons typically limited to the toy market?	the surface-area to payload-weight ratio is relatively high
Why was solar technology developed in the 1860s?	driven by an expectation that coal would soon become scarce
What slowed the development of solar technologies in the early 20th century?	increasing availability, economy, and utility of coal and petroleum
According to a report in 2011, by what year could solar energy provide a third of the world's energy?	2060
What could the sun's energy do to help limit climate change?	could play a key role in de-carbonizing the global economy alongside improvements in energy efficiency and imposing costs on greenhouse gas emitters
What are some of the empires and dynasties that have also ruled over this land?	Achaemenid Empire, Sassanian Empire, Hephthalite Empire, Samanid Empire, Mongol Empire, Timurid dynasty, and the Russian Empire
What other culutres has ruled the area?	Oxus civilization, Andronovo culture, Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism
What was the territory of Tajikistan during the Neolithic and the Bronze Age?	city of Sarazm
When did Tajikistan become an independent nation?	1991
What years did the civil war take place?	1992 to 1997
What were some of the different kindoms and people that called Tajikistan home?	Oxus civilization, Andronovo culture, Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism
What are some of the empires and dynasties that ruled this lane?	the Achaemenid Empire, Sassanian Empire, Hephthalite Empire, Samanid Empire, Mongol Empire, Timurid dynasty, and the Russian Empire
What year did Tajikistan become an independant nation?	1991
What years did the war last through?	1992 to 1997
When did Tajiks start being part of the Soviet Army?	1939
How many Tajik troops fought against Germany, Finland and Japan during WWII?	260,000 Tajik
What percent of Tajiks were killed during the war?	Between 60,000(4%) and 120,000(8%)
What was not developing as fast as other Soviet Republics?	living conditions, education and industry
How were the different factions distinguished from eachother?	by clan loyalties
What did the ceasefire guaranteed?	30% of ministerial positions would go to the opposition
Who came into power in 1992?	Emomali Rahmon
Why did more than half a million people flee?	because of persecution, increased poverty and better economic opportunities
Who was stationed along the boarder?	Russian border troops
Where have French Troops been stationed since September 11, 2001?	at the Dushanbe Airport
Where is the main base for the Tajikistan air force?	t located 15 km southwest of Dushanbe
Why do US troops visit Tajikistan every so often?	to conduct joint training missions of up to several weeks duration.
How many solider were killed in September when Islamic militants escaped?	28 Tajik soldiers
When did Russia say they will be sending more troops to Tajikistan?	2015
When did the military operation end in Rasht Valley?	November 2010
Why was there concerns in 2010?	that Islamic militarism in the east of the country was on the rise following the escape of 25 militants from a Tajik prison in August
What type of government does Tajikistan have?	a republic
Who is the prime minister of Tajikistan?	Kokhir Rasulzoda
Who are the Deputy Prime Ministers?	Murodali Alimardon and Ruqiya Qurbanova
When was Emomalii Rahmon elected president?	November 1994
What kind of system is a dominant-party system?	where the People's Democratic Party of Tajikistan routinely has a vast majority in Parliament
Even though Tajikistan has freedom of the press, what is the problem with it?	independent press outlets remain restricted
What is not tolerated by the government in respect to media?	no public criticism of the regime is tolerated
What is not covered by local media?	all direct protest is severely suppressed
What access is blocked?	access is blocked to local and foreign websites including avesta.tj, Tjknews.com, ferghana.ru, centrasia.ru
What is the smalled nation in the Central Asia area?	Tajikistan
What mountian range runs through Tajikistan?	the Pamir range
Where is Dushanbe located?	on the southern slopes above the Kofarnihon valley
Where exactly is Tajikistan?	between latitudes 36° and 41° N (a small area is north of 41°), and longitudes 67° and 75° E (a small area is east of 75°)
What area is under sea level?	in the north (part of the Fergana Valley), and in the southern Kofarnihon and Vakhsh river valleys
Where did the word Tajik come from?	the name of a pre-Islamic (before the seventh century A.D.) tribe
What does Tajikistan mean?	"Land of the Tajiks"
What does the suffix -stan mean?	"place of" or "country"
Why is it hard to find the origin of the word Tajik?	because the term is "embroiled in twentieth-century political disputes about whether Turkic or Iranian peoples were the original inhabitants of Central Asia."
When was the region under Tibetan empire and the CHinese?	650–680
Who took control of the regin in 710?	Umayyads
Who restored Persian control of the region?	The Samanid Empire,
What was the name of the region when it was the cultural center of Iran?	Khorasan
When was the region under Tibetan empire and the CHinese?	650–680
Who took control of the regin in 710?	Umayyads
When was the region under Tibetan empire and the CHinese?	650–680
Who restored Persian control of the region?	The Samanid Empire,
Who took control of the regin in 710?	Umayyads
Who restored Persian control of the region?	The Samanid Empire,
What was the name of the region when it was the cultural center of Iran?	Khorasan
What was the name of the region when it was the cultural center of Iran?	Khorasan
When was the land under Tibetan empire and Chinese?	650–680
When was Tajikistan under Ymayyads contorl?	710
Who conquered Tansaxania?	The Kara-Khanid Khanate
When did the Samanid Empire rule the land?	The Samanid Empire
When did the Russian Empire take over Central Asia?	during the late 19th century's Imperial Era
Who controled the Tajikistan portion of Russian Trukestan?	the Emirate of Bukhara and Khanate of Kokand
What was Russian interested in Tajikistan area for?	gaining access to a supply of cotton
What did Russia do between 1864-1885?	Russia gradually took control of the entire territory of Russian Turkestan
In 1885, who was ruling the Tajikistan area?	the Russian Empire or its vassal state, the Emirate of Bukhara
What did the Jadidists establish themselves as in the late 19th century?	an Islamic social movement throughout the region
Who were viewed as a threat by the Jadidists?	Russians
When was the uprising against the Khanate of Kokand?	between 1910 and 1913
Why did demonstrators attack Russian soldiers in Khujand?	the threat of forced conscription during World War I
Who went to war against Bolshevick armies?	guerrillas throughout Central Asia, known as basmachi
What did they go to war against Bolshevick?	to maintain independence
Who won the war?	The Bolsheviks
What religions were discourages so their places of worship were closed?	Islam, Judaism, and Christianity
In 1924, what was created as part of Uzbekistan?	Tajik Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic
Where was the expansion of cotton and agriculture mainly?	in the southern region
What happeded between 1927-1934?	collectivization of agriculture and a rapid expansion of cotton production took place
What forced resettlement throughout Tajikistan?	Soviet collectivization policy brought violence against peasants and forced resettlement
Who directed the purges of Soviets?	Moscow
How many people were expelled??	nearly 10,000 people
Who were sent to replace the expelled positions?	Ethnic Russians
What did the population of Russians do between 1926-1959?	grew from less than 1% to 13%
What did this cause when the expelled parties were replaced?	subsequently Russians dominated party positions at all levels, including the top position of first secretary
What happened in the Feb 2010 election?	PDPT lose four seats in Parliament
Why were parties upset in the 2005 election?	accusations from opposition parties and international observers that President Emomalii Rahmon corruptly manipulates the election process and unemployment
What did the OSCE say that Tajikistan did?	"failed to meet many key OSCE commitments" and that "these elections failed on many basic democratic standards."
What was the Tajikistan governments response?	The government insisted that only minor violations had occurred, which would not affect the will of the Tajik people
Where is Tajikistan located?	in Central Asia
How many people are living in Tajikistan?	8 million people
What is the area of Tajikistan?	area of 143,100 km2 (55,300 sq mi)
What country lies to Tajikistans east?	China
What seperates Tajikistan and Pakistan?	Wakhan Corridor
What country borders Tajikistan to the east?	China
How many people are estimated to live in Tajikistan?	8 million
What is the area of Tajikistan?	143,100 km2
What country borders Tajikistan to the south?	Afghanistan
What country borders Tajikistan to the west?	Uzbekistan
What was the first recorded history of this region?	about 500 BCE
What was modern Tajikistan part of around 500 BE?	the Achaemenid Empire
Who took over the territory and made it part of their empire?	Alexander the Great
What tribes took control of the region in first centry CE?	Yuezhi tribes
When was Islam brought to the region?	in the early eighth century
What empire brought Islam practices with them?	Hephthalite Empire,
What religions were practiced in the region from first centry CE to 4th centry CE?	Buddhism, Nestorian Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Manichaeism
What was the rate that the GDP expanded?	an average rate of 9.6%
What is the primary source of income in Tajikistan?	aluminium production, cotton growing and remittances from migrant workers
What accounts for 60% of the agricultural output?	60%
What is the name of the state owned company that produces aluminium?	Tajik Aluminum Company
Who is trying to attract investments for hydropower in Tajikistan?	the government
What is something that the rivers in Tajikistan are good for?	hydropower potential
What is the highest dam in the world?	Nurek Dam
What will the project named CASA 1000 do?	CASA 1000, will transmit 1000 MW of surplus electricity from Tajikistan to Pakistan with power transit through Afghanistan
What is the average amount lived on per day?	US$1.25 per day
What was the total for the remittances from Tajik migrans?	estimated $2.1 billion US dollars
How did Tajikistan change their economy?	by purely market-based means, simply by exporting its main commodity of comparative advantage — cheap labor
What has been one of the drivers of Tajikistan's robust economic growth?	remittances
What is raised locally for the domestic market?	opium poppy
What all has helped with the fight against drugs?	with the increasing assistance from international organizations, such as UNODC, and cooperation with the US, Russian, EU and Afghan authorities
Tajikistan is thrid in the world for what type of confiscations?	heroin and raw opium confiscations
What is UNODC helping Tajikistan with to help the war on drugs?	strengthen border crossings, provide training, and set up joint interdiction teams. It also helped to establish Tajikistani Drug Control Agency
What are the majority of transportation options?	via roads, air, and rail.
What countries had Tajikistan been working with to use ports?	Iran and Pakistan
What countries did Tajikistan agree with to build a highway and a rail way?	Tajikistan, Pakistan, and Afghanistan
What year was the agreement signed?	2012
How many airports does Tajikistan have?	26 airports
What is the country's main airport?	Dushanbe International Airport
Where are the international flights maining going to?	Russia
What is the name of the airport in the eastern half of the country?	Khorog Airport
What is Tajikistans population as of July 2009?	7,349,145
What percent of the population is under 30 years old?	70%
What percent of the population are between 14 to 30 years old?	35%
What lanuage do the people of Tajikistan speak?	Tajik
What are the citizens of Tajikistan called?	Tajikistanis
What people live in the southeast area of the country?	The Pamiri people
How are they different than most Tajiks?	distinct linguistically and culturally
What mountians do the Pamiri people call home?	Pamir Mountains
What school has been recognized by the government?	Sunni Islam of the Hanafi
What kind of state does Tajikistan see itself as?	a secular state with a Constitution providing for freedom of religion
What are the two national Islamic holidays?	Id Al-Fitr and Idi Qurbon
What percent of the population is muslim?	98%
What type of religions concerns are there?	minority religious groups undermine national unity
What concerns for the religions institutions are there?	a concern for religious institutions becoming active in the political sphere
What is the name of the militant Islamic party in Tajikistan?	Hizb ut-Tahrir
What does the Hizb ut-Tahrir aim for?	aims for an overthrow of secular governments and the unification of Tajiks under one Islamic state
What do religions communities have to register with?	State Committee on Religious Affairs (SCRA) and with local authorities
What does the SCRA require?	a charter, a list of 10 or more members, and evidence of local government approval prayer site location
What do you have to have to gather for public prayer?	a physical structure
What can happen if you do not register?	can result in large fines and closure of place of worship
What is wrong with the health care system in Tajikistan?	, the system remains extremely underdeveloped and poor, with severe shortages of medical supplies
How many disabled people are registered in Tajikistan?	104,272
What percent of the GDP was spent on health?	1%
What was the name of the paper that the World Bank and Tajikistan came up with?	World Bank's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
How many years of school are there in the Tajikistan school system?	11 years of primary and secondary education
What do they want to impliment in 2016?	a 12-year system
What is the name of one of the tertiary education institutions?	Khujand State University
What is the percent of tertiary education enrollment?	17%
What is anthropology a study of?	humans and their societies
What type of anthropology describes the workings of societies around the world?	social
What investigates the influence of language in social life?	linguistic anthropology
What subdivision of anthropology concerns itself with the long-term development of the human organism?	physical
Where is Archaeology considered a branch of anthropology?	United States
Vienna created it's society in what year?	1870
When was the Berlin Society of Anthropology founded by Rudolph Virchow?	1869
When was the American Anthropological Association founded?	1902
When did Madrid get it's own anthropological society?	1865
What did Virchow feel Darwin's conclusions lacked?	empirical foundation
What proliferated in the last three decades of the 19th century?	anthropological societies
What did all the anthropological societies allow their membership to be?	international
Who belonged to these proliferating organizations?	The major theorists
How many educational institutions had some curriculum in anthropology by 1898?	48
How many countries were the institutions teaching anthropology located in?	13
When did Bronislaw Malinoswki and Franz Boas do their relevant work?	late 19th and early 20th centuries
What did Margaret Mead advocate for?	gender equality and sexual liberation
What has cultural anthropology distinguished itself from other social sciences by emphasizing?	cross-cultural comparisons
What did Boas' argue against?	19th-century racial ideology
What has cultural anthropology specifically emphasized?	cultural relativism, holism, and the use of findings to frame cultural critiques
What fields are forced to confront one another in anthropology?	humanities, social, and natural sciences
What builds upon natural and social sciences?	Anthropology
What type of discipline is anthropology?	global
Where did early anthropology originate?	Greece and Persia
What interdisciplinary fields has anthropology been central in the development of?	cognitive science, global studies, and various ethnic studies
What has sociocultural anthropology been heavily influenced by?	structuralist and postmodern theories
When was there an epistemological shift away from positivist traditions in anthropology?	During the 1970s and 1990s
What questions came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology?	nature and production of knowledge
What two fields remained largely positivist?	archaeology and biological anthropology
What have the four sub-fields of anthropology lacked over the last several decades?	cohesion
What draws together the axes of cultural and social anthropology?	Sociocultural anthropology
Which type of anthropology studies relationships among persons and groups?	social
What does social anthropology help develop an understanding of?	social structures,
What kind of distinction is lacking between social and cultural anthropology?	hard-and-fast
What studies the way people make sense of the world around them?	Cultural anthropology
What is the attempt to understand other societies on their own terms?	cultural relativism
What can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic research?	Ethnography
What is one of the foundational methods of social anthropology?	Participant observation
What is a needlessly complicated word which means "conceptual"?	emic
What does accepting other cultures in their own terms moderate?	reductionism in cross-cultural comparison
Why type of anthropology is the study of social organization a central focus of?	Sociocultural
What patterns does sociocultural anthropology get up in the morning to learn about?	consumption and exchange
What is a human universal?	kinship
What is the object of study for linguistic anthropology?	language
Why type of conflict is sociocultural anthropology interested in?	resolution
What field studies human's past through material remains?	Archaeology
What can archaeologists deduce from material remains?	human behavior and cultural practices
What do Ethnoarchaeologists gain a better understanding of by studying living human groups?	past human groups
How are long dead human groups presumed to have lived and behaved as compared to still living populations?	in similar ways
What are artifacts, faunal remains and human altered landscapes the evidence of?	cultural and material lives of past societies
What problems does linguistic anthropology bring linguistic methods to bear on?	anthropological
What is the analysis of linguistic forms and processes linked to?	interpretation of sociocultural processes
What subdivision of anthropology seeks to understand the process of human communications?	Linguistic
What related fields do linguistic anthropologists draw on?	sociolinguistics, pragmatics, cognitive linguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis
What is a cultural phenomenon?	art
What have several anthropologists noted about Western artistic endeavors and their place in non-Western contexts?	do not exist
What formal features in objects do anthropologists of art focus on?	evident 'aesthetic' qualities
When was Art as Cultural System penned?	1983
What is the trend to transform the anthropology of 'art' into an anthropology of?	culturally specific 'aesthetics'
Who used the term anthropology to describe the natural history of man?	Étienne Serres
When was anthropology used as a term for comparative anatomy?	1838
When was a chair created for anthropology at the National Museum of Natural History?	1850
Where is the National Museum of Natural History located?	France
What organization was formed by members whose primary objective was the abolishment of slavery?	Société Ethnologique de Paris
What is anthropology the intellectual results of?	comparative methods
What were theorists in diverse fields beginning to notice between animals and languages?	similarities
What did the theorists suspect these patterns were the result of?	processes or laws unknown to them then
What was Darwin's On The Origin of Species for theorists?	epiphany
How did Darwin arrive at his conclusions?	comparison of species
When did Wallace and Darwin unveil the theory of evolution?	late 1850s.
What was there a rush to do with the theory of evolution?	bring it into the social sciences
Where did Paul Broca reside?	Paris
What organization was Broca in the process of disentangling himself from?	Société de biologie
What did the French call evolutionism?	Transformisme
If Broca were alive today, what would his profession be?	neurosurgeon
What particularly interested Broca?	the pathology of speech
What did Broca discover in the human brain?	speech center
What did the German philosopher Waitz specialize in?	psychology
How many volumes was Waitz work?	six
How did Waitz define anthropology?	the science of the nature of man
What philosophical perspective did Waitz hold?	an animist
What would anthropology use to differentiate man from the animals nearest him?	comparative anatomy, physiology, and psychology
What did Waitz stress that the data of comparison must be?	empirical
What history was to be brought into the comparison?	civilization
Who was Waitz influential among?	British ethnologists
In what year did Richard Francis Burton break away from the Ethnological Society of London?	1863
What path of exploration did the Anthropological Society of London follow?	anthropology
Representatives from where were present in the Anthropological Society of London?	French Société
Whose work did Hunt stress in the first volume of The Anthropological Review?	Waitz
What did the 20th century see the expansion of anthropology departments into?	majority of the world's higher educational institutions
What was anthropology diversified into dozens of?	subdivisions
What type of anthropology is used to solve specific problems?	Practical
What does a forensic archaeologist become stimulated to do in the presence of buried victims?	recreate the final scene
From how many nations does the WCAA boast members from?	about three dozen
What type of anthropology tries to understand the social aspects of mass media?	Media anthropology
Media production and media reception are examples of what type of context?	ethnographic
Media such as a radio and television have started to make their presences felt since what years?	early 1990s
Following audiences in their everyday responses to media is encompassed by what type of context?	media reception
What type of anthropology involves the relatively new area of internet search?	cyber
What type of anthropology concerns itself with the study of photography and film?	Visual
What are performances, art, and the production of mass media grouped under?	visual representation
What cultures' visual representations are included in visual anthropology?	all
What term is visual anthropology sometimes used interchangeably with?	ethnographic film
Which branch of anthropology attempts to explain human economic behavior?	Economic
Economic anthropology covers what scope of human economic behavior?	historic, geographic and cultural
What is economic anthropology highly critical of?	discipline of economics
Who was the Polish-British founder of Anthropology?	Bronislaw Malinowski
What is Economic Anthropology mostly focused upon?	exchange
What does political economy in anthropology apply Historical Materialism to?	traditional concerns
What did Political Economy introduce questions of to theories of social structure and culture?	history and colonialism
Who were the original affluent society?	Hunter-gatherers
What do peasants make up the vast majority of in the world?	population
What have Political Economists most recently focused on the issues of?	industrial (and post-industrial) capitalism
What type of anthropology is used to analyse and find solutions to real world problems?	Applied
What do the instrumental methods of applied anthropology produce?	change or stability
What type of action does applied anthropology initiate?	direct
What side of anthropology is applied anthropology?	the practical side
Included in applied anthropology is researcher involvement as well as activism in what communities?	participating
What perspective does development anthropology view development from?	critical
What does development anthropology involves doing a lot of?	pondering
Development anthropologists would like to know why if a goal is to alleviate poverty, that poverty is doing what?	increasing
When it comes to plans and outcomes, what do development anthropologists look at between them?	gap
What does a lot of planned development apparently do?	fail
What can refer to the study of patterns in human cultures?	Kinship
What has developed a number of related concepts and terms?	anthropology
When has anthropology developed related terms?	Over its history
What does it mean if people are related by descent?	one's social relations during development
Kinship patterns can included people who are relatives by what cultural ritual involving the exchange of rings and sometimes dowry?	marriage
What type of anthropology focuses on a political agenda rather than on contributing to science?	Feminist
What does feminist anthropology self-reports as seeking to reduce in research findings?	male bias
What do feminist anthropologists claim their research helps to correct?	systematic bias
What are feminist anthropologists centrally concerned about?	gender
What type of anthropology do feminist anthropologists inclusively specialize in?	birth anthropology
What division of anthropology concerns itself with food security?	Nutritional
Nutritional anthropologists investigate the interplay between economic systems and what?	food security
If environmental changes in a community affect access to food, then there is an eventual connection to what?	globalization
What affects overall health status?	Nutritional status
What can having ready access to food affect the overall potential development of?	economic
What subfield of anthropology studies mental processes?	Psychological
What does psychological anthropology particularly focus on in a particular culture group?	humans' development and enculturation
What aspects define a cultural group?	its own history, language, practices, and conceptual categories
What shapes processes of human cognition?	cultural group
Psychological anthropology examines how our models of social processes are informed by what?	understanding
What type of anthology deals with patterns of shared knowledge?	Cognitive
What methods and theories do cognitive anthropologists use to explain cultural innovation?	cognitive sciences
What are two examples of methods and theories of cognitive science?	experimental psychology and evolutionary biology
Cognitive anthropologists want to know how the way people perceive and related to the world around them is linked to what?	implicit knowledge
What type of anthropology is interested in the structure of political systems?	Political
From what basis do political anthropologists examine the structure of political systems?	structure of societies
When did the new development of a stateless society come about?	the 1960s
The presence of states, bureaucracies and markets makes for what type of social setting?	"complex"
Who did a comparative work on a Balinese state?	Geertz
What type of anthropology originated as a sub-focus group?	Cyborg
When did the division of cyborg anthropology originate?	1993
What the sub-group of cyborg anthropology very closely related to, in addition to STS?	the Society for the Social Studies of Science
Who published a Cyborg Manifesto?	Donna Haraway
What does cyborg anthropology study about humankind and technological systems humans have built?	its relations
Which sub-specialty of anthropology takes an active role in looking at how humans interact with their environment?	Environmental
What is the focus of most of the field work in environmental anthropology today?	political ecology
What do many characterize the new perspective as being more informed with?	culture, politics and power, globalization, localized issues, and more.
The data interpretation of environmental anthropology can be used to prevent what type of exploitation?	corporate
Who does Melissa Checker have a relationship with?	people of Hyde Park
How does an someone interested in ethnohistory learn more about cultures and customs?	by examining historical records
Ethnohistory can study the history of what types of groups which may or may not exist today?	ethnic
What does ethnohistory use both historical and ethnographic data as?	its foundation
What do the methods of ethnohistory go beyond the standard use of?	documents and manuscripts
Who recognizes the utility of music, folkore and language?	Practitioners
What division of anthropology is concerned with poverty?	Urban
Who is fond of quoting a remark from the 1960s?	Ulf Hannerz
What is a stereotype of traditional anthropologists?	notoriously agoraphobic
How many principles approaches are there in urban anthropology?	two
One would be studying how the dynamic of a city is affected if one were looking directly at different what?	social issues
What is Anthrozoology also known as?	human–animal studies
What is the study of interaction between living things?	Anthrozoology
What does the field of anthrozoology overlap with?	number of other disciplines
What type of effects are a major focus of the anthrozoologic research?	positive
What are some of the diverse range of fields scholars come to Anthrozoology from?	anthropology, sociology, biology, and philosophy
What branch of anthropology studies human behavior and the relation between primates?	Evolutionary
What is evolutionary anthropology  based in?	natural science and social science
Which humans does evolutionary anthropology concern itself with the biological and cultural evolution of?	past and present
What type of approach is evolutionary anthropology based on?	scientific
What evidence does evolutionary anthropology draw on to understand the human experience?	many lines
What type of anthropology commitment is noticing and documenting genocide?	Ethical
What is the proper term for circumcision?	mutilation
What are good topics to attract the attention of an anthropologist?	racism, slavery, and human sacrifice
Nutritional deficiencies and colonialism are just two theories of the root cause of Man's inhumanity towards whom?	man
Why can one find thousands of anthropological references to the topics?	depth of an anthropological approach
What were Boas' peers doing in the 1940s?	active in the allied war effort
What groups formed the Axis forces?	Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan
What did many anthropologists serve in?	the armed forces
The Office of Strategic Services is an example of what type of posting during the War?	intelligence
Why are several anthropologists dismissed from their jobs, according to David H. Price?	communist sympathies.
What do groups of anthropologists object to the use of anthropology for benefit of?	the state
What type of briefings are forbidden for members of certain anthropologist bodies to give?	secret
What has the ASA identified as being ethically dangerous?	certain scholarship
Who penned a "Statement of Professional Responsibility"?	The AAA
Secret research and reports are things which should never be what?	given
Who are anthropologists working with along with other social scientists?	the US military
What are the anthropologists part of?	US Army's strategy in Afghanistan
What efforts focus on better understanding and meeting of local needs in Afghanistan?	Counterinsurgency
Where are HTS teams working with the military in addition to Afghanistan?	Iraq
What does the AAA feel is incompatible with working with the military?	ethics
What type of anthropologist is interested in human variation?	Biological
What would an idea shared by virtually all human cultures be considered?	human universals
Where can participant observation take an anthropologist?	into the field
To be able to do fieldwork, an anthropologist must first travel to what?	a community in its own setting
Articles can published once what type of samples have been taken?	genetic
How do anthropologists typically like to divide up the world?	relevant time periods and geographic regions
How has human time on Earth been divided up?	cultural traditions based on material
Olduwan, Mousterian, and Levalloisian are all types of what?	tool
Mapping cultures is central to both the sciences of anthropologists and who else?	geographers
What is a central part of the science of anthropology?	comparative method
What do some authors state anthropology developed as the study of?	"other cultures
A past society would be an other culture separated by what temporal aspect?	time
What other cultures are said to be separated by space, what is actually meant?	non-European/non-Western societies
Who published a book with unnecessarily long title, "Exploring the City: Inquires Toward an Urban Anthropology"?	Ulf Hannerz
When did anthropologists stop looking for cultures far away and instead began to "look across the tracks"?	only in late 1960s
What has become common for social anthropologists to do since the 1980s?	set ethnographic research in the North Atlantic region
Setting research in the North Atlantic region allows looking at connections between locations rather than being limited to what?	research to a single locale
What has there been a shift toward broadening the focus beyond?	daily life of ordinary people
What setting have anthropologists done more research in recently?	scientific laboratories
Governmental and nongovernmental organizations and businesses are all settings which are fair game to do what in?	research
What happened to Joseph I in 1758?	wounded in an attempted assassination
Who was implicated in the attempted assassination of Joseph I?	The Távora family and the Duke of Aveiro
Who was expelled from the country after the assassination attempt on Joseph I?	The Jesuits
In what year did Joseph I make his minister the Count of Oeiras?	1759
What act finally broke the power of the aristocracy?	Sebastião de Melo prosecuted every person involved, even women and children
In which year was the Count of Oeiras made the Marquis of Pambal?	1770
How long did the Marquis of Pombal rule Portugal?	until Joseph I's death in 1779
What did Pombal's enlightenment promote at the expense of individual liberty?	autocracy
Was the new Count of Oeiras opposed by anyone after the Tavora affair?	knew no opposition
What was Pombal's "enlightenment" an apparatus for?	crushing opposition, suppressing criticism, and furthering colonial economic exploitation
Under whose occupation did Portugal begin a slow decline?	Napoleon
In what year did Brazil become independent from Portugal?	1822
To where did Prince Regent Joao VI of Portugal transfer his court?	Brazil
What was the name of the pluricontinental state formed by Portugal and Brazil in 1815?	United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves
How long did Portugal's decline last?	until the 20th century
Portugese and British troops fought against the invasion of which country?	French
Until when did the King of Portugal remain in Brazil?	until the Liberal Revolution of 1820
Where did the Liberal Revolution of 1820 begin?	Porto
By what year had the situation in Europe cool down enough so that Joao VI would have been able to safely return to Lisbon?	1815
What provoked the modernization and expansion of the Brazilian administrative, civic, economical, military, educational, and scientific apparatus?	the change in its status and the arrival of the Portuguese royal family
When were railroad tracks being installed Portugese Africa?	before the turn of the 20th century
When was the Conference of Berlin held?	1884
During what period were the Portugese Africa's cities founded or redeveloped?	Scramble for Africa
Why were the Portugese Africa territories' borders formally established?	to protect the centuries-long Portuguese interests in the continent from rivalries enticed by the Scramble for Africa
What new Portugese Africa's coastal towns were developed during the Scramble for Africa?	Beira, Moçâmedes, Lobito, João Belo, Nacala and Porto Amélia
On what day were King Dom Carlos I and and his heir, Prince Royal Dom Luis Filipe, Duke of Braganza, murdered?	1 February 1908
Under the rule of King Dom Carlos I, on what two days was Portugal declared bankrupt?	on 14 June 1892, and again on 10 May 1902
Who succeeded King Dom Carlos I as king?	Manuel II of Portugal
On what day was King Manuel II overthrown?	5 October 1910
During the Portuguese First Republic, what creating a fertile ground for chaos and unrest?	Political instability and economic weaknesses
Who led the Estado Novo?	António de Oliveira Salazar
In what year was the Estado Novo established?	1933
How many European countries remained neutral throughout World War II?	five
What action affirmed Portugal's status as a transcontinental nation?	relocation of mainland Portuguese citizens into the overseas provinces in Africa
What are three international organizations that Portugal belongs to?	United Nations, the European Union, the Eurozone, OECD, NATO and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries
What form of government does Portugal maintain?	unitary semi-presidential republican
What is Portugal's Social Progress ranking?	18th highest
Which three Western European countries have a lower Social Progress ranking than Portugal?	France, Spain and Italy
In 2001, Portugal was the first country in the world to do what?	decriminalized the usage of all common drugs
What was Pelayos' plan?	to use the Cantabrian mountains as a place of refuge and protection from the invading Moors
Against which group of people was Pelayos fighting?	Moors
In which battle did Pelayos defeat the Moors?	Battle of Covadonga
In which year was Pelayos proclaimed king?	722 AD
What was the war of Christian reconquest, started by Pelayos, known as in Portugese?	Reconquista Cristã
Why was the Kingdom of Asturias divided?	dynastic divisions of inheritance among the kings offspring
Who annexed the County of Portugal into the Kingdom of Asturias?	King Alfonso III
In which year was Vimara Peres knighted?	868 AD
What was Vimara knighted as?	First Count of Portus Cale
What three names did Portugal become known as after Vimara Peres was knighted?	Portucale, Portugale, and simultaneously Portugália
During the internecine struggles, what did the the people of Country of Portugal struggle with?	maintain the autonomy of Galicia with its distinct language and culture (Galician-Portuguese) from the Leonese culture
The County of Portugal separated from the Kingdom of Galicia to establish what?	the Kingdom of Portugal
Portugese diverged from which language?	Galician
What is the Castilian Lanugage known as?	Spanish
By which language was the Astur-Leonese replaced?	Castilian (Spanish Language)
Who was de Melo's second marriage to?	the daughter of the Austrian Field Marshal Leopold Josef, Count von Daun
Who was the 1st Marquis of Pombal?	Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo
What title did Archduchess Maria Anne Josefa hold?	Queen consort of Portugal
Who arranged the widow de Melo's second marriage?	Queen consort of Portugal
Who was not pleased by de Melo's second marriage?	King John V of Portugal
What type of natural disaster was the city center of Lisbon designed to resist?	earthquakes
How were earthquakes simulated on the architectural models?	marching troops around the models
Did Lisbon suffer any epidemics from the calamity?	Lisbon suffered no epidemics
What are some of Lisbon's tourist attractions?	The buildings and big squares of the Pombaline City Centre
How did de Melo contribute to the study of seismology?	by designing an inquiry that was sent to every parish in the country
What is the official name of Portugal?	Portuguese Republic
Where is Portugal located?	Iberian Peninsula, in Southwestern Europe
Which ocean does Portugal border?	Atlantic Ocean
How long is the Portugal-Spain border?	1,214 km (754 mi)
What two autonomous regions have their own governments in Portugal?	Azores and Madeira
What is the official name of Portugal?	Portuguese Republic
Where is Portugal located?	Iberian Peninsula, in Southwestern Europe
What other country does Portugal border?	Spain
What ocean does Portugal border?	Atlantic Ocean
What is the longest uninterrupted border within the European Union?	Portugal–Spain
Who were the first inhabitants of Portugal?	The Celts and the Romans
Which two groups followed the first inhabitants?	Visigothic and the Suebi Germanic peoples
By what year had Portugal established itself as an independent kingdom?	1139
What age did Portugal pioneer?	Age of Discovery
In which centuries did Portugal establish the first global empire?	15th and 16th centuries
In Portugal, which city was destroyed in the 1755 earthquake?	Lisbon
In which year did Brazel become independent?	1822
In which year was the Portugal monarchy deposed?	1910
Which Portugese colony was lost to China in 1999?	Macau
How many Portugese speakers are there today?	250 million
From what name is Portugal derived?	Portus Cale
By what group was the Portugal region settled?	Pre-Celts and Celts
To what four peoples did the settlement of Portugal give rise?	Gallaeci, Lusitanians, Celtici and Cynetes
During what years was the Portugal region incorporated in the Roman Republic?	45 BC until 298 AD
From what old Germanic word is Alenquer originate?	Alankerk
In what year did Lusitania become a Roman province?	27 BC
What was the Northern province of Lusitania known as?	Gallaecia
What are two large Roman sites that still exist today in Portugal?	Conímbriga and Mirobriga
What are castros?	hill forts
How far apart are Conimbriga and Coimbra?	16 km
How long did it take the Umayyad Caliphate to defeat the Visigoths?	a few months
In what year did Portugal become a part of Umayyad Caliphate's empire?	711
In which year did Umayyad Caliphate's empire collapse?	750
Under whom did the Western part of Umayyad Caliphate's empire gain its independence?	Abd-ar-Rahman
How long did it take the Emirate to become the Caliphate of Codoba?	almost two centuries
What were the governors of the taifas called?	Emir
Which which kingdoms did the taifas establish diplomatic relations?	the Christian kingdoms of the north
To which taifa did most of Portugal fall into?	Taifa of Badajoz
In which year did the taifa period end?	1086
Which battle took place in 1147?	Battle of Sagrajas
What are converts to Islam called?	Muwallad or Muladi
Who did the Arabs principally consist of?	noblemen from Oman
Where were the Berbers originally from?	Atlas mountains and Rif mountains of North Africa
In which region of Portugal did the Muslim population stay?	Algarve region, and south of the Tagus
How many modern Portugese words have Arabic origins?	800
Who was the eldest son of Alfonso III and what did he become king of?	García, became king of León
Who was the second son of Alfonso III and what did he become king of?	Ordoño, reigned in Galicia
Who was Alfonso III's third son and what area did he receive?	Fruela, received Asturias with Oviedo as his capital
In which year did Alfonso III likely die?	910
In which year was the Kingdom of Castile formed?	1230
Which years were plagued by the Black Death?	1348 and 1349
In 1373, Portugal made an alliance with which country?	England
What is the longest standing alliance in the world?	Portugal made an alliance with England
The Portugal-English alliance served as the predecessor to what?	NATO
In which Portugese region is there still visible English influence?	Oporto region
What European age did Portugal spearhead?	the Age of Discovery
Who was the Father of Prince Henry the Navigator?	King João I
Which three Atlantic archipelagos did Portugal discover?	Azores, Madeira, and Cape Verde
By which path did Portugal discover a route to India?	Cape of Good Hope
What South American country did Portugal discover?	Brazil
Did the King's confidence in de Melo increase or decrease?	increased
What title was given to de Melo in 1755?	Prime Minister
With whose economic success was de Melo impressed with?	British
Who abolished slavery in Portugal?	Sebastião de Melo
Who ended discrimination against difference Christian sects in Portugal?	Sebastião de Melo
What were de Melo's greatest reforms?	economic and financial
Why did e Melo demarcate the region for production of Port?	to ensure the wine's quality
Among which class did de Melo's reforms gain him the most enemies?	especially among the high nobility
Who was the first person to try to ensure the wine's quality in Portugal?	Sebastião de Melo
Did de Melo impose strict laws only on one class of people?	upon all classes of Portuguese society from the high nobility to the poorest working class
Until when did the Portuguese government resist decolonization of their overseas territories?	April 1974
What was the Carnation Revolution?	left-wing military coup in Lisbon
By what was the PREC characterized by?	social turmoil and power disputes between left- and right-wing political forces
What entity governed Portugal until 1976?	Junta de Salvação Nacional
Which party won the Portuguese election in 1976?	Socialist Party
Who became the Prime Minister of Portugal in 1976?	Mário Soares
Through what years was Mario Soares the Portuguese Prime Minister?	1976 to 1978 and again from 1983 to 1985
Between which two political ideals did Portugal bounce between?	socialism and adherence to the neoliberal model
In what year was the Portuguese Constitution approved?	1976
For what reasons were the Portuguese Constitution rewritten?	to accommodate socialist and communist principles
What type of climate does Portugal have?	Mediterranean
In the mountainous interior north of Portugal, between what degrees is the average temperature?	8–12 °C (46.4–53.6 °F)
In the south of Portugal and on the Guadiana river basin, between what degrees does the average temperature fluctuate?	16–19 °C (60.8–66.2 °F)
How high do the mountains between Algarve and the Alentejo region reach?	900 metres (3,000 ft)
What type of climate do the archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira have?	subtropical
What makes weather predictions difficult in the archipelago region?	rough topography
What type of climate does the island of the Azores have?	Mediterranean
What two types of forests can be found in Geres?	deciduous and coniferous
To what period does the laurissilva forest date back to?	the Tertiary period
What type of oak tree is colonizing many abandoned areas in Portugal?	Pyrenean
What wild animal was recently found roaming urban areas in Portugal?	Boars
How many national parks does Portugal have?	12
What is Laurisilva?	a unique type of subtropical rainforest
What are some examples of  mammalian fauna found in Laurisilva forests?	fox, badger, iberian lynx, iberian wolf, wild goat (Capra pyrenaica), wild cat (Felis silvestris), hare, weasel, polecat, chameleon, mongoose, civet, brown bear
What type of animal crosses between Europe and Africa during the Autumn?	migratory birds
How many freshwater fish species can be found in Portugal?	more than 100
In Portugal, where can you find the giant European catfish?	in the Tagus International Natural Park
Why are some species becoming endangered in Portugal?	because of habitat loss, pollution and drought
What type of glowing species can be found on some beaches in Portugal?	plankton
For how many years is the Portugal president elected?	five
Who is the current president of Portugal?	Aníbal Cavaco Silva
How many deputies make up the Assembly of the Republic?	230
For how long of a term are deputies elected?	four-year
How many members sit on the Constitutional Court?	thirteen
What two political parties dominate Portugal's government?	Socialist Party and the Social Democratic Party
At what three levels does the Portugal government operate?	national-, regional- and local-levels
What other political groups exist other than the two dominant ones?	Unitary Democratic Coalition (Portuguese Communist Party and Ecologist Party "The Greens"), the Left Bloc and the Democratic and Social Centre – People's Party
What percentage of the vote do the non-dominant parties get?	5 and 15%
Who is the Head of State of Portugal?	President of the Republic
For how many years does each term of the President of the Republic last?	five
By what means is the President of the Republic elected?	by direct, universal suffrage
Who has the power to appoint and dismiss the Prime Minister?	President of the Republic
What group acts as the presidential cabinet?	The Council of Ministers
What process is required of each government's policies?	define the broad outline of its policies in a programme, and present it to the Assembly for a mandatory period of debate
What is needed to reject a cabinet's policy?	an absolute majority of deputies
Portuguese law continues to be a major influence for what?	former colonies and territories
What is the Policia de Seguranca Publica - PSP (Public Security Police)?	a civilian police force who work in urban areas
What is the Policia Judiciaria - PJ (Judicial Police)?	a highly specialized criminal investigation police
Which entity oversees the Judicial Police?	the Public Ministry.
In which year did Portugal decriminalize drug possession?	2001
How much of a drug is legal to possess?	10 days worth of personal use
What option is allowed to those caught with small amounts of drugs?	go to a rehab facility
By 2009, by how much had the rate of HIV infection decreased?	50 percent
How many municipalities is Portugal divided into?	308
How many civil parishes are the Portuguese municipalities divided into?	3,092
How many districts is the continental Portugal divided into?	18
How many branches make up the Portuguese armed forces?	three
What are the branches of the Portuguese armed forces?	Navy, Army and Air Force
What is the primary purpose of the Portuguese armed forces?	primarily as a self-defense force whose mission is to protect the territorial integrity of the country and provide humanitarian assistance and security
How many women were in the Portuguese armed forces in 2008?	7,500
How much money was spent on the Portuguese armed forced in 2009?	$5.2 billion, representing 2.1 percent of GDP
What is the number of personnel in the army?	21,000
With what is the infantry brigade mainly equipped with?	Pandur II APC
What is the mechanized brigade mainly equipped with?	Leopard 2 A6 tanks and M113 APC
What does the Rapid Reaction Brigade consist of?	paratroopers, commandos and rangers
How many personnel does the Navy have?	10,700
In what two major conflicts did Portugal engage in during the 20th century?	World War I and the Portuguese Colonial War
During which years was the Portuguese Colonial War fought?	1961–1974
In what countries have the Portuguese Armed Forces participated in peacekeeping missions?	East Timor, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq (Nasiriyah) and Lebanon
What are two examples of independent Portuguese unilateral military operations conducted abroad?	Angola in 1992 and in Guinea-Bissau in 1998
Who headed the government after the bailout was announced?	Pedro Passos Coelho
What was the purpose of the Portuguese bailout?	improve the State's financial situation
How was the Portuguese bailout implemented?	tax hikes, a freeze of civil service-related lower-wages and cuts of higher-wages by 14.3%, on top of the government's spending cuts
Between 2010 and 2012, by what percentage were the wages of public servants cut?	20%
In which year did the Carnation Revolution take place?	1974
Between 1974 and 2010, how did the Portuguese government encourage over-expenditure and investment bubbles?	unclear Public–private partnerships and funding of numerous ineffective and unnecessary external consultancy and advisory of committees and firms
By whom was a report published in 2011 that demonstrated the Portuguese government encouraged over-expenditure and investment bubbles?	Diário de Notícias
In what two years was there a financial crisis?	2007–08
Which two Portuguese banks had been accumulating losses for years?	Banco Português de Negócios (BPN) and Banco Privado Português (BPP)
What caused BPN and BPP to accumulate losses?	bad investments, embezzlement and accounting fraud
Why was the case of BPN more serious?	its size, market share, and the political implications
On what charge was BPN's CEO arrested?	fraud
What currency does Portugal use?	the euro (€)
What currency did the euro replace in Portugal?	Portuguese Escudo
What is the name of Portugal's central bank?	Banco de Portugal
In what two areas are most Portuguese industries, businesses, and financial institutions concentrated?	Lisbon and Porto metropolitan areas
According to World Travel Awards, for what activity is Portugal known as Europe's leading destination?	Golf
In which year did the Carnation Revolution take place?	1974
What period followed the Carnation Revolution?	PREC period
Since the 90's, how has Portugal's economic development model been changing?	changing to a system that is focused on exports, private investment and the development of the high-tech sector
What are the more traditional industries that have existed in Portugal?	textiles, clothing, footwear and cork
What is Portugal the world's leading producer of?	cork
By what entities was the Portuguese economy bailed out?	European Commission, European Central Bank and International Monetary Fund
In what year was the economic bailout agreed to?	2011
How much money was agreed to in the financial bailout?	€78 billion
When did Portugal exit the bailout?	May 2014
By the time Portugal exited the bailout, to what percentage had the unemployment rate fallen?	15.3 percent
Upon what is Portuguese agriculture based?	small to medium-sized family-owned dispersed units
What types of companies back more large scale, export-oriented agrobusinesses in Portugal?	Grupo RAR's Vitacress, Sovena, Lactogal, Vale da Rosa, Companhia das Lezírias and Valouro
What types of crops does Portugal produce?	tomatoes, citrus, green vegetables, rice, corn, barley, olives, oilseeds, nuts, cherries, bilberry, table grapes, edible mushrooms
What types of livestock products does Portugal produce?	dairy products, poultry and beef
Which company is the world's oldest canned fish producer?	Ramirez
What are the names of various companies that produce and export fish products?	Bom Petisco, Nero, Combate, Comur, General, Líder, Manná, Murtosa, Pescador, Pitéu, Tenório, Torreira and Vasco da Gama
What food does Portugal have one of the highest rates of consumption of?	fish
What mineral is Portugal ranked as a leading European producer of?	copper
What are three types of minerals Portugal is a notable producer of?	tin, tungsten and uranium
What type of exploration does Portugal lack the potential for?	hydrocarbon
In which region does Portugal have vast reserves of iron and coal?	north
What event triggered a decrease in the extraction of Portugal's natural resources?	1974 revolution and the consequent economic globalization
What automotive brands exist in Portugal?	Volkswagen Autoeuropa and Peugeot Citroen
What aerospace companies exist in Portugal?	Embraer and OGMA
Where is Volkswagen Group's AutoEuropa assembly plant located?	Palmela
What are the main centers for the Portuguese aerospace industries?	Alverca, Covilhã, Évora, and Ponte de Sor
Where are the main centers of the biotech and IT industries located?	Lisbon, Porto, Braga, Coimbra and Aveiro
Portuguese tourist numbers are expected to do what in the future?	increase
With what area does Portugal compete with for tourists?	Eastern European destinations
How does Portugal compete with other areas for tourists?	focus upon its niche attractions
What attractions does Portugal have to offer tourists?	health, nature and rural tourism
What magazine described Portugal as "a new sick man of Europe?"	The Economist
Between 2002 and 2007, by what percentage did the rate of unemployment change?	65%
What percentage did the unemployment rate reach in December, 2009?	10.2%
In 2009, what rating did Standard & Poor's assign to Portugal's long-term credit assessment?	negative
In which year did Moody's downgrade Portugal's long-term credit assessment?	2011
What did Prime Minister Jose Socrates announce on April 6, 2011?	that the country would request financial assistance from the IMF and the European Financial Stability Facility
How many times has Portugal requested external financial support?	third
What provoked the first request from Portugal for financial support?	Carnation's Revolution
For what reason did Moody's Investor Services downgrade nine Portuguese banks in 2011?	financial weakness
In 2005, how many public employees did Portugal have for every thousand inhabitants?	70.8
What was the average number of public employees per every thousand inhabitants for the European Union in 2005?	62.4
In comparison to EU and USA standards, how was Portugal's justice system regarded?	slow and inefficient
Which country had the slowest criminal justice system in Western Europe in 2005?	Italy
How many judges and prosecutors does Portugal have per 100,000 inhabitants?	over 30
Who was the Portugal Prime Minister in 2013?	Passos Coelho
What did the Prime Minister announce during the first week of May in 2013?	significant government plan for the public sector, whereby 30,000 jobs will be cut and the number of weekly working hours will be increased from 35 to 40 hours
For what reason did Prime Minister Passos Coelho justify cutting 30000 jobs?	austerity measures are necessary if Portugal seeks to avoid another monetary bailout grant
From which entities did Portugal seek a monetary bailout from?	European Commission, European Central Bank and International Monetary Fund
To what age did Passos Coelho increase the retirement age?	66
To what did Passos Coelho announce cuts to?	pensions, unemployment benefits, health, education and science expenses
Which obligatory class was abolished from Basic Education?	English
What did the instituting of these policies lead to?	social unrest and to confrontations between several institutions
Since when has the Portugal unemployment rate been in a falling trend?	third quarter of 2014
To what percentage did the unemployment rate peak at?	17.7%
In the second quarter of 2008, what was the Portuguese unemployment rate?	7.3%
By when did the Portuguese unemployment rate pass the 10% mark?	December 2009
What are the tourist hotspots in Portugal?	Lisbon, Algarve, Madeira, Porto and the city of Coimbra
Where do 4-5 million religious pilgrims visit in Portugal every year?	Fátima
What apparitions reportedly took place in 1917?	Blessed Virgin Mary to three shepherd children
What tourist destinations are the Portuguese government continuing to promote and develop?	Douro Valley, the island of Porto Santo, and Alentejo
What is the 16th European city to attract the most tourists?	Lisbon
What prompted transportation improvements in Portugal in the 1970's?	fast economic growth with increasing consumption and purchase of new automobiles
After joining the European Economic Community in the 90's, what did Portugal begin building?	new motorways
How long is Portugal's total road network?	68,732 km (42,708 mi)
In which year was the first motorway opened in Portugal?	1944
How much land does the Continental Portugal cover?	89,015 km2 (34,369 sq mi)
How many national airports does Portugal have?	four
Near what cities are the Portuguese airports located?	Lisbon, Porto, Faro and Beja
Why is Lisbon a popular stopover for many foreign airlines?	geographical position
What is the primary flag-carrier in Portugal?	TAP Portugal
Into what country does Portugal's railway system expand?	Spain
What entity supports and administrates Portugal's railway system?	Comboios de Portugal
How long is the total railway system in Portugal?	2,791 km (1,734 mi)
How long is the amount of railway lines that are electrified?	1,430 km (889 mi)
How long is the amount of railway lines that permit speeds greater than 120 km/h?	900 km (559 mi)
What are the two subway systems in Portugal?	Lisbon Metro and Metro Sul do Tejo in the Lisbon Metropolitan Area and Porto Metro in the Porto Metropolitan Area
How long are each of the subway systems?	more than 35 km (22 mi)
By what company have the Lisbon tram services been supplies by?	Companhia de Carris de Ferro de Lisboa (Carris)
For how long has the Libon tram service existed?	over a century
In what type of network are most scientific research studies conducted in Portugal?	R&D units belonging to public universities and state-managed autonomous research institutions
What is one example of a state-managed autonomous research institution?	INETI – Instituto Nacional de Engenharia, Tecnologia e Inovação
By which ministry is authority granted for funding and managing Portugal's research system?	Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education (MCTES)
What are two of the large non-state run research institutions in Portugal?	Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência and the Champalimaud Foundation
What is the Champalimaud Foundation?	neuroscience and oncology research centre
What does the Champalimaud Foundation award every year?	one of the highest monetary prizes of any science prize in the world
In what year was the Sciences Academy of Lisbon founded?	1779
What is the name of the largest European aquarium?	Lisbon Oceanarium
What does the state agency Ciencia Viva promote?	scientific and technological culture among the Portuguese population
What are some examples of notable organizations focused on scientific exhibitions?	Science Museum of the University of Coimbra, the National Museum of Natural History at the University of Lisbon, and the Visionarium
What was responsible for creating thousands of scientific, technological, and knowledge-based businesses?	the emergence and growth of several science parks throughout the world
What are some examples of the science parks being built in Portugal?	Taguspark (in Oeiras), the Coimbra iParque (in Coimbra), the biocant (in Cantanhede), the Madeira Tecnopolo (in Funchal)
For what reason to companies locate in the Portuguese science parks?	take advantage of a variety of services ranging from financial and legal advice through to marketing and technological support
What are the two most considerable sources of renewable energy in Portugal?	wind and river power
Where was Moura Photovoltaic Power Station located?	Moura, in the south
Where was the Agucadoura Wave Farm located?	Norte region
By the end of 2006, what percentage of Portugal's energy production was from renewable sources?	29%
What is the name of Portugal's national energy transmission company?	Redes Energéticas Nacionais (REN)
What does REN do?	uses sophisticated modeling to predict weather, especially wind patterns, and computer programs to calculate energy from the various renewable-energy plants
Through what renewable resource had Portugal generated electricity before the solar/wind revolution?	hydropower plants on its rivers
What is used to pump water uphill in Portugal?	wind-driven turbines
How did the Portuguese government encourage rooftop solar panels?	setting a premium price
What was the Portuguese population in 2011?	10,562,178
What percentage of the Portuguese population in 2011 was female?	52%
What percentage of the Portuguese population in 2011 was male?	48%
What is the dominant religion in Portugal?	Catholicism
What were the Moors who converted to Catholicism known as?	Mouriscos
In what group of people do the Portuguese have their origin?	Paleolithic peoples
When did people first start arriving in the European continent?	45,000 years ago
What is the main population source of the Portuguese people?	Paleolithic
What is the cornerstone of Portugal's national identity?	colonial history
Which ocean does Portugal border?	Atlantic Ocean
What were two of the last territories Portugal gave up?	Angola and Mozambique
The vast majority of Brazilians have what ancestry in common?	Portuguese
How many inhabitants did Portugal have by 2007?	10,617,575
What percentage of the Portuguese people are Roman Catholic?	81.0%
What other religious communities exist in Portugal?	Protestant, Latter-day Saint, Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, Eastern Orthodox Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Baha'i, Buddhist, Jewish and Spiritist
What percentage of the Portuguese people identify as non-religious?	6.8%
What percentage of the Portuguese population did not give an answer for their religion in the 2011 census?	8.3%
In what religion do many Portuguese holidays and festivals find their origin?	Christian
In what centuries did the Roman Catholic Church play a role in the reconquest?	13th and 14th
What changed the role and importance of organized religion in Portugal?	formation of the First Portuguese Republic
During what years did the formation of the First Portuguese Republic take place?	1910–26
On what date did the Battle of Ourique take place?	25 July 1139
Afonso heard Jesus promising what?	victories for the coming battles, as well as God's wish to act through Afonso
Why did God want to act through Afonso?	in order to create an empire which would carry His name to unknown lands
What is the official name of Portugal?	Portuguese
What type of language is Portuguese?	Romance
Where did Portuguese originate?	Galicia and Northern Portugal
What was the common name of the Galician and Portuguese people?	Galician-Portuguese
From what language is Portuguese derived?	Latin
By what group of people is Portuguese derived?	Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula
Between what years did Portugal establish a colonial and commercial empire?	1415 and 1999
In how many continents is Portuguese spoken as a native language?	five
What country has the largest number of native Portuguese speakers?	Brazil
What is the adult literacy rate in Portugal?	99 percent
Portuguese primary school enrollment is close to what percent?	100 percent
What percentage of college-age citizens attend a higher education institution in Portugal?	Over 35%
What percentage of college-age citizens attend a higher education institution in the United States?	50%
Since when have Portuguese universities existed?	1290
Where was the oldest Portuguese university established?	Lisbon
Where did the oldest Portuguese university relocate to?	Coimbra
What is the oldest engineering school of the Americas?	the Real Academia de Artilharia, Fortificação e Desenho of Rio de Janeiro
What is the oldest medical college in Asia?	the Escola Médico-Cirúrgica of Goa
When was the Bologna process adopted?	2006
What are most higher education student costs supported with?	public money
Over what age are higher education applicants considered mature?	over 23 years old
What is the Ministry of Health responsible for?	developing health policy as well as managing the SNS
How many regional health administrations exist in Portugal?	Five
What are the regional health administrations in charge of?	implementing the national health policy objectives, developing guidelines and protocols and supervising health care delivery
What do most Portuguese people die from?	noncommunicable diseases
What are the two main components of cardiovascular disease?	ischaemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease
What is the biggest killer in Portugal?	cerebrovascular disease
What percentage of Portuguese people die less often from cancer than in the Eur-A?	12%
Who is cancer more common among in Portugal?	children as well as among women younger than 44 years
What survey results complement on data on health status?	self-reporting at the household level
What number of Portuguese adults rated their health as good or very good?	one third
Portugal modernized its public cultural facilities during what two decades?	1990s and 2000s
In what year was the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation established?	1956
Where was the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation established?	Lisbon
What are some examples of Portugal's public cultural facilities?	Belém Cultural Centre in Lisbon, Serralves Foundation and the Casa da Música
How many UNESCO World Heritage Sites is Portugal home to?	fifteen
What is the Manueline style also known as?	Portuguese late Gothic
What is the Manueline style?	a sumptuous, composite Portuguese style of architectural ornamentation of the first decades of the 16th century
What is Soft Portuguese style?	A 20th-century interpretation of traditional architecture
Who are some of the most renowned architects to come from Portugal?	Eduardo Souto de Moura, Álvaro Siza Vieira (both Pritzker Prize winners) and Gonçalo Byrne
For what is Tomas Taveira particularly noteworthy for in Portugal?	stadium design
In which period was cinema born?	late 19th century
Who are some examples of Portuguese film directors?	Arthur Duarte, António Lopes Ribeiro, António Reis, Pedro Costa, Manoel de Oliveira, João César Monteiro, António-Pedro Vasconcelos, Fernando Lopes
Who are some noted Portuguese actors?	Joaquim de Almeida, Daniela Ruah, Maria de Medeiros, Diogo Infante, Soraia Chaves, Ribeirinho, Lúcia Moniz, and Diogo Morgado
In which period was cinema born?	late 19th century
Who are some examples of Portuguese film directors?	Arthur Duarte, António Lopes Ribeiro, António Reis, Pedro Costa, Manoel de Oliveira, João César Monteiro, António-Pedro Vasconcelos, Fernando Lopes
Who are some noted Portuguese actors?	Joaquim de Almeida, Daniela Ruah, Maria de Medeiros, Diogo Infante, Soraia Chaves, Ribeirinho, Lúcia Moniz, and Diogo Morgado
Who was Luís de Camões?	Adventurer and poet
What epic poem did Luís de Camões write?	"Os Lusíadas" (The Lusiads)
What was Luís de Camões main influence?	Virgil's Aeneid
What styles are modern Portuguese poetry rooted in?	neoclassic and contemporary styles
Who are some modern Portuguese authors?	Almeida Garrett, Camilo Castelo Branco, Eça de Queiroz, Fernando Pessoa, Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen, António Lobo Antunes and Miguel Torga
What is dry cod known as in Portuguese?	bacalhau
Other than bacalhau, what are two other popular fish recipes in Portugal?	grilled sardines and caldeirada
What is caldeirada?	a potato-based stew that can be made from several types of fish
What meats are often used in Portuguese recipes?	beef, pork, lamb, or chicken
What are two popular Northern Portugal dishes?	arroz de sarrabulho (rice stewed in pigs blood) or the arroz de cabidela (rice and chickens meat stewed in chickens blood)
What are three examples of fast food dishes in Portugal?	Francesinha (Frenchie) from Porto, and bifanas (grilled pork) or prego (grilled beef) sandwiches
Where does the Portuguese art of pastry have its origins?	in the many medieval Catholic monasteries spread widely across the country
What are the main ingredients used to make pastries in the monasteries?	almonds, flour, eggs and some liquor
What are two examples of Portuguese pastries?	pastéis de Belém (or pastéis de nata) originally from Lisbon, and ovos moles from Aveiro
Since when have Portuguese wines garnished international recognition?	since the times of the Romans
With which Roman God was Portugal associated with?	Bacchus
What are some of the best Portuguese wines?	Vinho Verde, Vinho Alvarinho, Vinho do Douro, Vinho do Alentejo, Vinho do Dão, Vinho da Bairrada and the sweet: Port Wine, Madeira Wine
Which two Portuguese wines are especially enjoyed around the world?	Port and Madeira
What are a couple examples of Summer music festivals held in Portugal?	Festival Sudoeste in Zambujeira do Mar, Festival de Paredes de Coura in Paredes de Coura, Festival Vilar de Mouros near Caminha,
What are a couple examples of non-Summer music festivals in Portugal?	Flowfest or Hip Hop Porto
What is the Boom Festival?	one of the largest international Goa trance festivals takes place in central Portugal every two years
What international awards have been won by the Boom Festival?	European Festival Award 2010 – Green'n'Clean Festival of the Year and the Greener Festival Award Outstanding 2008 and 2010
In which year did Portugal hold the MTV Europe Music Awards?	2005
What are some examples of classical pianists from Portugal?	Artur Pizarro, Maria João Pires, Sequeira Costa
What are some examples of classical violinists from Portugal?	Carlos Damas, Gerardo Ribeiro
Who are some notable musical composers from Portugal?	José Vianna da Motta, Carlos Seixas, João Domingos Bomtempo, João de Sousa Carvalho, Luís de Freitas Branco and his student Joly Braga Santos
Who are some contemporary composers from Portugal?	Nuno Malo and Miguel d'Oliveira
In which century did Portugal see the arrival of Modernism?	20th century
By what group was Amadeo de Souza-Cardoso most heavily influenced by?	French painters, particularly by the Delaunays
What is one of Amadeo de Souza-Cardoso's best known works?	Canção Popular a Russa e o Fígaro
Who are some of the most prominent modern visual artists in Portugal?	Vieira da Silva, Júlio Pomar, Helena Almeida, Joana Vasconcelos, Julião Sarmento and Paula Rego
What is the most popular sport in Portugal?	Football
What is still a major symbol of Portuguese football history?	Eusébio
Who are two examples of the top football players born in Portugal?	Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo
What award did both Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo win?	FIFA World Player of the Year
Who are some of the most renowned football managers in Portugal?	José Mourinho, André Villas-Boas, Fernando Santos, Carlos Queiroz and Manuel José
What are the three largest sports clubs by popularity in Portugal?	SL Benfica, FC Porto, and Sporting CP
What are the three largest sports club by popularity in Portugal known as?	"os três grandes" ("the big three")
How many titles in the European UEFA club competitions have "the big three" won?	eight
Other than football, what other sports are popular in Portugal?	roller hockey, basketball, futsal, handball, and volleyball
By what entity is the Algarve Cup hosted?	Portuguese Football Federation (FPF)  – Federação Portuguesa de Futebol
What year was Kanye born?	1977
What kind of music does Kanye West perform?	hip hop
What is Kanye West's middle name?	Omari
When is Kanye West's birthday?	June 8, 1977
What was the first label that Kanye produced for?	Roc-A-Fella Records
Who are some well known artists that Kanye produced for early in his career?	Jay-Z and Alicia Keys
How many albums has Kanye released since starting his solo career in 2004?	7
With which artists that Kanye formerly produced for did he go on to collaborate with?	Jay-Z
Where did Kanye West live as a child?	Chicago
What was Kanye West's first job title after art school?	producer
What year did Kanye West release his first rap CD?	2004
How many total CDs has Kanye West released in his career so far?	7
How many albums has Kanye sold?	32 million
How many downloads do Kanye's tracks have across the globe?	100 million
Kanye is known for having the most of what type of award for his age?	Grammy
How many albums does Kanye have on the "500 Greatest Albums of All Time" list?	3
What popular magazine placed Kanye on their annual list in 2005 and 2015?	Time
How many CDs has Kanye West sold?	32 million
How many Grammy Awards has Kanye West won?	21
How many of Kanye West's albums were recognized by Rolling Stone Magazine?	3
Which years was Kanye West mentioned in Time Magazine?	2005 and 2015
What subject did Kanye's mother teach at her university?	English
What Georgia city was Kanye West born?	Atlanta
What was the name of the business that Kanye West helped fund in 2006?	Good Water Store and Café
Where did Kanye West's mother work before becoming his manager?	Chicago State University
What was the name of Kanye West's high school?	Polaris High School
Where did Kanye and his mother relocate when he was 10?	Nanjing, China
While staying in China, Kanye was the only what in his class?	foreigner
How well did Kanye do in high school?	A's and B's
At what age did Kanye West relocate to China?	10
What University was the cause of West's mother moving the family to China?	Nanjing University
What was Kanye creating when he was five?	poetry
What was one of the first tracks written by Kanye when he was 13?	"Green Eggs and Ham"
Who did Kanye meet early in his career who later mentored him?	DJ No I.D.
What activity did Kanye West start doing when he was five?	writing poetry
What was the name of the song he wrote at age thirteen?	Green Eggs and Ham
What was the name of the producer that helped Kanye West?	No I.D.
Where did Kanye receive a scholarship to attend?	American Academy of Art
How old was Kanye when he dropped out of college?	20
What school did Kanye West go to in 1997?	Chicago's American Academy of Art
What subject was Kanye West's focus at Chicago State University?	English
At what age did Kanye West leave school to follow his musical passion?	20
What was the name of the CD that Kanye recorded based on his failed college experience?	College Dropout
Who were the beats Kanye made in the 90's originally intended for?	local artists
What types of records did Kanye sample in his early career.	classic soul records
What music group did Kanye join when he couldn't release his solo album?	Go-Getters
In what time period did Kanye begin producing?	mid-1990s
When did Kanye West start his production career?	mid-1990s
For which artist did Kanye West act as a ghost producer?	Deric "D-Dot" Angelettie
What late 1990s Chicago rap group was Kanye West a member of?	Go-Getters
What firm managed Kanye West's rap group?	Hustle Period
What year was the first Go-Getters album released?	1999
Kanye produced the third song from the second album of what artist?	Foxy Brown
What rappers were featured in the songs that Kanye produced for Tell 'Em Why U Madd?	Ma$e, Raekwon, and Eminem.
Which U.S. Billboard 200 chart topper did Kanye West produce a song for?	Foxy Brown
What was the name of the CD produced by Kanye that was by a made-up character?	Tell 'Em Why U Madd
What label did Kanye begin to work for in 2000?	Roc-A-Fella Records
What album did Kanye receive production credits on in 2001?	The Blueprint
In what year did Roc-A-Fella make Kanye West known?	2000
What was the name of the CD West produced for Jay Z in 2001?	The Blueprint
Although Kanye was achieving fame by producing, what did he actually want to be?	rapper
What label declined to work with Kanye after many meetings?	Capitol Records
What career was Kanye's ultimate dream?	rapper
What did Kanye West not have that made record companies turn him down?	gangsta image
Which record company turned Kanye down after many meetings?	Capitol Records
Who almost picked up Kanye but was ultimately swayed?	Joe Weinberger
What label finally (although reluctantly) picked up Kanye?	Roc-A-Fella
What did Kanye's peers see him as while he tried to pursue his rap career?	a producer
What man was almost ready to give Kanye a record deal?	Joe Weinberger
What record company eventually signed Kanye West?	Roc-A-Fella
What track did Kanye compose and perform while injured from his accident?	Through The Wire
What was the name of Kanye's 2002 mixtape that he wrote while in the hospital?	Get Well Soon...
After dropping his mixtape, Kanye revealed the name of his debut album to be what?	The College Dropout
What was the date of Kanye's car wreck?	October 23, 2002
What song did Kanye record about his experience with what happened after the wreck?	"Through The Wire"
What was the name of the mixtape Kanye released in December of 2002?	Get Well Soon
What happened to Kanye's debut album that caused him to remaster most of it?	it was leaked
How many times was the release date for Kanye's first album pushed back?	3
In what city did West finish recording his first album?	Los Angeles
How many times was The College Dropout's release put off?	3
What was supposed to be the original release date for The College Dropout?	August 2003
What place on the Billboard chart did Kanye's album debut at?	2
How many publications voted The College Dropout for album of the year?	2
What was the name of the single off the debut album that gave Kanye mainstream attention?	Jesus Walks
What label did Kanye create following the success of his first album's release?	GOOD Music
When was The College Dropout finally released?	February 2004
What song was the second released off of Kanye's The College Dropout album?	"Slow Jamz"
How many Grammy nominations did The College Dropout receive?	10
What was the name of the record label that West founded?	GOOD Music
What kind of ensemble did Kanye hire to work on his second album?	string orchestra
What composer worked alongside Kanye on the album's production?	Jon Brion
What was the name of Kanye's second studio album?	Late Registration
How many copies of Late Registration sold in its first year?	2.3 million
What English music group was an inspiration for Kanye West on his second album?	Portishead
What was the name of West's second album?	Late Registration
How many copies of Late Registration were sold in the United States?	2.3 million
The loss of which award caused Kanye to leave the American Music Awards?	Best New Artist
Kanye participated alongside Mike Meyers in a relief benefit show for what natural disaster?	Hurricane Katrina
What magazine did Kanye don a thorn crown for the cover of in 2006?	Rolling Stone
In which AMA category did Kanye lose in 2004?	Best New Artist
Which actor was alongside Kanye West when he insulted President Bush?	Mike Myers
What magazine did Kanye West pose for in 2006 that caused another controversy?	Rolling Stone
What broadcast for NBC was Kanye presenting for when he spoke negatively about President Bush?	A Concert for Hurricane Relief
What band did Kanye tour with for a year?	U2
What setting did Kanye want his next tracks to perform well in?	large arenas
Who did Kanye study in order to develop his lyrical skills?	Bob Dylan and Johnny Cash
Which band did Kanye West travel with for the Vertigo Tour?	U2
What decade of music inspired Kanye West after his tour with U2?	1980s
Other than U2 and Led Zeppelin, what other band inspired Kanye West?	The Rolling Stones
What other country singer besides Johnny Cash did Kanye listen to?	Bob Dylan
What was the name of Kanye's third album?	Graduation
Kanye released Graduation at the same time of what other famous rapper, thus drawing media comparison?	50 Cent
How many copies did Graduation sell in its first week of release?	957,000
What famous electronic duo did Kanye sample on his third album?	Daft Punk
What was the name of Kanye West's third CD?	Graduation
What artist was Kanye's third album release competing against?	50 Cent
What music group was in Kanye's first release off of Graduation?	Daft Punk
Following the loss of his mother, who did Kanye end his long-term relationship with?	Alexis Phifer
What vocal technology did Kanye pick up for his next set of artistic endeavors?	Auto-Tune
In what year did Kanye West's mother pass away?	2007
What was the name of Kanye's ex-fiance?	Alexis Phifer
What was the name of Kanye's 2008 music tour?	Glow in the Dark Tour
In what state did Kanye West record them majority of his fourth album?	Hawaii
What was the first song released off of Kanye's fourth album?	"Love Lockdown"
What label pushed out Kanye's fourth studio album?	Island Def Jam
Which album by Kanye West featured the song "Love Lockdown"?	808s & Heartbreak
808s & Heartbreak was released by what company?	Island Def Jam
When was 808s & Heartbreaks released?	November 2008
What was the second song released off of 808s?	Heartless
The major usage of musical machine on 808s was described as eponymous?	Roland TR-808 drum machine
What journalist gave "808s and Hearbreak" critical acclimation 4 years after its release?	Matthew Trammell
What was the name of the journalist that wrote about Kanye's album in 2012?	Matthew Trammell
Where did Kanye's famous mic-grab incident occur at?	2009 MTV Video Music Awards
From who did Kanye grab the mic from to make his statement?	Taylor Swift
Kanye's tour with what artist was cancelled following his outburst at the VMA's?	Lady Gaga
In what year did Kanye's biggest controversy so far take place?	2009
What artist did Kanye West interrupt Taylor Swift to defend?	Beyoncé
Which artist was Kanye supposed to tour with, but couldn't due to the Taylor Swift controversy?	Lady Gaga
What awards ceremony did Kanye not receive any nominations for after the MTV controversy?	52nd Grammy Awards
Where did Kanye base himself to create his next album?	Hawaii
What industry did Kanye turn to after taking a break from recording music?	fashion
What state did Kanye West hide in while writing his next album?	Hawaii
What is the name of Kanye's album released in 2010?	My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy
What award was My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy omitted from?	Album of the Year
What was the name of Kanye's fifth album?	My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy
When was Kanye West's fifth album debuted?	November 2010
What song off of Kanye's fifth album was a hit internationally?	"All of the Lights"
What was the name of the free music promotion on Kanye's website in 2010?	GOOD Fridays
What festival did Kanye headline in 2011?	Coachella
With what other hiphop artist did Kanye collaborate with?	Jay-Z
Where did Kanye premier a film directed by himself in 2012?	Cannes Film Festival
What event did Kanye headline in 2011?	Coachella
What was the name of the joint album Kanye made with Jay Z?	Watch the Throne
What was the top single off the album "Watch the Throne"?	"Niggas in Paris"
In what year was "Cruel Summer" released?	2012
What film festival did Kanye West premier a film called "Cruel Summer"?	2012 Cannes Film Festival
Where did Kanye begin production on his sixth album?	Paris
What became the name of his sixth studio album?	Yeezus
Who did Kanye tour alongside of in order to promote the efforts of Yeezus?	Kendrick Lamar
In what year did Kanye West begin working on his sixth album?	2013
What was the inspiration behind Kanye West's decision to call Rick Rubin?	architecture
What was the name of Kanye's sixth album?	Yeezus
On what date was Yeezus released?	June 18, 2013
What artist did Kanye go on tour with while promoting album number six?	Kendrick Lamar
What was the name of Kanye's first child with Kim Kardashian?	North
What brand set to collaborate on an apparel line with Kanye?	Adidas
What famous British artist worked with Kanye on multiple singles?	Paul McCartney
Where did Kanye perform his single "All Day" with a menagerie of other artists?	2015 BRIT Awards
Who is the mother of Kanye's first child?	Kim Kardashian
What is Kanye West's first child's name?	North
In what Italian city were Kim Kardashian and Kanye West wed?	Florence
What musician joined Kanye West on the song "Only One"?	Paul McCartney
What was the name of the Adidas clothing line by Kanye West that he released in 2013?	Yeezy Season 1
What did Kanye change the title of his next planned album from So Help Me God to?	SWISH
From which institution did Kanye receive an honorary doctorate?	Art Institute of Chicago
How many people signed a petition to keep Kanye from performing at Glastonbury Festival?	135,000
What was the original name of Kanye's album "SWISH"?	So Help Me God
What school awarded Kanye west an honorary doctorate?	School of the Art Institute of Chicago
How many people petitioned his show at the Glastonbury Music Festival in the UK?	135,000
What was the tentative release date announced for Kanye's next studio album?	February 11
What was Kanye's next album renamed again to?	Waves
With what other rapper did Kanye west have a Twitter feud with in early 2016?	Wiz Khalifa
What became the final title of Kanye's next album?	The Life of Pablo
What platform was The Life of Pablo officially released on?	Tidal
What song  by West was debuted in December 2015?	"Facts"
On January 26, 2016, Kanye told the world he changed the name of his next album from SWISH to what?	Waves
What artist did Kanye West have a feud with over Amber Rose?	Wiz Khalifa
What was the name of Kanye's clothing line premiered at Madison Square Garden?	Yeezy Season 3
What English musician did Kanye cite as one of his biggest inspirations?	David Bowie
Kanye has stated that members from which rap group influenced his early style?	Wu-Tang Clan
What name did Kanye's early production style coin.	chipmunk soul
What artist was named by Kanye West to be his "most important inspiration"?	David Bowie
Who was Kanye's greatest cultural figure?	Puff Daddy
What was the name of the song that first featured Kanye's "chipmunk soul" style?	"This Can't Be Life"
What composer did Kanye collaborate with for his second record?	Jon Brion
What classical elements did Brion bring to the production of Kanye's album?	orchestral elements, including string arrangements, piano chords, brass flecks, and horn riffs among other symphonic instrumentation
What sort of orchestra did Kanye tour with while promoting his second album?	a string section
What composer did Kanye West work with for his second album?	Jon Brion
What English trip-hop group helped influence Kanye on his second album?	Portishead
What was the name of Kanye's third record?	Graduation
What musical direction did Kanye take with his third album?	more atmospheric, rock-tinged, electronic-influenced soundscape
Kanye drew inspiration from The Rolling Stones, U2, and Led Zeppelin in what ways?	melody and chord progression
What year was Kanye West's third album released?	2007
What kind of sound did Kanye abandon a rap and hiphop one for with his fourth album?	electropop
Who did Kanye become inspired by while creating 808s & Heartbreak?	Gary Numan, TJ Swan and Boy George
What types of instruments are present on his fourth album?	dense drums, lengthy strings, droning synthesizers, and somber piano
What other artist besides Gary Numan and TJ Swan helped inspire Kanye's fourth album?	Boy George
What other type of 1980s group was Kanye's fourth album compared to other than new wave?	post-punk
The article about Kanye's fourth album written by Matthew Trammell was published in what magazine?	Rolling Stone
What is Kanye's fifth album titled?	My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy
What journalist drew comparisons between My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and other Kanye albums?	Simon Vozick-Levinson
What musician collaborated with Kanye West for his album Late Registration?	Jon Brion
What artist worked with Kanye on his album Graduation?	DJ Toomp
Kid Cudi joined Kanye for which album?	808s & Heartbreak
Which album by Kanye West has been talked about by writers for having maximalist aesthetic?	My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy
What did Kanye state that Yeezus was?	a protest to music
What artist did Kanye draw inspiration from when crafting Yeezus?	Le Corbusier
In what year was Kanye West's sixth album released?	2013
What was the title of Kanye's sixth album?	Yeezus
What did Kanye announce he would release after acquiring a Grammy in 2005?	clothing line
What finally become of Kanye's clothing line in 2009?	cancelled
When did Kanye West annouce his Pastelle Clothing line?	September 2005
What year was Kanye's Pastelle Clothing Line scrapped?	2009
What company worked with Kanye in 2009 to create his own shoe line?	Nike
For what brand did Kanye design a shoe meant for Paris Fashion Week?	Louis Vuitton
Form whom was Kanye's 2011 fashion label designed for?	women
What kind of reviews did Kanye's fashion line spark?	mixed-to-negative reviews
When did Kanye debut his second effort in the fashion world?	March 6, 2012
On what day was Kanye's women's clothing line debuted?	October 1, 2011
What was the name of Kanye West's women's clothing line?	DW Kanye West
On what day was Kanye's women's line premiered at Paris fashion week?	October 1, 2011
What was the name of West's fashion line for women?	DW Kanye West
The fashion line shown in Paris received what sort of reviews?	mixed-to-negative
On what day did West release his second fashion line?	March 6, 2012
What brand struck a deal with Kanye and sparked a new clothing line?	Adidas
How many "seasons" of clothing did Kanye release?	3
What were the shoes designed by Kanye and released by Adidas called?	Adidas Yeezy Boosts
How many pairs of shoes were sold in the initial release in New York City?	9000
What shoe was announced on Twitter by Kanye West?	Adidas Yeezy Boosts
In what year did Kanye premier his Season line?	2015
What album release coincided with Kanye's Yeezy Season 3 clothing line?	The Life of Pablo
What restaurant chain did Kanye aspire to open in his native Chicago?	Fatburger
How many restaurants did Kanye open?	2
What happened to the Fatburger chains that Kanye established?	shut down
What was the name of the restaurant Kanye annouced he was opening?	Fatburger
How many  of Kanye's Fatburger restaurants were actually opened?	2
When was Kanye's last Fatburger restaurant closed?	2011
What is the name of Kanye West's food company?	KW Foods LLC
What did Kanye call the label he founded in 2004?	GOOD Music
As of 2015, who did Kanye choose as the new president of GOOD Music?	Pusha T
What year did Kanye West open his GOOD Music production company and record label?	2004
What other artist besides Kanye West and Common was among the first to record at GOOD Music?	John Legend
Who did Kanye name President of GOOD Music in 2015?	Pusha T
What was the goal of Kanye's new creative company DONDA?	to make products and experiences that people want and can afford
Kanye's creative content company DONDA was named after who?	mother Donda West
On what date did Kanye go public with his DONDA company?	January 5, 2012
What platform was Kanye named  a co-owner of in 2015?	Tidal
What longtime friend of Kanye acquired Tidal in 2015?	Jay-Z
What criticisms of other streaming platforms does Tidal stand to challenge?	low payout of royalties
What music streaming service is Kanye West a co-owner of?	Tidal
What is Tidal's specialization?	lossless audio and high definition music videos
Which famous rapper bought Aspiro?	Jay Z
What music service is a huge competitor for Tidal?	Spotify
With the help of his mom, what foundation did Kanye create early in his career?	Kanye West Foundation
What is the goal of the Kanye West Foundation?	battle dropout and illiteracy rates, while partnering with community organizations to provide underprivileged youth access to music education
What was founded by Kanye West and his mother?	Kanye West Foundation
In What year did the Kanye West Foundation Partner with Strong American Schools?	2007
Where was the "Kanye West Foundation" founded?	Chicago
What other mission besides dropout and illiteracy rates did the Kanye West Foundation seek to improve?	music education
What campaign did the Kanye West Foundation partner with in 2007?	"Ed in '08"
In what month was the inaugural concert held for the "Ed in '08" campaign?	August
What was the Kanye West Foundation renamed to in 2008?	The Dr. Donda West Foundation
What year did the foundation end its run?	2011
In what year did Kanye West's mother pass away?	2008
Kanye's foundation was changed to what name following his mother's death?	The Dr. Donda West Foundation
What year did the foundation stop operating?	2008
What are some charitable efforts Kanye west has participated in?	100 Black Men of America, a Live Earth concert benefit, World Water Day rally
During what show did Kanye take an opportunity to criticize the efforts of a U.S. President?	A Concert for Hurricane Relief
Which U.S. President did Kanye criticize after the events of Hurricane Katrina?	George W. Bush
Which President did Kanye West accuse of "Not caring for black people"?	George W. Bush
On what day did the Kanye's famous George W. Bush criticism take place?	September 2, 2005
What happened after Kanye made his controversial statement?	Rick Kaplan cut off the microphone and then cut away to Chris Tucker
Who did Kanye West say doesn't care about black people?	George Bush
How did George W. Bush describe Kanye's controversial statement?	"one of the most disgusting moments" of his presidency
To which reporter did Kanye West express regret for his remark about President Bush?	Matt Lauer
Kanye was criticized by human rights groups for performing in what country?	Kazakhstan
How much was Kanye paid to perform in Kazakhstan?	$3 million
How is Kazakhstan's human rights record compared to the rest of the world?	one of the poorest
What country's President paid Kanye West to perform at his grandson's wedding?	Kazakhstan
Kanye, Shakira, and Rage Against the Machine refused to perform in what state due to a new law against illegal aliens?	Arizona
For what reason did Sting and other artists cancel their scheduled performances in Kazakhstan?	human rights concerns
What TV show lampooned one of Kanye's BBC Radio 1 interviews?	Jimmy Kimmel Live!
What did Kanye demand from Jimmy Kimmel in regards to the sketch?	an apology
What person was Kanye's rant on Twitter directed at?	Jimmy Kimmel
The skit on JImmy Kimmel Live! was a depiction of Kanye West and what reporter?	Zane Lowe
On what radio station did Kanye West deem himself "the biggest rockstar on the planet"?	BBC Radio 1
What president did Kanye comment on as having trouble pushing policies while in office?	Obama
What type of people did Kanye state had more power than Black people?	Jewish people
On what day did Kanye do an interview about President Obama pushing policies in Washington?	November 26, 2013
On what day did Kanye take back his original comment about Jews?	December 21, 2013
What celebrity knee-deep in controversy did Kanye endorse in a 2016 tweet?	Bill Cosby
What actor was Kanye defending on Twitter in February 2016?	Bill Cosby
To who did Kanye lose the Best New Artist award in 2004?	Gretchen Wilson
The video for what song failed to win an award for again in 2006, leading to an onstage outburst by Kanye?	Touch the Sky
What artist did Kanye West lose "Best New Artist" to at the 2004 AMAs?	Gretchen Wilson
Which Kanye West video failed to win Best Video at the MTV Europe Music Awards?	Touch the Sky
On what day did Kanye apologize for his ranting at the MTV Europe Awards?	November 7, 2006
What show did Kanye perform a spoof about the incident at the MTV Europe Awards?	Saturday Night Live
What did Kanye believe was a contributing factor in him not opening for the 2007 MTV VMAs?	race
With what song did Kanye aspire to open the VMAs with?	Stronger
What factor did Kanye West accuse of being the reason for his being excluded for the opening of the 2007 VMAs?	his race
What song was Kanye's dream to perform on the VMAs?	"Stronger"
What artist's award reception did Kanye interrupt onstage at the 2009 MTV VMAs?	Taylor Swift
Which U.S. President criticized Kanye for his VMA outburst?	Obama
Which President called Kanye West a jackass for his behavior at the 2009 VMAs?	President Barack Obama
To which artist did Kanye profusely apologize to?	Taylor Swift
What song did Kanye end up writing that referenced his outburst against Taylor Swift?	Famous
When did Kanye West post to Twitter apoloizing to Taylor Swift?	September 2010
When did Kanye take back his apology to Taylor Swift, saying that he was being "selfless"?	November 8, 2010
What album by Kanye was released in 2016?	The Life of Pablo
Which artist's award reception did Kanye interrupt at the 57th Grammy Awards?	Beck
To who did Kanye state that Beck should hand his award over to?	Beyoncé
What artist's acceptance speech did Kanye interrupt by walking on stage at the 57th Grammys?	Beck
What day did Kanye apologize to Beck on Twitter?	February 26, 2015
What award did Kanye capture at the 2015 MTV VMAs?	Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award
When does Kanye intend to run for president?	2020
What award was presented to Kanye West on August 30, 2015?	Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award
For what event was the largest amount of signatures collected in an attempt to keep Kanye from performing at it?	Glastonbury Festival 2015
What was another event that garnered a large amount of protest for Kanye's removal of headliner status?	2015 Pan American Games
What website have music fans been using to try to block Kanye West's performance at different events?	Change.org
What festival was the largest failed petition to keep Kanye from performing?	Glastonbury Festival
How many signatures were gathered for Kanye's removal from the 2015 Pan American Games?	50,000
Kanye's first engagement was to which well-known designer?	Alexis Phifer
What model did Kanye begin to date in 2008?	Amber Rose
Who has Kanye finally settled with an married in 2014?	Kim Kardashian
How many children does Kanye have with Kim?	2
What year did Kanye West begin his relationship with Alexis Phifer?	2002
When did Alexis Phifer and Kanye West get engaged?	August 2006
Who did Kanye date from 2008 to 2010?	Amber Rose
When did Kanye West start dating Kim Kardashian?	April 2012
Where in Jerusalem did Kardashian and West have their daughter North baptised?	Armenian Apostolic Church at the Cathedral of St. James
How old was Kanye's mother when she died?	58
What doctor did Donda West ignore the recommendation of to invest her heart condition?	Andre Aboolian
At approximately what time did paramedics receive the call about Kanye West's mother, Donda?	7:35 pm
What condition along with complications for the plastic surgery caused the death of Donda West?	heart disease
What doctor originally turned Donda West down for her plastic surgery operation?	Andre Aboolian
What was the name of the doctor who performed the surgery that ended up killing Donda West?	Jan Adams
What talk show did the doctor who performed Donda West's plastic surgery appear on?	Larry King Live
What was the final cause of Donda's death determined by the coroner?	"coronary artery disease and multiple post-operative factors due to or as a consequence of liposuction and mammoplasty"
What was the name of the West's family's attorney during the incident surrounding the death of Donda West?	Ed McPherson
What reasons did West's family give for filing complaints against Adams and Aboolian?	violating patient confidentiality
On what show did Adams appear to "defend himself"?	Larry King Live
On what day did the final coroner's report show that Donda died from heart disease and complications from surgery?	January 10, 2008
Where was Donda West's funeral?	Oklahoma City
What songs did Kanye dedicate to his late mother as his performance at The O2 in London?	"Hey Mama", as well as a cover of Journey's "Don't Stop Believin'"
In what city was the funeral and burial for Donda West held?	Oklahoma City
On what day was the funeral of Donda West?	November 20, 2007
What day was Kanye's first concert after the death of his mother?	November 22
On what tour did Kanye perform "Hey Mama" and his version of Journey's "Don't Stop Believing" in memory of his mother?	Glow in the Dark tour
Where did Kanye first speak on his mother's death?	New Zealand
Where did Kanye West first speak about his mother's death?	New Zealand
What famous governor signed legislation in honor of Donda West's death?	Arnold Schwarzenegger
What governor passed a law in honor of Donda West?	Arnold Schwarzenegger
What was the name of the law passed by Arnold Schwarzenegger?	"Donda West Law"
What famous stuntman sued Kanye for purported use of his likeness in 2006?	Robert "Evel" Knievel
When was the suit settled?	days before his death in November 2007
Which celebrity sued West in 2006 for trademark infrigement?	Robert "Evel" Knievel
What was the name of the nickname Kanye West took on in his video "Touch the Sky"?	Evel Kanyevel
When did Knievel settle the argument with West?	November 2007
What was Kanye arrested for in 2008?	felony vandalism
How much was Kanye's bail bond?	$20,000
What was Kanye finally charged with?	one count of misdemeanor vandalism, one count of grand theft and one count of battery
On what day was Kanye West arrested at the Los Angeles International Airport?	September 11, 2008
What were the charges filed against Kanye West?	felony vandalism
What was the name of the bodyguard also accused of vandalism?	Don "Don C." Crowley
What was the dollar amount of Kanye's bond?	$20,000
What was Kanye second arrest for?	scuffle involving a photographer outside the famous Tup Tup Palace nightclub in Newcastle
What was the date of Kanye's second arrest?	November 14, 2008
Where was Kanye arrested at for the second time?	Hilton hotel near Gateshead
At what location did the incident leading to West's second arrest take place?	Tup Tup Palace nightclub
What paparazzi member did Kanye attack at LAX in 2013?	Daniel Ramos
What was Kanye convicted for after his paparazzi attack?	misdemeanor criminal battery and attempted grand theft
What was the name of the man who was hassling West outside of LAX that West later attacked?	Daniel Ramos
How many years' probation was Kanye supposed to serve for this altercation?	2
He had to attend 24 sessions of what kind of therapy?	anger management
How many hours of community service did Kanye receive?	250
What are Kanye's religious beliefs?	Christian
"Jesus Walks" was on which of Kanye's albums?	The College Dropout
September of 2014, Kanye called himself a what during one of his concerts?	Christian
How is Kanye viewed as a 21st century artist?	among the most critically acclaimed
What famous English artist was Kanye compared to by The Guardian?	David Bowie
What reporter compared Kanye West to a lightning rod?	Jon Caramanic
Who said Kanye West was the greatest hip hop artist of all time?	Ben Westhoff
What magazine compared Kanye to David Bowie?	The Guardian
What overabundance of themes did Kanye criticize early in his career?	homophobia in hip hop
The shift away from what genre of rap is Kanye credited for?	gangsta rap
What kind of background did Kanye West grow up in?	middle-class
Who did Kanye West have a sales competition with during his album release of Graduation?	50 Cent
Who said that Kanye West effectively led a new wave of artists that weren't only interested in rapping about gunplay or drug dealing?	Ben Detrick
A number of artists have cited Kanye as being what to them?	influential
Who complimented West in Time Magazine?	inventor Elon Musk
How many songs has Kanye had that have exceeded 3 million digital sales?	6
How many songs has Kanye sold digitally in his career?	over 30 million
How many of West's six albums have gone platinum?	6
What was Kanye's fifth consecutive number one album?	Yeezus
As of 2012, how many downloads have there been of "Golddigger"?	3,086,000
What rank is West in total sales for the last decade?	third
How many total digital songs has Kanye West sold in the US?	30 million
How many Grammies has Kanye won as of 2013?	21
With which artist does Kanye tie with for reaching the top of the annual Pazz & Jop Critic Poll?	Bob Dylan
How many times has Kanye placed in the annual Time Magazine people list?	twice
In 2013, West had won how many total Grammy Awards?	21
What rank did About.com give Kanye "Top 50 Hip-Hop Producers" list?	8
On what day did MTV name Kanye as the year's Number 1 "Hottest MC in the Game."?	May 16, 2008
December 17, 2010 was the day Kanye was nominated by MTV for what?	MTV Man of the Year
What musician did West tie with for topping the annual Pazz & Jop critic poll 4 times each?	Bob Dylan
How many of Kanye's albums placed on the 2012 Rolling Stone list?	3
How many of West's albums were included on Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list?	3
Which one of Kanye's albums won The Pitchfork's Album of the Decade (so far) award?	My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy
What place did Yeezus secure on the list of 100 albums?	eighth
What online music publication ranked Kanye's album "My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy" as the world's best album so far?	The Pitchfork
What album was ranked 8 on a list of 100 albums?	Yeezus
What song was ranked third in a list of 200 "best tracks" since 2010?	"Runaway"
What President did Kanye West insult on air in 2005?	George W. Bush
Whose speech did Kanye West ruin at the 2009 MTV Awards?	Taylor Swift
What fashion items does Kanye West design?	clothing and footwear
What company did Kanye West begin?	DONDA
What year did Kanye West begin working with Adidas?	2013
What type of religion is Buddhism?	nontheistic
What are the practices of Buddhism based on?	teachings attributed to Gautama Buddha
Where did the Buddha live?	present-day Nepal
How do Buddhists believe their suffering can be ended?	through the direct understanding and perception of dependent origination and the Four Noble Truths
What did the Buddha teach should be given up to end suffering?	ignorance and craving
What type of religion is Buddhism?	nontheistic religion
Who's teaching is Buddhism based upon?	Gautama Buddha
When was Buddha alive?	between the 6th and 4th centuries BCE
Where did Buddha reside when he was alive?	present-day Nepal
Who's teachings is Buddhism based upon?	Gautama Buddha
Where was Buddha thought to live?	Nepal
When approximately was Buddha alive?	sometime between the 6th and 4th centuries BCE
Buddhism is based on the teaching of who?	Gautama Buddha
How many noble truths are there?	4
Buddha was part of what subcontinent?	Indian
Who is "the awakened one"	Buddha
What are the two major branches of Buddhism?	Theravada ("The School of the Elders") and Mahayana ("The Great Vehicle")
What is sometimes viewed as the third branch of Buddhism?	Vajrayana
Where does Theravada have the largest following?	Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia
Mahayana includes which practices of Buddhism?	Pure Land, Zen, Nichiren Buddhism, Shingon, and Tiantai (Tendai)
What is the estimated number of Buddhists in the world?	488 million[web 1] and 535 million
Which branch practices the teachings of Zen?	Mahayana
What minor branch is sometimes attributed to Mahayana?	Vajrayana
What kind of teachings does Tibetan Buddhism preserve?	Vajrayana
Vajrayana is attributed to who?	Indian siddhas
Theravada means what?	The School of the Elders
What is the goal of Theravada Buddhism?	the attainment of the sublime state of Nirvana
How is Nirvana achieved?	practicing the Noble Eightfold Path (also known as the Middle Way)
What is the bodhisattva path?	a state wherein one remains in this cycle to help other beings reach awakening
What is the goal of Tibetan Buddhism?	Buddhahood or rainbow body
How is Nirvana attained?	by practicing the Noble Eightfold Path
In what buddhism is the goal a state of nirvana?	Theravada
What buddhism has a goal of Buddhahood or rainbow body?	Tibetan
The Noble Eightfold Path is also known as what?	the Middle Way
Mahayana aspires to Buddhahood through what path?	bodhisattva
Theravada escapes what cycle?	suffering and rebirth
What are the Three Jewels of the Buddhist tradition?	the Buddha, the Dharma (the teachings), and the Sangha (the community)
What is one of the Ten Meritorious Deeds of Buddhism?	cultivation of higher wisdom and discernment
What other practices do Buddhists adhere to?	Ten Meritorious Deeds
What is one of the Ten Meritorious Deeds?	renouncing conventional living and becoming a monastic
Buddhism denies what kind of deity?	creator
Of the Ten Meritorious Deeds, giving charity reduces what?	greediness
Invocation of buddhas and bodhisattvas is in what tradition?	Mahayana
The Nidānakathā of the Jataka tales of the Theravada is attributed to who?	Nidānakathā of the Jataka tales of the Theravada
What are some other biographies that differ from the Jataka tales?	Buddhacarita, the Lokottaravādin Mahāvastu, and the Sarvāstivādin Lalitavistara Sūtra
What do scholars recognize about the life of the Buddha?	Most accept that he lived, taught and founded a monastic order
When was the Buddhagohosa written?	5th century CE
What is one of the earlier biographies on Buddhism?	the Buddhacarita
Who founded a monastic order in his life?	Buddha
Scholars do not make claims without evidence about who's life?	Buddha
Most accept that Buddha lived and taught in what type of order?	monastic
The Jataka tales of the Theravada happened in what century?	5th ce
Who said "the outline of the life must be true: birth, maturity, renunciation, search, awakening and liberation, teaching, death."?	Michael Carrithers
What are some of the outlines of life?	birth, maturity, renunciation
Who wrote a biography of Buddha?	Karen Armstrong
What do some say is Buddha's real name?	Siddhatta Gotama
What are the helpers called that helped Buddha?	disciples
Who believes "the outline of the life must be true" in reference to Buddha?	Michael Carrithers
Karen Armstrong wrote a biography on who?	the Buddha
Karen Armstrong has said that we can be confident who existed?	Siddhatta Gotama
According to early texts, when was Siddhārtha Gautama born?	fifth century BCE
According to early texts, where was Siddhārtha Gautama born?	in a community that was on the periphery, both geographically and culturally, of the northeastern Indian subcontinent
What type of community was Siddhārtha Gautama raised in?	It was either a small republic, in which case his father was an elected chieftain, or an oligarchy, in which case his father was an oligarch.
Where was Siddhārtha Gautama born?	the northeastern Indian subcontinent
When did Siddhārtha Gautama live?	fifth century BCE
What size was Siddhārtha Gautama's birthplace?	a small republic
Where did we find proof of his existence?	early texts
What was most likely Siddhārtha Gautama's father?	an oligarchy
Who was born in a northeastern part of India/	Siddhārtha Gautama
If Siddhartha lived in a small republic, his father would have been a what?	elected chieftain
What was the name of the astrologer who visited Prince Gautama's father?	Asita
What was the prediction made by Asita?	Siddhartha would either become a great king or renounce the material world to become a holy man
According to Asita, how would Siddhartha decide which path to take in life?	depending on whether he saw what life was like outside the palace walls
What was the occupation of the person who visited Gautama?	an astrologer
What was the name of his father?	Suddhodana
What was Buddha predicted to become contrary with his life as we know it?	a great king
What was the name of the astrologer that visited Gautama's father?	Asita
What is Gautama's fathers name?	Suddhodana
Asita prophesied that Siddhartha would be a kind or a what?	holy man
What did Śuddhodana do to ensure that his son became a king instead of a holy man?	prevented him from leaving the palace grounds
How old was Gautama when he first left the palace grounds?	29
What happened when Gautama left the palace grounds?	he learned of the suffering of ordinary people
What are the four sights in Buddhism?	encountering an old man, a sick man, a corpse and, finally, an ascetic holy man
What did Buddha's father want him to become?	a king
By what age was he venturing outside?	29
What were his first four encounters called?	the four sights
What did Gautama do after learning about the outside world?	abandon royal life
Suddhodana wanted his son to become what?	a king
At what age did Gautama venture out from the palace area?	29
How many "sights" did Gautama have that are well known?	four
Gautama encountered an old man, a sick man, a holy man, and a what?	corpse
What was the first thing Gautama did on his spiritual quest?	went to study with famous religious teachers of the day
What is the path of moderation between the extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification called?	the Middle Way
What are some of the practices Gautama underwent on his quest?	prolonged fasting, breath-holding, and exposure to pain
What was the first skill Gautama learnt?	meditation
What almost killed Gautama in his pursuit?	asceticism
What did he receive from the locals that changed his approach?	milk and rice
What is the path of moderation called he followed?	Middle Way
Gautama didn't like the religious teaching he initially found because of why?	they did not provide a permanent end to suffering
What did Gautama accept from a village girl?	milk and rice
Gautama devoted himself to what type of meditation?	anapanasati
Buddhists call anapanasati what?	the Middle Way
How old was Gautama when he sat under the Bodhi Tree?	35
What kind of tree was the Bodhi Tree?	Ficus religiosa
What did Gautama spend the rest of his life doing after reaching enlightenment?	he spent the rest of his life teaching the path of awakening he had discovered
How old was the Buddha at the time of his death?	80
What is the south branch of the tree Gautama sat under called?	Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
What was the tree called he sat under?	Ficus religiosa
What was the tree renamed that Gautama achieved enlightenment under?	Bodhi Tree
At what age did Gautama come to pass?	80
When he was 35 Gautama sat in meditation under what tree?	Bodhi Tree
What type of tree was the Bodhi Tree?	Ficus religiosa
What town was the Bodhi Tree in?	Bodh Gaya
The south branch of the original fig tree is known as?	Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
What is samsara?	the continual repetitive cycle of birth and death
What is avidya?	ignorance
What is dukkha?	suffering, anxiety, dissatisfaction
Is liberation from samsara possible?	In the Buddhist view, liberation from samsara is possible by following the Buddhist path.
The cycle of birth and death is called what in Buddhism?	Samsara
How many realms of existence are there in Buddhism?	six
avidya is what kind of samsara?	ignorance
How can you be freed from samsara?	by following the Buddhist path
What is samsara defined as?	the continual repetitive cycle of birth and death
How many realms of existance are within the cycle of rebirths?	six
Realms can be understood as physical realms of what type of states?	psychological
Samsara is caused by what?	avidya
A person can get away from samsara by doing what?	following the Buddhist path
What does the Sanskrit term Karma translate as?	action, work
What is karma according to Buddhism?	the force that drives saṃsāra
What is theavoidance of unwholesome actions and the cultivation of positive actions called?	sīla
What actions does karma refer to in Buddhism?	actions of body, speech or mind that spring from mental intent
What is the definition of Karma from Sanskrit?	action, work
What is the avoidance of bad acts called?	sīla
Karma's actions come from what?	cetanā
What is the result of Karma called?	vipāka
What is Karma?	the force that drives saṃsāra
Avoidance of unwholesome actions and use of positive actions is called what?	sīla
what does vipaka mean?	result
In which branch of Buddhism is it believed that there can be no divine salvation or forgiveness for karma?	Theravada Buddhism
In Mahayana Buddhism, what are some Mahayana sutras that are believed to remove negative karma just by the hearing of the texts?	the Lotus Sutra, the Aṅgulimālīya Sūtra and the Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra
The reciting of mantras as a means for removing past negative karma is a part of which branch of Buddhism?	Vajrayana
According to Genshin, who has the power to destroy karma?	Amitābha
What Buddhism says that salvation is unattainable?	Theravada Buddhism
Who has the power to destroy bad karma?	Amitābha
What type of sutra is the Lotus Sutra?	Mahayana
Some mantras are used for cutting off what type of karma?	negative
Who was the Japanese Pure Land teacher?	Genshin
According to Genshin, whats has the power to destroy karma?	Amitābha
What is the process in which beings go through cycles of lifetimes as many forms of sentient life?	Rebirth
Which doctrine denies the concept of a permanent self or soul?	The doctrine of anattā (Sanskrit anātman)
In Buddhism, rebirth into consecutive lives is determined by what?	the laws of cause and effect
Sentient life according to Buddhism runs between what two points?	from conception to death.
The laws of cause and effect can also be called?	karma
What is the name for the process of a succession of lifetimes?	Rebirth
What doctrine rejects the idea of permanent self?	anatta
"dependent arising" is the meaning of what word?	pratītyasamutpāda
Hinduism and Christianity use what term for a permanent self?	eternal soul
Rebirth into the Śuddhāvāsa Worlds or Pure Abodes can only be attained by who?	skilled Buddhist practitioners known as anāgāmis (non-returners)
Rebirth into the formless realms can only be attained by who?	those who can meditate on the arūpajhānas, the highest object of meditation
How many planes of existence are there?	31
What are the higher heavens called?	Pure Abodes
What are skilled Buddhists called?	anāgāmis
What is another name for Ārūpyadhātu?	formless realms
What is the highest object of meditation called?	arūpajhānas
How many planes of existence?	31
Skilled buddhist practictioners that can get to the higher heavens are known as what?	anāgāmis
What is the highest object of meditation?	arūpajhānas
What does arupyadhatu mean?	formless realms
There is a transitional state between one life and the next according to what branches of Buddhism?	East Asian and Tibetan
What branch of Buddhism rejects that there is a transitional state between lives?	Theravada
Passages in what teaching support the idea that the Buddha taught of a stage between lives?	Samyutta Nikaya of the Pali Canon
What is the state called between lives?	bardo
Which major part of Buddhism rejects bardo?	Theravada
What book discusses bardo?	Samyutta Nikaya
Other than Tibetan Buddhism, what other Buddhism supports bardo?	East Asian
There is an intermediate state between one life and the next according to what Buddism?	East Asian and Tibetan
What type of Theravada rejects the intermediate state idea?	orthodox
Some passages of what Canon support the idea of intermediate stages?	Pali
What is considered to be central to the teachings of Buddhism?	the Four Noble Truths
What do the Four Noble Truths explain?	the nature of dukkha (suffering, anxiety, unsatisfactoriness), its causes, and how it can be overcome
What teachings are the most important to Buddhism?	the Four Noble Truths
What part of Dukkha deals with pain?	suffering
What is considered central to the teachings of Buddhism?	Four Noble Truths
The four truths explain the nature of what?	dukkha
What does the first of the Four Noble Truths explain?	the nature of dukkha
What is Dukkha?	"suffering", "anxiety", "unsatisfactoriness", "unease", etc.
What does the first truth cover?	Dukkha
What is another word for Dukkha?	suffering
What is another nature of Dukkha?	anxiety
How many aspects are there to Dukkha?	three
Dukkha can be translated as what word in regards to unhappiness?	unsatisfactoriness
Suffering, anxiety, unsatisfactoriness, and unease is the translation of what word?	Dukkha
How many aspects does dukkha have?	three
What does the second of the Four Noble Truths explain?	that the origin of dukkha can be known
What is the origin of dukkha?	craving (Pali: tanha) conditioned by ignorance (Pali: avijja)
What is the third of the Four Noble Truths explain?	the complete cessation of dukkha is possible
What is the fourth of the Four Noble Truths explain?	identifies a path to this cessation
What is the second truth?	dukkha can be known.
How is the meaning of Dukkha explained?	craving
What is a contributing factor to Dukkha?	ignorance
The second truth is?	the origin of dukkha can be known
The origin of dukkha is explained as craving conditioned by what?	ignorance
The root cause of dukkha is identified as ignorance of what?	true nature of things
The third noble truth is that the complete cessation of what is possible?	dukkha
What is the fourth of the Buddha's Four Noble Truths?	The Noble Eightfold Path
What is the purpose of the Noble Eightfold Path?	lead to the cessation of dukkha
What are the eight factors of the Noble Eightfold Path?	Right View (or Right Understanding), Right Intention (or Right Thought), Right Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood, Right Effort, Right Mindfulness, and Right Concentration
The Noble Eightfold Path is which of Buddha's Truths?	the fourth
The fourth truth consists of how many factors?	Eight
What is the end goal of the Fourth Truth?	the cessation of dukkha
What is one of the eight factors?	Right Action
The Noble Eightfold Path is which Noble Truth?	the fourth
The noble Eightfold path is a set of how many inerconnected factors?	eight
When the eight factors are developed together, is leads to the cessation of what?	dukkha
Who describes the Noble Eightfold Path as "a mandala of interconnected factors that support and moderate each other."?	Ajahn Sucitto
How are the eight factors of the Noble Eightfold Path to be understood?	as eight significant dimensions of one's behaviour
What can one's behaviour be divided into?	mental, spoken, and bodily
Who describes the path as "a mandala of interconnected factor that support and moderate each other"?	Ajahn Sucitto
During his search for enlightenment, Gautama combined what teachings?	the yoga practice of his teacher Kalama with what later became known as "the immeasurables"
What was the new kind of human invented by Gautama?	one without egotism
What are the Four Immeasurable Minds also known as?	brahmaviharas, divine abodes, or simply as four immeasurables
What is the best known of the four immeasurables?	mettā or loving-kindness meditation
The Four Immeasurables are taught as a form of meditation that cultivates what?	wholesome attitudes towards all sentient beings
Gautama combined the yoga practice of what teacher?	Kalama
Gautama invented a new kind of human without what?	egotism
What are the "four Immeasurable minds"?	love, compassion, joy, and equanimity
Who calls the four immeasurable minds "four limitless ones"?	Pema Chödrön
The Four Immeasurables are taught as a form of what?	meditation
When did Gautama Buddha discover the Middle Way?	prior to his enlightenment
An important guiding priciple of Buddhist practice is what?	the Middle Way
Guatama discovered the middle path before his what?	enlightenment
What are some of the theories and philosophies produced by Buddhist scholars?	Abhidharma, Buddhist philosophy and Reality in Buddhism
Does Buddhism encourage or discourage doctrinal studies?	Some schools of Buddhism discourage doctrinal study, and some regard it as essential practice.
Who has produced a number of theories and concepts such as Abhidharma and Reality in Buddhism?	Buddhist scholars
Some schools within Buddhism discourage what type of study?	doctrinal
What is the goal of the Buddhist path?	liberation
Upon awakening to the true nature of the self, what is one is liberated from?	suffering (dukkha) and the cycle of incessant rebirths (saṃsāra)
Liberation is know as what?	nirvāṇa
What is the goal of the buddhist path?	nirvāṇa
In awakening to the true nature of the self, one no longer care about what?	objects
Buddha recommended viewing thing by how many marks of existence?	three
What is the meaning of impermanence in Buddhism?	all compounded or conditioned phenomena (all things and experiences) are inconstant, unsteady, and impermanent
According to the Buddhist doctrine of impermanence, how does life express impermanence?	in the aging process, the cycle of rebirth (saṃsāra), and in any experience of loss
Why is attachment to things futile?	because things are impermanent
What is in a constant flux?	Everything
Everything is continuously coming into being and what?	ceasing to be
The cycle of rebirth is also called what?	saṃsāra
According to doctrine, because all thing don't last, attachment can lead to what?	suffering
The term dukkha corresponds to what English terms?	suffering, pain, unsatisfactoriness, sorrow, affliction, anxiety, dissatisfaction, discomfort, anguish, stress, misery, and frustration
Dukkha is often translated as suffering, but the philosophical meaning of dukkha of more closely related to what term?	disquietude
Buddhism seeks to be neither pessimistic or optimistic, but what?	realistic
Suffering is a central concept in what?	Buddhism
The philosophical meaning of suffering is close what term?	disquietude
The condition of being disturbed is what?	disquietude
In translation what term is often left untranslated to keep of fuller definition?	dukkha
What is the third mark of existence in Buddhism?	Not-self (Pāli: anatta; Sanskrit: anātman)
The Buddha rejected the metaphysical assertions "I have a Self" and "I have no Self" as views that bind one to what?	suffering
What was the answer given when the Buddha was asked if the body is the same as the self?	the Buddha refused to answer
What is the conclusion that one comes to when analyzing the changing physical and mental components or  person or thing?	neither the respective parts nor the person as a whole comprise a self
What is the 3rd mark of existence?	Not-self
In what form is anatta not meant as a metaphysical assertion?	Nikayas
Buddha rejected the assertion "I have a Self" and what other related assertion?	"I have no Self"
What is the term for constantly changing physical and mental parts?	skandhas
What is the name of the Buddhist doctrine that states that phenomena arise together in a mutually interdependent web of cause and effect?	pratītyasamutpāda, (Sanskrit; Pali: paticcasamuppāda; Tibetan Wylie: rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba; Chinese: 緣起)
Translated into English, what does pratītyasamutpāda mean?	"dependent origination", "conditioned genesis", "dependent relationship", "dependent co-arising", "interdependent arising", or "contingency"
The doctrine of pratityasumatupada is a important part of what type of metaphysics?	Buddhist
What is the most common application of the concept of pratītyasamutpāda?	the scheme of Twelve Nidānas
What does the scheme of Twelve Nidānas explain?	the continuation of the cycle of suffering and rebirth (saṃsāra) in detail.
An application of the idea of pratityasamutpada is the scheme of what?	Twelve Nidānas
What doe nidana mean?	cause, foundation, source or origin
What describes the connection between the conditions of cyclic existence?	The Twelve Nidānas
What describes the causal connection between the subsequent conditions of cyclic existance?	The Twelve Nidānas
How are sentient beings freed from suffering?	by attaining Nirvana
What is the first Nidāna?	ignorance
The absence of ignorance leads to what?	the absence of the others
Who always suffers throughout samsara?	Sentient beings
What is suffering also called?	dukkha
How do you free yourself of dukkha?	attaining Nirvana
What is the first Nidana?	ignorance
Nagarjuna's main contribution was the exposition of the concept of what?	śūnyatā
What does sunyata mean?	emptiness
Nagarjuna said that sentient beings are empty of what?	ātman
What does dharmas mean?	phenomena
What teaching were criticized by Nagarjuna?	Sarvastivada teachings
What scholars reformed Sarvastivada teachings?	Vasubandhu and Asanga
What is the doctrine that says that the mind and only the mind are real?	cittamatra
What Yogacarins asserted that the mind was not truly existent?	Vasubandhu and Asanga
What does tathagatagarbha mean?	Buddha-nature
what does prajnaparamita mean?	perfected spiritual insight
According to what school is tathgatagarbha the inseparability of clairty and emptiness of one's mind?	Sakya
According to what school does it refer to the innate qualities of the mind that express themselves as omniscience?	Jonang
What type of sutras were generally ignored in india?	tathāgatagarbha
What term means cessation?	Nirvana
What term means awakening?	nirvana
What is the term for someone who has achieved nirvana?	arahant
What is the term applied to the experience of the awakening of arahants?	Bodhi
In early Buddhism Bodhi used a meaning synonymous to what word?	nirvana
What is the term for greed or craving?	raga
what is the word for hate or aversion?	dosa
What does moha mean?	delusion
What has achieved nirvana and also liberation from delusion?	bodhisattva
If bodhi is attained what do you become?	a buddha
In theravada buddhism, bodhi and what term have the same meaning?	nirvana
What term is used for the complete nirvana attained by the arahant at death?	parinirvana
Who is a fully awakened being who has purified his mind of the three poisons of desire, aversion, and ignorance?	a Buddha
A Buddha is no longer bound by what?	Samsara
What do unawakend people experience?	suffering
How many Buddhas are considered to have existed in the Pali Canon?	28
A Theravada and Mahayana belief is that the next Buddha will be one named what?	Maitreya
Mahayana has many Buddhas of what origin?	celestial
A person can awaken from the "sleep of ignorance" by acknowledging the true nature of what?	reality
At the end of the cycle of rebirth a person is called what?	arahants
Nirvana and what term carry the same meaning?	Bodhi
What is the term for extinction of only hatred and greed, with residue of delusion?	anagami
In the Mahayana, who is thought to be an omnipresent being?	Buddha
Who is thought to be beyond the range and reach of thought?	Buddha
In what sutras are the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha viewed as One?	Mahayana
Buddha's death is seen as an illusion, as he is living in other planes of what?	existence
Who is permitted to offer "new truths" based on Buddhas input?	monks
What is the term for the idea of ultimately nothing has existance?	śūnyatā
Who are enlightened people who vow to continue being reborn?	bodhisattvas
What is characterized by the deep truts in the "other-power" of Amitabha Buddha	Pure Land
What is perhaps the most faith-oriented for of Buddhism?	Pure Land
What Buddha vowed to rescue all beings from samsaric suffering?	Amitabha
Who is believed to have achieved enlightenment first?	Gautama Buddha
What is the term for the stretch of history during which people rmember and practice the teachings of the earliest known buddha?	A Buddha era
Who is the Buddha of this Buddha era?	Gautama Buddha
Who taught directly or indirectly to all other Buddhas?	Gautama Buddha
Who believes there are innumerable other Buddhas in other universes?	Mahayana Buddhists
What buddhist belief says that Buddhas come one at a time and not within other eras?	Theravada
What form of Buddhism has declined to the point where few are capable of following the path?	Pure Land
What does Bodhisattva mean?	enlightenment being
What is the term for the spontaneous wish to attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings?	bodhicitta
What term means "great vehicle"?	Mahayana
What is an honorary synonym for Bodhisattvayana?	Mahayana
The Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita Sutra is an important text of what type?	Mahayana
What buddhism encourages everyone to become bodhisattvas?	Mahayana
What is the idea there the practitioner promises to work for the complete enlightenment of all beings by practicing the six paramitas?	bodhisattva vow
What are the six perfections under Mahayana teachings?	dāna, śīla, kṣanti, vīrya, dhyāna, and prajñā
Which Dalai Lama cites Shantideva's famous saying?	the 14th Dalai Lama
Devotion is an important part of the practice of most what?	Buddhists
What are the devotional practices?	bowing, offerings, pilgrimage, and chanting
Buddhism traditionally incorporates states of what type of absorption?	meditative
The most acient yogic ideas is found in the early sermons of who?	the Buddha
The difference between the Buddha's teaching and the yoga presented in what what type of texts is significant?	Brahminic
According to the Buddha event he highest meditative state is not what?	liberating
Meditation was an aspect of the practice of who?	the yogis
In Buddhism, what must be developed at all times?	mindfulness and clear awareness
Religious knowledge is also known as what?	vision
What type of techniques were shared with other traditions of his day?	meditative
There is an idea where ethics are causally related to the attainment of what?	transcendent wisdom
What are probably the earliest texts describing meditation techniques?	Buddhist texts
What describes meditative states exising before the Buddha?	Buddhist texts
What two items were written after the rise of Buddhism?	Upanishads
In pre-buddhist early Brahminic texts there is no evidence for what?	meditation
The upanishads statements reflect what type of tradition?	contemplative
What contains evidence for a contemplative tradition?	Nasadiya Sukta
What is the first step in a school of Buddhism?	the Three Jewels
What mentions taking refuge on behalf of young or unborn children?	Majjhima Nikaya
What type of Buddhism adds a fourth refuge?	Tibetan
The Three Jewels are preceived as possessed of an eternal and unchanging what?	essence.
What has an irreversable effect?	The Three Jewels
Who presented himself as a model?	Gautama Buddha
What offers a refuge by providing guidelines for the alleviation of suffering?	Dharma
What provides refuge by preserving the authentic teachings of the Buddha?	Sangha
What is an action committed through the body and involves intentional effort?	Śīla
Sila is the second what?	pāramitā
What keeps the cultivator from rebirth in the four realms of existance?	keeping the precepts
What is the foundation of Samadhi/Bhavana?	Śīla
What promotes not only the peace of mind but also peace in the community?	keeping the precepts
What does sila refer to?	overall principles of ethical behavior
Lay people tend to live by the five what?	precepts
Schools can undertake eight precepts, which add basic what?	asceticism.
Precepts are not created as imperatives, but as what?	training rules
The cultivation of dana and what kind of conduct refine consciousness?	ethical
Even if there is no further Buddhist practice, what heavens is still likely?	lower
Of the eight precepts which one is on sexual misconduct?	third
What is the third strict precept on sexual misconduct?	a precept of celibacy
How many precepts are on the list?	ten
In the complete list of precepts, which one is partitioned into two?	seventh
How many basic precepts are there for monastics?	the ten precepts
What is the specific moral code for monks and nuns?	vinaya
How many rules dows the patimokkha have?	227
What are the scriptures on vinaya called?	vinayapitaka
Regarding the monastic rules, the Buddha reminds his hearers that it is the spirit that what?	counts
The rules themselves are designed to assure a satisfying what?	life
The rules are a perfect springboard for what?	higher attainments
Monastics are instructed by the Buddha to live as what?	islands unto themselves
Distinctive Vinaya and ethics are contained within what sutra?	Mahayana Brahmajala
Bodhisattvas are not encouraged to eat what?	meat
Where is the monastic vinaya displaced and clergy is allowed to marry?	Japan
In Chinese Buddhism what meditation is more popular?	Zen
Evidence has shown some lay people got to proficiency in all eight what?	jhānas
What does the word samyaksamadhi mean?	right concentration
Meditation is the primary means of cultivating what?	samādhi
Upon development of samadhi, a person gets rid of what?	defilement, calm, tranquil, and luminous
What is powerful concentration called?	jhāna
What is the term when the mind is ready to penetrate and gain insight?	vipassanā
Mindfulness is essential to concentration, which is neede to achieve what?	insight
Samatha meditation starts from being mindful of an object or what?	idea
What is the term for tranquility?	jhāna
In Buddhism, samatha meditation can calm the what?	mind
Vipassana meditation can reveal how the mind was what?	disturbed
What is the term for insight knowledge?	jñāna
What is the term for understanding?	prajñā
What eradicates the defilements completely?	understanding
In Theravada Buddhism, what is the cause of human existence and suffering?	craving
What does craving carry with it?	defilements
Deeply rooted afflictions of the mind create what?	suffering and stress
What is the ultimate goal for Theravadins?	Nibbāna
How many Noble Truths are there?	Four
Prajna is the wisom that is able to extinguish afflictions and bring about what?	bodhi
What is listed as the sixth of the six paramitas of the mahayana?	Prajñā
Initially prajna is attained at a conceptual level by means of listening to what?	sermons
In theory when can one attain Nirvana during practice?	at any point
What can be applied to daily life once it is attained?	conceptual understanding
Zen Buddhism is known as what in Korea?	seon
What form of buddhism lays special emphasis on meditation?	Zen
What form of Buddhism places less emphasis on scriptures?	Zen
Zen focuses on what type of breakthroughs?	spiritual
Zen Buddhism is divided into how many main schools?	two
Which schools of Zen likes the use of meditation on the koan for spiritual breakthroughs?	Rinzai
What Buddhist teachings are often full of paradox?	Zen
What type of self is equated with the Buddha?	True Self
What is not allowed to confine and bind oneself?	Thinking and thought
What type of Buddhism is Tibeto-Mongolian based on?	Mahayana
What is the English term for Vajrayana?	Diamond Vehicle
What type of Buddhism is concerned with ritual and meditative practices?	Tantric
Psycho-physical energy is harnessed through what?	ritual
What time period was the beginning of Buddhism?	second half of the first millennium BCE
Scholars believe that karma originated in what?	the shramanas
What groups broke with Brahmanic tradition?	shramanas
Shramanas were a continuation of what type of trand of Indian thought?	non-Vedic
Buddhism arose in what area?	Greater Magadha
Greater magadha stretched from Sravasti in the north-west to what area in the south-east?	Rajagrha
What time period did the eastward spread of Brahmanism start?	2nd or 3rd centuries
Movements were influenced by philosophical thought within the Vedic tradition such as what?	in the Upanishads
The movement included atomists such as what?	Pakudha Kaccayana
What is the term for agnostics?	Ajnanas
What movement focused on the idea that the sould must be freed from matter?	Jains
A criticism the Buddha gave dealing with animals was?	Vedic animal sacrifice
The Buddha mocked what hymn of the Vedic?	hymn of the cosmic man
The original Veda of the rishis was altered by a few Brahmins who introduced what?	animal sacrifices
The Buddha refused to pay respect to who, during their time of animal sacrifice?	Vedas
What is in dispute regarding the research into the core of the teachings?	The reliability
A large problem in the study of early Buddhism is the relationship of dhyana and what else?	insight
Liberating insight is attained after mastering what?	Rupa Jhanas
Later edition of texts such as what has the Rupa Jhanas?	Majjhima Nikaya
According the Bronkhorst, intentions and desire are responsible for what?	rebirth
Bronkhurst says that Buddha had a view of 'what' much different then current day?	karma
What was the earliest Buddhism type?	dhyana
Buddha's way to release was by means of what type of practices?	meditative
From which jhana did Buddha gain bodhi?	fourth
A logic problem arises when noting that the four truths constitute what?	liberating insight
The four truths depict what type of path of practice?	linear
What is the Sanskrit form of Nibbana?	Nirvāna
Many terms for Nibbana can be found throughout the what?	Nikayas
The desired goal for buddhism is what?	Nirvāna
A description of the Buddhist path may have been as simplistic as what term?	the middle way
The description of buddhism was broadened resulting in what path?	eightfold
Authors Bronkhorst and Anderson claim the four truths bacame a substitution for what?	prajna
What is prajna called in english?	liberating insight
Gotamas teachings may have been personal and adjusted to the need of each what?	person
How many marks of existence reflect Upanishadic influences?	three
The periods of Buddhisma in India is divided into how many periods?	five
What is the first period of Buddhism called?	Early Buddhism
What is another name for Nikaya buddhism?	Sectarian
What is the last period of Buddhism?	Esoteric Buddhism
What is Esoteric Buddhism also called?	Vajrayana
Was is the earliest phase of buddhism?	Pre-sectarian
Gautama Buddha most likely taught the idea of Karma and what?	rebirth
Gautama buddha taught what Path concept?	Noble Eightfold
Soon after the parinirvana of Gautama Buddha, what type of council was held?	Buddhist
Who was cousin of the Buddha?	Ānanda
What are the discourses of the Buddha called?	sūtras
Some sources say that discourse of who else were recited along with Buddha's?	abhidhamma
The Sangha began to break into separte factions after what council?	the Second
According to the Dipavamsa they started immediately after what council?	the Second Council
The Mahasanghika places the breakup at what time?	100 BCE
The major schism was between the Sthaviras and what other group?	Mahasanghikas
The Dipavamsa says that the losing party broke away in protest and formed what?	Mahasanghika
The Mahasanghikas argued that the Sthaviras were trying to expand what?	the vinaya
Who gave rise to the Theravada school?	Sthaviras
Monks following different schools of thought seem to have lived happily together in the same what?	monasteries
By the latest at around 100 CE, schisms were being caused by what type of desagreements?	doctrinal
What is a detailed scholastic reworking of doctrinal material called?	Abhidharma
The abhidharma texts do not contain treatises, but what?	summaries or numerical lists
The Abhidharma texts are from what time?	3rd century BCE
There is a disagreement on whether a school had an Abhidhamma or not, which school is it?	Mahasanghika
Which sutras are among the earliest Mahayana sutras?	Prajñāpāramitā
The Prajnaparamita sutras were developed along the krsna river in what region of South India?	Āndhra
The earliest Mahayana sutra include the very first version of what genre?	Prajñāpāramitā
Texts concerning Aksobhya Buddha were written down in what century?	1st century BCE
Author Warder believes that the Mahayana originated in the south of India in what area?	Āndhra
The ancient buddhist site  in the lower Krsna Valley can be traced to at least what century BCE?	third
Evidence suggests that many Early mahayana scriptures originated in what part of India?	South
There is no evidence that Mahayana ever referred to a separate school of what?	Buddhism
The mahayana never tried to have separte what?	Vinaya
We know that both Mahayana and non Mahayana monks live in the same what?	monasteries
Most of the early extant evidence for the origins of Mhayana comes from what type of translations?	Chinese
The Mahayana teachings were first propagated into China by who?	Lokakṣema
The earliest Mahayana sutras included the very first versions of what series?	Prajñāpāramitā
Texts concerning Aksobhya Buddha were probably composed in what century BCE?	1st
What four types of thought developed during the period of late mahayna buddhism?	Madhyamaka, Yogacara, Tathagatagarbha, and Buddhist Logic
What was the latest thought type?	Buddhist Logic
In India the two main philosophical schools of the Mahayana were Madhyamaka and what else?	Yogacara
Buddhism may have spread quickly because of what Mauryan emperor?	Ashoka
The support of Asoka and his descendants led to what being built more?	stūpas
What does stupas mean in English?	Buddhist religious memorials
Emissaries were sent to various countries to what direct from India?	west
Scholars disagree on whether emissaries were accompanied by Buddhist what?	missionaries
What were the emissaries used for?	to spread Buddhism
The gradual spread of Buddhism exposed it to a variety of influences including what civilization?	Persian and Greek
Who was the Greek king immortalized in Buddhist canon?	Menander
The Theravada school spread south from india in what century BCE?	3rd century
The Dharmagupta schol spread in what century to Kashmir?	3rd century
When was the first documented translation efforts by foreign Buddhist monks in China?	2nd century CE
Mahayana Sutras spread to China during what century?	2nd century CE
What two countries after China was the Mahayana sutras spread?	Korea and Japan
When did Buddhism apread from India to Tibet?	8th century onwards
China and India are now starting to fund what type of shrines in various Asian countries?	Buddhist
What is the Dharma?	the teachings of the Buddha
What is the Sangha?	the Buddhist community
West Buddhism is often seen as exotic and what?	progressive
New forms of Buddhism are created because of what reason?	Modern influences
When did a number of modern movement in Buddhism emerge?	second half of the 20th Century
What is the Dalit buddhist movement sometimes called?	neo-Buddhism
What Buddhism emerged in the second half of the 20th century in Japan?	Nichiren Buddhism: Soka Gakkai
What does Soka Gakkai mean in English?	Value Creation Society
What Buddhist movement has linked more than 12 million people?	Soka Gakkai International
What is the largest Buddhist movement in the world?	SGI
What religion is practiced by an estimated 488 to 535 million people?	Buddhism
What country has the largest population of Buddhists?	China
How many Buddhists are in China?	244 million
How may adherents does Mahayana have?	360 million
How many adherents does Thervada have?	150 million
How many Buddists are outside of Asia?	Seven million
How many Buddhists were there in 1910?	138 million
How many Buddhists are there in 2010?	495 million
How many buddhists are in Asia?	487 million
What does Hinayana mean in English?	lesser vehicle
What is used by Mahayana followers to name the early schools?	Hinayana
Each tradition has its own core what?	concepts
there are common concepts to both major buddhist branches according to what organization?	Buddhist ecumenical organization
What is the oldest surviving Buddhist school?	Theravada
Where does the name theravada come from?	ancestral Sthāvirīya
Sinhalese buddhist reformer portrayed what Canon as the original version of scripture?	Pali Canon
Where is there a growing presence of Theravada?	the west
What type of Buddhists believe that personal effort is required to realize rebirth?	Theravadin
Laypersons can perform good actions, producing what?	merit
What was the most important Mahayana centre of learning?	Nālandā University
Mahayana schools recognize all or part of what?	Mahayana Sutras
A few of the sutras for Mahayanists became a manifestation of who?	the Buddha
Faith in and veneration of Mahayana are stated in what sutras?	Lotus Sutra and the Mahaparinirvana Sutra
Native Mahayana buddhism is also called what?	Eastern Buddhism
The Buddhism practiced in Tibet, the Himalayan regions and Mongolia are often referred to as?	Northern Buddhism
What is the most widely practised Eastern Buddhism?	the Pure Land school of Mahayana
The royal courts sponsored both Buddhism and what?	Saivism
Mantras taught in the Saiva, Garuda, and Vaisnava tantra will be effective if applied by who?	Buddhists
What work is associated with Guhyasamaja tradition?	The Guhyasiddhi of Padmavajra
There is a great variety of what type of scripture?	Buddhist
Some schools venerate certain texts as religious what?	objects
Unlike most religions, Buddhism has no single central what?	text
Tibetan Buddhists have not even translated most of the what?	āgamas
Some scholars say there is no universally accepted common what?	core
What has been seen by some as a hinderance to understanding Buddhist philosophy?	size and complexity of the Buddhist canons
In Sri Lanka, what was determined to be the best unifying scripture?	Dhammapada
There have been attempts to create a single text with all the main ideas of what religion?	Buddhism
condensed study texts where created in what tradition?	Theravada
Goddard collected mainly what type of Buddhist scripture?	Zen
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar attempted to create a single combined document with all Buddhist principles and called it?	The Buddha and His Dhamma
What means "three baskets"?	Pāli Tipitaka
What does the "three baskets" refer to?	the Vinaya Pitaka, the Sutta Pitaka, and the Abhidhamma Pitaka
What contains disciplinary rules for Buddhist Monks and nuns?	Vinaya Pitaka
What contains discourses ascribed to Gautama Buddha?	the Sutta Pitaka
What contains material ofen described as systematic expositions of the Gautama Buddha teachings?	Abhidhamma Pitaka
What is the only Tipitaka to survive intact in its original language?	Pāli Tipitaka
Is is said that some early schools of buddhism had how many pitakas?	five or seven
Which monk presided after the death of the Buddha?	Mahākāśyapa
What was the goal of the council?	to record the Buddha's teachings
the vinaya was recited by?	Upāli
Who was the Buddha's personal attendant?	Ānanda
Ananda was called upon to recite what?	dhamma
Much of the material in the Canon is not specifically what?	Theravadin
Who may have added texts to the Canon for some time?	The Theravadins
What are considered the original teachings of the Buddha?	Mahayana sutras
What is a very broad genre of Buddhist scripture?	Mahayana sutras
What teaching was criticized by Nagarjuna?	Sarvastivada Abhidharma
What sutras are reserved for those who follow the bodhisattva path?	Mahayana
What does Mahayana mean?	the Great Vehicle
What path is described as being built upon the motivation to liberate all living beings?	bodhisattva path
What sutras were transmitted in secret?	Mahayana
What sutras could have been preserved in non-human worlds?	Mahayana
What tradition says that sutras might have come from other Buddhas or Bodhisattvas?	Mahayana tradition
How many Mahayana sutras have survivied in Sanskrit or in Chinese or Tibetan translations?	six hundred
What buddhism recognizes sutras of Chinese origin?	East Asian Buddhism
When did Mahayana sutras start to influence the behavior of mainstream buddhists in India?	after the 5th century CE
What was the pejorative label for those that rejected Mahayana sutras?	Hinayana
What school does not include the Mahayava scriptures in its canon?	the Theravada
The modern Theravada school stablished itself in what country?	Sri Lanka
What Mahayana related label is considered derogatory?	hinayana
The mahayana occasionally referred to early Buddhism as what?	Hinayana
What term was more politically correct term for the word Hinayana?	Śrāvakayāna
What provides chances for comparative study with a large range of subjects?	Buddhism
Buddhism's emphasis on the Middle Way provides a guideline for what?	ethics
Buddism has what kind of parallels withother systems of thought?	moral and spiritual
Buddhism had similiar tenets to what other common religion?	Christianity
Buddhist concept of dependent origination has been compared to what modern thought?	scientific
What school of thought is questioned on whether or not it is a religion?	Buddhism
What is often referred to as a religion by many sources?	Buddhism
Who is the creator of American Idol?	Simon Fuller
What company produces American idol?	19 Entertainment
What year did American Idol begin airing?	2002
What British show is American Idols format based on?	Pop Idol
What television network does American Idol air on?	Fox
What company produces American Idol?	19 Entertainment
What British series is American Idols format based on?	Pop Idol
Who created American Idol?	Simon Fuller
Who produced American Idol?	19 Entertainment
When did American Idol first air on TV?	June 11, 2002
What British show was American Idol based on?	Pop Idol
What record producer was an original judge on American Idol?	Randy Jackson
What comedian was an original host on American Idol?	Brian Dunkleman
What actress is a judge on the most current season of American Idol?	Jennifer Lopez
Who was a host on all seasons of American Idol?	Ryan Seacrest
What comedian was an original host on American Idol?	Brian Dunkleman
What pop singer was an original judge on American Idol?	Paula Abdul
What actress is a judge on the most current season of American Idol?	Jennifer Lopez
Which original judge was a record producer and music manager?	Randy Jackson
Which original judge was a choreographer?	Paula Abdul
Which original judge was a music executive?	Simon Cowell
Which judge is a country music singer?	Keith Urban
Which judge is a jazz singer?	Harry Connick, Jr.
How many Billboard hits did American Idol produce in its first ten years?	345
Who was a pop idol that started on American Idol?	Kelly Clarkson
Who called American Idol "the most impactful show in the history of television"?	a rival TV executive
Who was a pop idol that started on American Idol?	Carrie Underwood
Who was a pop idol that started on American Idol?	Fantasia
Who was a pop idol that started on American Idol?	Carrie Underwood
Who was a pop idol that started on American Idol?	Fantasia
How many Billboard chart toppers did American Idol contestants have within the first ten seasons?	345
Who said that American Idol is "the most impactful show in the history of televsion?	a rival TV executive
What year did FOX announce that American Idol was cancelled?	2015
What year did FOX announce the cancellation of American Idol?	2015
For how many seasons did American Idol air?	15
How many consecutive years did American Idol been ranked number one in ratings?	eight
When did Fox announce that American Idol is ending?	May 11, 2015
What show in New Zealand was the inspiration for the British Series Pop Idol?	Popstars
Who was the creator of British Series Pop Idol?	Simon Fuller
What year did Pop Idol make its television debut?	2001
Who was a judge on the British series Pop Idol in 2001?	Simon Cowell
Wha was the executive producer of Pop Idol in 2001?	Nigel Lythgoe
What show was Pop Idols based on?	Popstars
Who saw Popstars while in Australia and wanted Britain to have the same thing?	Nigel Lythgoe
In addition to back stories and drama, what did Fuller add to the show?	telephone voting
When did Pop Idol premiere in Britain?	2001
Who was the executive producer of Pop Idol?	Lythgoe
For how many seasons was American Idol the most watched show in the US?	seven
What year did American Idol first air on FOX?	2002
What year did producers attempt to sell the Pop Idol format in the United States?	2001
Who talked Rupert Murdoch into buying American Idol for FOX?	his daughter Elisabeth
Who is the head of Fox's parent company?	Rupert Murdoch
What was Pop Idol renamed to for its American debut?	American Idol: The Search for a Superstar
For how many seasons were the three original judges on American Idol?	eight
How many judges were originally planned for American Idol?	four
What New York radio personalty was hired as a judge for American Idol in season two but declined?	Angie Martinez
What radio DJ was originally hired as a judge in season one but declined?	Stryker
How many judges were originally intended for the show?	four
Which judge quit before the premiere, citing image concerns?	DJ Stryker
During Season two, which judge quit after a few days?	Angie Martinez
When did American Idol change to a four-judge panel?	season eight
Who was added as a fourth judge in the eighth season of American Idol?	Kara DioGuardi
Who replaced Paula Abdul as a judge in season nine of American Idol?	Ellen DeGeneres
For how many seasons was Steven Tyler a judge on American Idol?	two
What year did Simon Cowell announce that he was leaving American Idol?	2010
What show did Simon Cowell launch in 2011 after leaving American Idol?	The X Factor
Who was added as a fourth judge for the eighth season?	Kara DioGuardi
When did Paula Abdul quit as a judge?	before season nine
When did Simon Cowell announce he was no longer going to be a judge?	January 11, 2010
Which talk show host replaced Paula Abdul?	Ellen DeGeneres
When did Steven Tyler become a judge?	season ten
In what season was Lionel Richie a guest judge on American Idol?	season two
Which season eight contestant was a guest judge in season fourteen?	Adam Lambert
In what season was Donna Summer a guest judge on American Idol?	season three
In which season was Shania Twain a guest judge on American Idol?	season six
Which season of American Idol featured Katy Perry as a guest judge?	season nine
Who were the guest judges in season two?	Lionel Richie and Robin Gibb
When was Shania Twain a guest judge for auditions?	season eight
When did Donna Summer help the contestants during the final rounds?	season three
Who was the only host of American Idol after season one?	Ryan Seacrest
Which host quit after the first season?	Brian Dunkleman
Who was a mentor to the contestants on American Idol in its thirteenth season?	Randy Jackson
Who mentored contestants in the fourteenth and fifteenth seasons of American Idol?	Scott Borchetta
What two things did the mentors help the contestants with?	song choice and performance
Who was the mentor for seasons 10 - 12?	Jimmy Iovine
Who was the mentor for season 13?	Randy Jackson
Who was the mentor for seasons 14 and 15?	Scott Borchetta
What is the upper age limit for contestants on American Idol?	twenty-eight
When was the age limit increased to 28?	season four
Currently, contestants can not have a recording track by what stage of the competition?	semi-final stage
How many auditions are there before contestants audition for the judges?	at least three
Which audition stage is televised?	the judges
How many contestants make it through the initial auditions in each city?	a few hundred
What is the only televised portion of the preliminary audition rounds?	in front of the judges
How many rounds can a contestant make it through before Hollywood?	three
Who do contestants sing for in the second round of cuts during auditions?	producers
If contestants get approval from the judges, where do they go next?	Hollywood
Which season did not have a group round in Hollywood?	seven
In which seasons were contestants required to write original lyrics?	two and three
How many Hollywood rounds were there in the first nine seasons?	usually three
In which season were contestants separated by gender to form groups?	twelve
How many rounds of cuts were in the Hollywood stage until season ten?	three
What was eliminated from the Hollywood round in Season seven?	groups
Which seasons did contestants have to write an original lyric or melody?	seasons two and three
In what city did contestants perform an additional round in seasons ten and eleven?	Las Vegas
What was the Las Vegas round called in season twelve?	Sudden Death
In which season was the "Hollywood or Home" round added to the competition?	twelve
How many text message votes were there in season eight?	178 million
In which season was online voting introduced?	ten
What company counts the votes on American Idol?	Telescope Inc
At what point does the public begin voting for contestants?	the semi-finals
How many votes were cast for contestants in the first season?	Over 110 million
How many votes were cast by season ten for all contestants?	nearly 750 million
How many finalists were there on the first season of American Idol?	ten
What is the name of the round that gives failed contestants another chance?	wildcard
How were the semi-finalists split up to perform in season one?	three groups of ten
How were the semi-finalists split up to perform in seasons two and three?	four groups of eight
When did the wildcard round become a factor?	season one
How many finalists were chosen for season one?	ten
How many finalists made it to the finals for seasons two and three?	12
How many semi-finalists were there in season 4?	twenty-four
How were the semi-finalists divided in season four?	by gender
How many men were in the top twelve on season five of American Idol?	six
How many women were in the top twelve on season nine of American Idol?	six
How many women were semi-finalists on season six of American Idol?	twelve
How many wildcards were chosen by the judges in season eight?	four
How many wildcard contestants were advanced in the competition in season ten?	three
How many women were in the top ten in season twelve?	five
How many finalists were there in season eight?	thirteen
What season saw the return of the Wild Card round?	season eight
How many contestants moved forward from each round?	three
How many wildcard contestants were chosen?	four
How many contestants were finalists for season 12?	10
Where studio hosts the live final rounds on American Idol?	CBS Television City
Who was the mentor on season ten of American Idol?	Jimmy Iovine
How many weeks did the finals of season thirteen last?	thirteen
How many weeks did the finals last in the first season?	eight
Where are the finals broadcast from?	CBS Television City
Who was a mentor for the contestants in Season 10?	Jimmy Iovine
How many songs do contestants sing initially in the finals?	one
When do contestants start singing two songs?	top four or five
In what season was the "Judges Save" introduced to give contestants a second chance?	eight
How many time can the judges save be used each season?	once
When three are called, one is often sent to what?	safety
Which season was the Idol Gives Back episode?	season six
In which season was the "Fan Save" first used?	fourteen
How do people vote using the fan save?	Twitter
What was introduced in season 14 to allow the fans to help save a contestant?	Fan Save
How do viewers vote for a contestant using Fan Save?	Twitter
When does the Fan Save start?	Top 8
What venue was the American Idol season seven finale held at?	the Nokia Theatre
How many people can attend an American Idol finale at the Dolby Theatre?	3,400
In what episode is the winner of American Idol revealed?	The finale
Where was the season one finale broadcast from?	Dolby Theatre
How many audience members can fit in Dolby Theatre?	3,400
What is the capacity for Gibson Ampitheatre?	6,000
For seasons 7-13, the season finale was held where?	Nokia Theatre
Which company manages the winners of American Idol?	19 Management
What record label signed the winner of season fourteen of American Idol?	Big Machine Records
How long does the record company have the right of first refusal for contestants on American Idol?	three months
What does the winner of American Idol receive?	a record deal
The winner also receives a management contract with which company?	19 Management
In season 14, the winner was signed to which company?	Big Machine Records
What is given to contestants who make it past the audition round?	a golden ticket
In the audition rounds, what do contestants who win the approval of the judges receive?	a golden ticket
Who votes for the winning contestants starting with the semi-final round?	the public
In which season were contestants first allowed to use musical instruments?	seven
Who was in charge of the American Idol band in season eleven?	Ray Chew
In what season did American Idol start airing on Thursday nights?	ten
Who was the leader of the American Idol band in season five?	Rickey Minor
Who led the American Idol band between seasons four and nine?	Rickey Minor
Who led the American Idol band after Rickey Minor's departure?	Ray Chew
What season were contestants allowed use a musical instrument when they sing?	seven
What network aired the first season of American Idol?	Fox
What year did American Idol first debut?	2002
Who was Ryan Seacrests co-host in the first season of American Idol?	Brian Dunkleman
When did American Idol debut?	June 2002
What network did American Idol debut on?	Fox
Who co-hosted American Idol?	Ryan Seacrest and Brian Dunkleman
How many contestants made it past the first round of auditions?	121
How many people initially auditioned?	around 10,000
Who was the first known homosexual contestant on American Idol?	Jim Verraros
Which contestant was surprisingly eliminated during the top four episode?	Tamyra Gray
Where was Christina Christian at when she was eliminated from the show?	the hospital
How many contestants were chosen from the 10,000 that auditioned?	121
Of the 121 chosen, how many became semi-finalists?	30
Which contestant was disqualified for lying about his age?	Delano Cagnolatti
When was Tamyra Gray eliminated?	top four
Who was eliminated while she was in the hospital due to chest pains?	Christina Christian
What year did Kelly Clarkson win?	2002
Who was the runner up to Kelly Clarkson?	Justin Guarini
What month did Kelly Clarkson win?	September
Of the final two, which was an early favorite to win?	Justin Guarini
Who won the first season of American Idol?	Kelly Clarkson
When did Clarkson win the crown?	September 4, 2002
What was the fist song released by Kelly Clarkson after winning American Idol?	A Moment Like This
What film did Kelly Clarkson and Justin Guarini star in after they were on American Idol?	From Justin to Kelly
How many albums has Kelly Clarkson sold around the world?	more than 23 million
What song did Kelly Clarkson perform during the finale?	A Moment Like This
What did Clarkson sing during the finale?	the coronation song
What was the name of the song?	A Moment Like This
Which record did the song break, which was the biggest leap to the top of the Billboard charts?	The Beatles
What was the name of the film that the two finalists made together?	From Justin to Kelly
How many worldwide album sales has Kelly Clarkson had since winning Idol?	more than 23 million
What year did season two of American Idol first air?	2003
Who was a correspondent on season two of American Idol?	Kristin Adams
When did season two air?	January 2003
Who was a correspondent for season two?	Kristin Adams
Which judge did Corey Clark claim to have had an affair with?	Paula Abdul
Which contestant was removed from the competition for having been a model on an adult website?	Frenchie Davis
Which contestant was removed from the competition for not revealing his police record?	Corey Clark
Which contestant had previously been arrested and charged with assault?	Jaered Andrews
Who was disqualified for having a police record?	Corey Clark
Which contestant was removed from the show for modelling for an adult website?	Frenchie Davis
Which contestant was disqualified because of an assault charge?	Jaered Andrews
Who was the season two winner of American Idol?	Ruben Studdard
How many votes were cast during the final week?	24 million
Who was the runner up on season two of American Idol?	Clay Aiken
How many votes did Ruben Studdard win by?	134,000
What was the name of the shows executive producer?	Nigel Lythgoe
Who won season two?	Ruben Studdard
Who was the runner up for season two?	Clay Aiken
How many more votes did Studdard have at the finale?	134,000
How many votes were cast for the finale?	24 million
Who did Nigel Lythgoe say was a fan favorite for the majority of the season?	Clay Aiken
What is the first song that Ruben Studdard released after winning American Idol?	Flying Without Wings
What contestant came in fourth on season two of American Idol?	Josh Gracin
What song did Clay Aiken first release after losing American Idol?	This Is the Night
What was the name of Studdard's coronation song?	Flying Without Wings
What was Aiken's single release named?	This Is the Night
Which of the final two had more success with his first album?	Aiken
Who finished fourth on season two?	Josh Gracin
What year did the third season of American Idol first air?	2004
Which contestant was best known for his bad audition of "She Bangs"?	William Hung
Which contestant sold more albums than all except two from season three of American Idol?	William Hung
When did season three premiere?	January 19, 2004
Which contestant sang an off-key "She Bangs"?	William Hung
Which contestant was number three in sales from season three?	William Hung
What were the three black female contestants on season three of American Idol commonly referred to as?	the Three Divas
Which contestant was eliminated during the week of the top seven?	Jennifer Hudson
What famous singer made claims of racism after Jennifer Hudson was eliminated from American Idol?	Elton John
Which season three contestant on American Idol was the recipient of reported death threats?	John Stevens
What were Fantasia Barrino, LaToya London and Jennifer Hudson called?	the Three Divas
Which of the three was eliminated?	Jennifer Hudson
Who said that the results were racist?	Elton John
Which contestant reportedly received a death threat on the show?	John Stevens
Who was the runner up on the third season of American Idol?	Diana DeGarmo
What was the name of the first single that Fantasia released after winning American Idol?	I Believe
What was the first song released by Diana DeGarmo after coming in second on American Idol?	Dreams
What song did Fantasia sing on the Top 8 show?	Summertime
Who has said that Barrino's rendition of Summertime has been his top moment of all seasons?	Simon Cowell
Who were the final two contestants?	Fantasia and Diana DeGarmo
Who was declared the season winner?	Fantasia
What was Fantasia's coronation song?	I Believe
Who got a spot in the top 12 after Mario Vasquez dropped out?	Nikko Smith
Who replaced Vasquez as a finalist?	Nikko Smith
What company produces the show?	Freemantle Media
A former employee states he was fired after complaining about which finalist?	Vazquez
During what week was there a problem with voting?	top 11 week
When did the results show happen?	the following night
What year did Carrie Underwood win American Idol?	2005
How many record has Carrie Underwood sold since winning American Idol?	65 million
What was the first song released by Carrie Underwood after winning American Idol?	Inside Your Heaven
Which American Idol contestant has won the biggest number of Grammy Awards?	Carrie Underwood
When was the winner declared?	May 2005
Who was the winner of this season?	Carrie Underwood
What song did the two finalists release?	Inside Your Heaven
How many records has Underwood sold in America?	14 million
Which season of American Idol stands out for having the highest ratings?	Season five
Which two contestants were removed from the show for accusations of identity theft?	the Brittenum twins
Which season has been the highest rated of all American Idol seasons?	Season five
When did season five premiere?	January 17, 2006
Which two contestants were kicked off the show for identity theft?	the Brittenum twins
Which contestant did the band Fuel ask to be their new lead singer?	Chris Daughtry
Which season five contestant caused controversy with their performance of I Walk the Line?	Chris Daughtry
Which contestant was surprisingly eliminated during the week of the top four?	Chris Daughtry
Who performed a Fuel song on this season?	Chris Daughtry
Fuel asked Chris Daughtry to become what?	lead singer
Who was eliminated in the Top 4 show?	Chris Daughtry
Which song performance did he receive both praise and criticism for?	I Walk the Line
Why did he receive criticism for I Walk the Line	not crediting the arrangement to Live
Who was the winner American Idol in 2006?	Taylor Hicks
What was the name of the first song that Taylor Hicks released after winning American Idol?	Do I Make You Proud
What was the first song that Katherine McPhee released after coming in second on American Idol?	My Destiny
When was the winner announced?	May 30, 2006
Who was the winner for this season?	Taylor Hicks
What was Hick's debut single?	Do I Make You Proud
What was McPhee's first single?	My Destiny
Which season five contestant has had the most success after the show?	Chris Daughtry
What is the name if the band that has Chris Daughtry as its lead singer?	Daughtry
Who was the most successful artist from this season?	Chris Daughtry
What band does Chris Daughtry sing for?	Daughtry
What year did the sixth season of American Idol first air?	2007
How many people watched the season premiere of American Idol in 2007?	37.3 million
When did season six premiere?	January 16, 2007
How many overall viewers did the first show of the season generate?	37.3 million
Who was the most discussed singer in American Idols sixth season?	Sanjaya Malakar
What celebrity asked his fans to vote for Sanjaya Malakar on American Idol?	Howard Stern
What is the name of the blog that tried to rally votes for Sanjaya Malakar on American Idol?	Vote for the Worst
What date was Sanjaya Malakar eliminated on American Idol?	April 18
What season six American Idol contestant was known for his strange hairstyles?	Sanjaya Malakar
Which contestant was talked about more than any other this season?	Sanjaya Malakar
What was the main reason Sanjaya garnered such attention?	hair
Which weblog helped Sanjaya survive elimination week over and over again?	Vote for the Worst
Which shock jock urged people to vote for Sanjaya?	Howard Stern
When was Sanjaya eliminated?	April 18
What was the name of the charity event on season six of American Idol?	Idol Gives Back
How much money did the Idol Gives Back event raise in 2007?	$76 million
What singer came in third on the sixth season of American Idol?	Melinda Doolittle
What was the charity event that occurred this season?	Idol Gives Back
Which two contestants were eliminated the following week?	Phil Stacey and Chris Richardson
Who was eliminated on the Top 3 show?	Melinda Doolittle
Who was the winner of American Idols sixth season?	Jordin Sparks
Who came in second on season six of American Idol?	Blake Lewis
On what date did American Idol air its season six finale?	May 23
When was the finale aired?	May 23
Which contestant won the season?	Jordin Sparks
Who was the runner up?	Blake Lewis
What year did season four of American Idol first air?	2005
How many contestants auditioned for the fourth season of American Idol?	over 100,000
What was the oldest that you could be to qualify as a contestant on the fourth season of American Idol?	28
What  was the first full season of American Idol to air in high definition?	Season four
In which season was Bo Bice a contestant on American Idol?	Season four
When did season four premiere?	January 18, 2005
Season four was the first full season to be aired in what?	high definition
How many people auditioned to be on American Idol?	over 100,000
What was the maximum age a contestant could be starting this season?	28
In what year did American Idol begin a contest to decide the winners single?	2007
What is the first song released by Jordin Sparks after winning American Idol?	This Is My Now
How was "This is My Now" decided as the first single for the American Idol winner in 2007?	public vote
Which contest started during this season?	American Idol Songwriter contest
Fans could vote for what during this contest?	coronation song
Of the thousands of songs entered, how many were the public able to vote for?	20
What song won the contest?	This Is My Now
When did Sparks release her version of the song?	May 24, 2007
What year did season seven of American Idol first air?	2008
Which season seven contestant had worked as a stripper before his time on American Idol?	David Hernandez
Which contestant was talked about most for having a record deal before being a contestant on American Idol?	Carly Smithson
When did season seven premiere?	January 15, 2008
Which contestant drew attention because he was a former stripper?	David Hernandez
Why did many of the contestants draw the attention of the media?	professional status
Which contestant garnered the most attention because of a prior recording contract?	Carly Smithson
What song did David Cook sing on American Idol during the week of the top ten?	Billie Jean
Which American Idol contestant was hospitalized after singing during the week of the top nine?	David Cook
Who arranged the version of "Billie Jean" that David Cook performed on American Idol?	Chris Cornell
On what date did the American Idol finals begin?	March 11, 2008
When did American Idol showcase a new set and stage?	March 11, 2008
Which arrangement was used for Cook's version of Billie Jean?	Chris Cornell
Who was taken to the hospital after the top nine show?	David Cook
Which contestant sang "Imagine" on season seven of American Idol?	David Archuleta
In which season of American Idol did Jennifer Lopez become a judge?	season ten
What song did Jason Castro receive praise for singing during the semi-finals on American Idol?	Hallelujah
Whose recording of Hallelujah became successful again after being performed on American Idol?	Jeff Buckley
On what digital platform were contestants performances released to after airing on American Idol?	iTunes
Which David Archuletta cover was thought to be the best of the season by many?	John Lennon's "Imagine"
Who said it Archuletta's rendition is one that she will never forget?	Jennifer Lopez
Which finalist sang "Hallelujah" during the semi-finals?	Jason Castro
Castro's performance sent which singer's version to the top of a Billboard chart?	Jeff Buckley
For the first time, recordings of the contestant's songs could be purchased where?	iTunes
Who won season seven of American Idol?	David Cook
Who was the first Rock and Roll artist to win American Idol?	David Cook
When was the winner announced?	May 21, 2008
Who was the winner?	David Cook
What was the name of the first song released by David Cook after winning American Idol?	The Time of My Life
How was the winning single chose on season seven of American Idol?	The American Idol Songwriter contest
What year did David Cook release the single, "The Time of My Life"?	2008
What was the coronation song?	The Time of My Life
When did Cook release his version of The Time of My Life?	May 22, 2008
What year did the eighth season of American Idol first air?	2009
Which contestant from season eight suffered the loss of a spouse?	Danny Gokey
What was Mike Darnells position at Fox in 2009?	president of alternative programming
What month did American Idol begin airing its eighth season?	January
When did season eight premiere?	January 13, 2009
Who was the president of alternative programming at Fox?	Mike Darnell
Which contestant received a lot of attention because of his widowhood?	Danny Gokey
Who was brought in as a new judge during American Idols eighth season?	Kara DioGuardi
How long did the Hollywood round air for in season eight of American Idol?	two weeks
What show did Nigel Lythgoe leave American Idol to produce?	So You Think You Can Dance
What venue hosted the Hollywood round on American Idol for the first time in 2009?	the Kodak Theatre
Why did American Idol choose not to have its Idol Gives Back special in 2009?	the global recession
How many judges were on the panel for this season?	four
Which judge joined the panel?	Kara DioGuardi
Nigel Lythgoe quit the show to focus on what other show?	So You Think You Can Dance
Where was the Hollywood round moved to?	Kodak Theatre
What was canceled for this year of Idol?	Idol Gives Back
How many finalists were there on season eight of American Idol?	13
Who was the first contestant to benefit from the Judges Save?	Matt Giraud
How many contestants were eliminated during the first week after the judges save?	two
How many contestants were sent home during the first week of finals?	two
Who was sent home the week after the judges saved Matt Giraud?	Lil Rounds and Anoop Desai
How many finalists were on this season?	13
How many finalists were eliminated during the first results show?	two
Which contestant was saved with the first Judges' Save?	Matt Giraud
Who were the final two contestants on season eight of American Idol?	Kris Allen and Adam Lambert
Who won season eight of American Idol?	Kris Allen
What state is American Idol winner Kris Allen from?	Arkansas
How many votes were cast in the American Idol finale in season eight?	100 million
Who won the season?	Kris Allen
The only prior season to have matching controversy over the winner was?	season two
How many votes were cast for the final two?	100 million
Who was accused of teaching the public how to power text for the winner?	AT&T employees
What was the name of the song that Kris Allen and Adam Lamber released after American Idol?	No Boundaries
Who helped write the song "No Boundaries"?	DioGuardi
What was the coronation song for this season?	No Boundaries
Who co-wrote the coronation song?	DioGuardi
Unlike every previous winner, the winner of this season failed to achieve what status?	gold album status
How many contestants from this season reached platinum album status?	none
What year did season nine of American Idol first air?	2010
Who filled the judges spot vacated by Paula Abdul on season nine of American Idol?	Ellen DeGeneres
At what point during season 9 of American Idol did Ellen Degeneres become a judge?	Hollywood Week
When did season nine premiere?	January 12, 2010
Which original judge left prior to the start of the season?	Paula Abdul
Who replaced Abdul?	Ellen DeGeneres
When did Ellen join the judges' panel?	Hollywood Week
Which contestant had to go to the hospital during the week of the top 20?	Crystal Bowersox
What producer wanted to remove Crystal Bowersox from the competition?	Ken Warwick
Why was Crystal Bowersox in the hospital during the week of the top 20 on American Idol?	diabetic ketoacidosis
Which contestant had Type-I diabetes?	Crystal Bowersox
When was Crystal hospitalized?	top 20 week
What was changed so she could still qualify?	The schedule
Who did Bowersox later reveal wanted her to be disqualified?	Ken Warwick
What role does Warwick have on the show?	producer
Which contestant was saved by the judges in season nine of American Idol?	Michael Lynche
At what point did the judges use their save on American Idols ninth season?	top nine
Who was the first American Idol contestant to return to the show as a mentor?	Adam Lambert
How much money was brought in by the Idol Gives Back special on season nine of American Idol?	$45 million
Who was saved with the Judges' Save?	Michael Lynche
Which former contestant was a mentor this season?	Adam Lambert
Who had their final season in the show in season nine?	Simon Cowell
Why did Paula Abdul appear on the season nine finale of American Idol?	tribute to Simon Cowell
Who had a special tribute at the finale?	Simon Cowell
Which former Idol star made an appearance for Cowell's tribute?	Paula Abdul
Who was the winner of American Idols ninth season?	Lee DeWyze
What U2 song was released by Lee DeWyze after winning American Idol?	Beautiful Day
When was the finale held?	May 26
Who won this season of Idol?	DeWyze
What song did DeWyze cover for his first release?	Beautiful Day
Which song did Bowersox cover for her first release?	Up to the Mountain
What year did season ten of American Idol first air?	2011
In which season of American Idol did Steven Tyler and Jennifer Lopez become judges?	ten
Who replace weekly mentors as a more permanent mentor on American Idols tenth season?	Jimmy Iovine
What show did Simon Cowell join after leaving American Idol?	The X Factor
Who was the executive producer of American Idols tenth season?	Nigel Lythgoe
When did season ten premiere?	January 19, 2011
Who returned as executive producer this season?	Nigel Lythgoe
Which two new judges joined Randy Jackson on the judges' panel?	Jennifer Lopez and Steven Tyler
Who was the in-house mentor this season?	Jimmy Iovine
What was the first season of American Idol to feature online auditions?	Season ten
What website hosted auditions for American Idols tenth season?	Myspace
How did Karen Rodriguez audition for American Idol season ten?	Myspace
This is the first season to have what kind of auditions?	online
Where could contestants submit a video audition?	Myspace
Which contestant had a fiancé that had suffered brain damage?	Chris Medina
In which round was Chris Medina eliminated n season ten of American Idol?	Top 40
Which season ten contestant was in the hospital instead of at the Top 13 results show?	Casey Abrams
Which contestants did the judges save on season ten of American Idol?	Casey Abrams
Which contestant cared for his brain-damaged fiancee?	Chris Medina
When was Medina eliminated from the competition?	Top 40 round
Which contestant suffered from ulcerative colitis?	Casey Abrams
Which show did Abrams miss because he was in the hospital?	Top 13 result show
Who received the Judges' Save this season?	Abrams
What contestant came in ninth on season ten of American Idol?	Pia Toscano
What actor was upset when Pia Toscano was eliminated on American Idol?	Tom Hanks
Which fan favorite was unexpectedly eliminated earlier than expected?	Pia Toscano
Which actor criticized Toscano's elimination?	Tom Hanks
What genre of music did season ten American Idol contestant Lauren Alaina sing?	country
Who was the winner of American Idols tenth season?	Scotty McCreery
What song did Scotty McCreery first release after winning American Idol?	I Love You This Big
What song did Lauren Alaina release after coming in second on American Idol?	Like My Mother Does
What is the name of the successful album that Ruben Studdard released in 2003?	Soulful
When was the season finale of Idol?	May 25
Who won this season of Idol?	Scotty McCreery
Scotty's first album reached the top Billboard spot, the first time for an Idol winner since when?	Ruben Studdard
In what year did American Idol first air its eleventh season?	2012
How many contestants made it to the finals on season 11 of American Idol?	25
What contestant was removed from the competition for concealing legal troubles?	Jermaine Jones
When did season 11 premiere?	January 18, 2012
Who joined the finalists, making it a Top 25?	Jermaine Jones
When was Jones removed from the show?	March 14
Why was Jones disqualified?	concealing arrests and outstanding warrants
Which season 11 contestant had to go to the hospital before the Top 13 Results?	Phillip Phillips
Why was Phillip Phillips hospitalized during his time on American Idol?	kidney stones
How many times did Phillip Phillips have surgery when he was on American Idol?	eight
Which contestant thought about leaving the contest because of pain in his kidney?	Phillip Phillips
Which contestant had eight surgeries during his Idol run?	Phillip Phillips
What kind of pain did Phillips endure?	kidney pain
Which contestant was saved by the judges on season 11 of American Idol?	Jessica Sanchez
Who was the first female to be saved by the judges on American Idol?	Jessica Sanchez
Who was eliminated the week after judges saved Jessica Sanchez on American Idol?	Colton Dixon
How far did Jessica Sanchez make it on American Idol?	final two
When did the judges use their save this season?	Top 7
Who was the recipient of the Judges' Save?	Jessica Sanchez
Which contestant was sent home the following week?	Colton Dixon
What former contestant did Ace Young ask to marry him?	Diana DeGarmo
In what season was Ace Young a finalist on American Idol?	five
In What season did Diana DeGarmo come in second on American Idol?	three
Who won this season of Idol?	Phillips
Which season was Ace Young on?	season five
Which season was Diana DeGarmo on?	season three
What is the first song that Phillip Phliips released after winning American Idol?	Home
What is the name of the song that Jessica Sanchez released first after American Idol?	Change Nothing
What was Phillip's coronation song?	Home
What song did Sanchez release?	Change Nothing
Which song is the best selling coronation song of all Idol seasons?	Home
What year did season 12 of American Idol first air?	2013
What was Mariah Careys position on season 12 of American Idol?	Judges
What website showed video of an altercation between Mariah Carey and Nicki Minaj?	TMZ
When did season 12 premiere?	January 16, 2013
How many judges did this season have?	four
How many girls were in the top 10 on season 12 of American Idol?	five
Who was the last guy to be sent home on season 12 of American Idol?	Lazaro Arbos
How many contestants did this season have?	10
How many weeks in a row were male contestants eliminated?	five
Who as the last man to be eliminated?	Lazaro Arbos
How many contestants were able to perform for two weeks without any eliminations?	four
Who was the winner of American Idols twelfth season?	Candice Glover
Which contestant came in second on season 12 of American Idol?	Kree Harrison
What was the first song released by Candice Glover after winning American Idol?	I Am Beautiful
What song did Kree Harrison first release after being on American Idol?	All Cried Out
Who won this season of Idol?	Candice Glover
Who was the runner up?	Kree Harrison
What was Glover's first single?	I Am Beautiful
What was Harrison's first single?	All Cried Out
This is the first season when what did not happen to the first runner up?	not signed by a music label
Which long time judge decided to leave his position at the end of the season?	Randy Jackson
How many seasons was Mariah Carey a judge on American Idol?	one
Who announced this would be his final year as a judge?	Randy Jackson
Who were the other judges to leave after this season?	Mariah Carey and Nicki Minaj
What year did season 13 of American Idol first air?	2014
Who was the host of American idol in its thirteenth season?	Ryan Seacrest
What new role did Randy Jackson assume during American Idols thirteenth season?	in-mentor
Who directed the thirteenth season of American Idol?	Gregg Gelfand
When did season 13 premiere?	January 15, 2014
Who was the mentor this season?	Randy Jackson
Which former judge came back to the judges' panel this season?	Jennifer Lopez
Which former mentor joined the judges' panel this season?	Harry Connick, Jr.
Per Blankens, Jesse Ignjatovic, and Evan Pragger replaced which two executives?	Nigel Lythgoe and Ken Warwick
Which contestant was saved by the judges after getting the least votes on season 13 of American Idol?	Sam Woolf
At what point in season 13 did American Idol air its 500th show?	Top 3 performance night
Contestants could perform what in the final rounds for the first time ever?	songs they wrote themselves
Who received the Judges' Save this season?	Sam Woolf
When did the judges use their save on Woolf?	Top 8
What episode was the 500th of the entire series?	Top 3 performance night
Who won season 13 of American Idol?	Caleb Johnson
Who came in second on season 13 of American Idol?	Jena Irene
What song did Caleb Johnson first release after winning American Idol?	As Long as You Love Me
What song did Jena Irene release after coming in second on American Idol?	We Are One
Who won this season of Idol?	Caleb Johnson
Who was the runner up this season?	Jena Irene
What was Johnson's coronation song?	As Long as You Love Me
What was Irene's coronation song?	We Are One
What year did American Idol first air its fourteenth season?	2015
Who was the host of American Idol in its fourteenth season?	Ryan Seacrest
Which former contestant replaced Keith Urban for auditions in New York City?	Adam Lambert
What was Keith Urbans position on American Idol in its fourteenth season?	judges
Who did not come back as a mentor in season 14?	Randy Jackson
When did season 14 premiere?	January 7, 2015
Who took Urban's spot at the New York auditions?	Adam Lambert
How many episodes did American Idol have each week of the top ten?	one
What drink company ended their relationship with American Idol in season 14?	Coca Cola
What car company had a relationship with American Idol in season 14?	Ford Motor Company
What record label had a contract with the winner of American Idols fourteenth season?	Big Machine Records
Starting this season, how many episodes of Idol aired every week?	one
Who ended their sponsorship this season?	Coca Cola
What other company reduced their sponsorship this season?	Ford Motor Company
This season, the winner won a recording contract with what company?	Big Machine Records
Who won American Idols fourteenth season?	Nick Fradiani
Who came in second on American Idol in season 14?	Clark Beckham
Who came in third on American Idol in season 14?	Jax
What was the name of Nick Fradianis victory song?	Beautiful Life
What song did Jax release after coming in third on American Idol?	Forcefield
Who won this season of Idol?	Nick Fradiani
Who was the runner up of Idol?	Clark Beckham
What was Nick's coronation song?	Beautiful Life
What was Beckham's first release?	Champion
Which contestant came in third place?	Jax
What year did Fox announce the cancellation of American Idol?	2015
How many seasons of American Idol have there been?	15
How many seasons was Jennifer Lopez a judge on American Idol?	5
What was Keith Urbans role on American Idols fifteenth season?	judges
Who hosted American Idol in its last season?	Ryan Seacrest
When did Fox announce that Season 15 would be the final season?	May 11, 2015
Who is returning as host?	Ryan Seacrest
As of 2012, how many finalists did American Idol have?	131
When did American Idol begin?	2002
What region of the United States were American Idols first five winners from?	Southern
What state is American Idol contestant Clay Aiken from?	North Carolina
What state is American Idol contestant Chris Daughtry from?	North Carolina
How many Idol winners have come from the southern part of America?	ten
In addition to Clay Aiken and Kellie Pickler, which other Idol is from North Carolina?	Chris Daughtry
How many CDs from American Idol contestants had been sold at the beginning of 2010?	47 million
In the same study, how much more likely was someone from Kentucky to tune into the show?	16 percent
How many CDS were sold by Idol contestants up to 2010?	47 million
Of the CDs sold, how many were by the contestants with southern ties?	85 percent
Who won season five of American Idol?	Taylor Hicks
What state is Taylor Hicks from?	Alabama
Where do people in the Southern United States often begin singing?	church
Where do a lot of people get their start in singing in the south?	church
Where is Taylor Hicks from?	Alabama
What does the acronym WGWG stand for?	White guy with guitar
Who won season eleven of American Idol?	Phillip Phillips
What is the name of the book written by Richard Rushfield about American Idol?	American Idol: The Untold Story
How many seasons in a row were won by caucasian guitar playing males?	five
What instrument did the winners for five seasons in a row play?	guitar
What is the WGWG factor?	White guy with guitar
Who wrote American Idol: The Untold Story?	Richard Rushfield
Who was named the winner of Season 11?	Phillip Phillips
What company are contestants required to sign a contract with on American Idol?	19 Entertainment
Who won season two of American Idol?	Ruben Studdard
Who came in second on season two of American Idol?	Clay Aiken
What year did Vote for the Worst cease operations?	2013
How many more text votes were there in season eight of American Idol over season seven?	100 million
Which season had the biggest voting controversy?	season two
Which season had a voting controversy because of a huge increase in text votes?	season eight
Which voting concern has been present since the first season?	power voting
When did Vote for the Girls start?	2010
When did Vote for the Worst close?	2013
What is the name of the special that raises money for charities on American Idol?	Idol Gives Back
How much money has American Idol raised for charity with its Idol Gives Back specials?	$185 million
What is the name of the charity that Idol has?	Idol Gives Back
When was the first Idol Gives Back?	season six
What year did American Idol being to air on television?	2002
How many people watched the first episode of American Idol?	9.9 million
How many people on average watched the American Idol finale in its first season?	23 million
What season of the year did American Idol first air on television?	summer
When did American Idol premiere?	June 2002
How many people watched the first episode of American Idol?	9.9 million
What was the average for viewership by finale night?	23 million
How many people watched the first episode of American Idols second season?	26.5 million
How many people on average tuned in to watch American Idol in its second season?	21.7 million
What contestant won the second season of American Idol?	Ruben Studdard
During what season did American Idol become the highest rated show across all demographics?	season four
Which season of American Idol was watched by the most people?	season five
How many people watched the second season premiere of American Idol?	26.5 million
How many people watched on average for season two?	21.7 million
By what season was American Idol the most watched show on TV?	four
Which season premier of American Idol was the most watched?	Season six
During which season to American Idols rating begin to fall?	Season six
What did other television networks refer to American Idol as because of its ratings?	the Death Star
Which television network originally aired The Cosby Show?	NBC
Which season premiere was the most watched of all seasons?	Season six
What was the show called by other networks?	the Death Star
Season six saw what for the first time in viewership?	decline
Season six was the first season where what had more viewers?	results show
During which season of American Idol did Fox beat the other networks in ratings for the first time?	season seven
Why were television ratings down across the board during American Idols seventh season?	Writers Guild of America strike
On what season was Kristy Lee Cook a contestant on American Idol?	season seven
Who was eliminated during the lowest rated show since season one?	Kristy Lee Cook
What was the series' third most watched finale?	season seven
Because of the rebound in viewers, Fox became what for the first time?	the most watched TV network
What happened in 2007-2008 that had a drop in viewers for all networks?	Writers Guild of America strike
Which television network aired the Winter Olympics in 2010?	NBC
Which television network originally aired All in the Family?	CBS
In what year did NBC beat American Idol in the ratings for the first time?	2010
What finally beat Idol in the ratings during season nine?	2010 Winter Olympics
How many people watched the 2010 Winter Olympics on February 17 as compared to the 18.4 million who tuned into Idol?	30.1 million
At the end of season nine, American Idol remained on top as the most watched show for how many years in a row?	six
What was the average age of American Idols viewers in its first season?	32.1
What was the average age of American Idols viewers in its tenth season?	47.2
What is the median age of viewers this season?	47.2
What was the median age for viewers for season one?	32.1
For how many years was American Idol the top rated show on television?	eight
What program saw more viewers than American Idol this season?	Sunday Night Football
How long did Fox reign in the 18-49 demographics in the Nielsen ratings?	eight years
How many people on average watched season 12 of American Idol?	13.3 million
During which season did American Idol fall out of the top ten shows in ratings?	13
When did American Idol first air on television?	2002
The season finale for season 12 had how many fewer viewers than season 11?	7.2 million
How many viewers watched on average this season?	13.3 million
What drink company ended its relationship with American Idol during season 14?	Coca-Cola
How many people watched American Idols finale in season 14?	8.03 million
After what season will American Idol be cancelled?	15
When did Fox announce the following season would be Idol's last?	May 11, 2015
How many people watched the season 14 finale?	8.03 million
For how many years was American Idol the highest rated reality show on television?	9
For how many years was Fox the highest rated network with young adults because of American Idol?	8
What television network originally aired the show Glee?	Fox
What television network originally aired the show House?	Fox
Who created American Idol?	Simon Fuller
What dancing show featuring celebrities has been helped by American Idol?	Dancing with the Stars
What is another singing show similar to American Idol?	The Voice
What show helped launched the career of Kelly Clarkson?	American Idol
What show helped launched the career of Carrie Underwood?	American Idol
What show helped launched the career of Daughtry?	American Idol
How many number one Billboard singles were released by American Idol contestants in the shows first decade?	345
Who is the president of Mediabase?	Rich Meyer
Who was the most successful American Idol winner on radio as of 2010?	Kelly Clarkson
How many number ones have Idol singers achieved on Billboard charts in just the first ten years?	345
Who authored books on Billboard charts?	Fred Bronson
How many contestants had at least one million radio spins by 2010?	four
How many radio spins did Kelly Clarkson have by 2010?	over four million
How many albums have been sold by American Idol contestants up until 2013?	59 million
How many single have been sold by American Idol contestants up until 2013?	120 million
How many albums have Idol contestants created as of 2013?	59 million
How many singles and digital downloads have Idol contestants created as of 2013?	120 million
Which American Idol contestant won an Oscar for Dreamgirls?	Jennifer Hudson
What job does Debra Byrd do on American Idol?	vocal coach
In what area of the entertainment industry have some Idol contestants found success?	musical theatre
Which Idol won an Academy Award?	Jennifer Hudson
What film did Jennifer Hudson win an Academy Award for?	Dreamgirls
Who recommended the role for Hudon?	Debra Byrd
What publication does Ken Tucker work for?	Entertainment Weekly
What did American Idols first winner sing at the Lincoln Memorial in 2002?	the national anthem
Which journalist felt Idol produced entertaining TV more than entertaining music?	Ken Tucker
Which publication did Tucker work for?	Entertainment Weekly
Who called American Idol a conniving multimedia monster?	Karla Peterson
Where did the season one winner sing the national anthem that received huge criticism?	Lincoln Memorial
What publication does Michael Slezak write for?	Entertainment Weekly
Who was accused of being mean and cruel on American Idol?	Simon Cowell
What singer had bad things to say about contestants on American Idol?	John Mayer
What magazine does Ramin Wetoodeh write for?	Newsweek
Sheryl Crow felt the show undermined art and promoted what?	commercialism
Who said that American Idol has reshaped the American songbook?	Ann Powers
Who was accused of helping meanness thrive?	Simon Cowell
Which singer said the contestants are not real artists with self respect?	John Mayer
What famous singer declined an offer to be a judge on American Idol after having been a mentor?	Elton John
What year did Carrie Underwood win a Country Music Award for Best Female Artist?	2006
What singer criticized Carrie Underwood for winning a Country Music Award?	LeAnn Rimes
Who felt that American Idol helped the true art form of music get lost?	Usher
Who won the Best Female Artist in Country Music Awards in 2006?	Carrie Underwood
Who did Carrie beat out for the award?	Faith Hill
Who said that Carrie had not paid her dues to win that award?	LeAnn Rimes
Who was a mentor but later turned down the opportunity to judge Idol?	Elton John
Which music genre has had the most success from American Idol?	country
Which genre has felt the impact of Idol the most?	country music
How many nominations has American Idol received for Outstanding Reality Competition Program?	9
What director win an Emmy Award for his work on American Idol?	Bruce Gower
How many total Emmy Awards has American Idol won?	8
What American Idol special received a Governors Award in 2007?	Idol Gives Back
How many times was American Idol nominated for an Emmy?	nine
What award did American Idol win for its Idol Gives Back charity work?	Governor's Award in 2007
How much money did American Idol make in 2004?	$900 million
How much money did American Idol generate from its first eight seasons?	$6.4 billion
What is the name of the American Idol theme attraction with Disney?	The American Idol Experience
How much money did American Idol generate from ads in its seventh season?	$900 million
Who did Idol partner with to create The American Idol Experience?	Disney
In which season did American Idol become the costliest show for advertising on television?	season four
How much did advertisers spend for a 30 second ad spot on the American Idol season four finale?	$1.3 million
How much did advertisers spend for a 30 second ad spot during American Idol in 2014?	less than $300,000
How much did advertisers spend for a 30 second ad spot during American Idol in its seventh season?	$737,000
By what season was Idol the  highest advertising cost of all shows?	four
How much did Idol earn in ad revenue alone for season 8?	800 million
In which season did Coca-Cola become a sponsor of American Idol?	season one
In which season did Ford Motor Company become a sponsor of American Idol?	season one
Which mobile carrier became a sponsor of American Idol in its second season?	AT&T Wireless
When did Coca-Cola stop being a sponsor of American Idol?	after season 13
In which season did iTunes begin a partnership with American Idol?	seven
How much did it cost each company for the first season?	10 million
How much did it cost each company in season 7?	35 million
Who was the third largest sponsor?	AT&T
What service did AT&T promote on American Idol as a way of voting?	text-messaging
How many product placements had Idol shown by season six?	4,349
Which major drink manufacturer decided at the beginning of American Idol not to be a sponsor?	PepsiCo
What show did PepsiCo begin sponsoring in hopes of not missing another opportunity like American Idol?	The X Factor
Which soda company did not want to sponsor American Idol?	PepsiCo
In hopes of not repeating another mistake, which show did PepsiCo sponsor?	The X Factor
PepsiCo fell to what place by 2010, which is in part credited with refusing to sponsor American Idol?	third
Which season of American Idol had the highest profit on its tour?	season five
What company was a sponsor of the American Idol tour in its ninth season?	M&M's Pretzel Chocolate Candies
Who was added to the tour in season 12?	a semi-finalist who won a sing-off
Who sponsored the first seven tours?	Kellogg's Pop-Tarts
Who sponsored the ninth tour?	M&M's Pretzel Chocolate Candies
Which was the most successful tour?	season five
When did iTunes become a sponsor on American Idol?	season seven
For how many seasons did American Idol put out a compilation of hits at seasons end?	five
What company has released studio recordings from American Idol since season seven?	iTunes
Idol releases both the performances as well as what for sale?	the winner's coronation single
How were the recordings released for the initial five seasons?	as a compilation album
Because all five were in the top ten of Billboard's charts, this made Idol what?	the most successful soundtrack franchise
Who joined Idol as a sponsor in season seven?	iTunes
What company has the right to all recordings from contestants on American Idol?	19 Recordings
What company took over as American Idols music label in 2010?	UMG
What company had released music from American Idol in addition to Sony Music Entertainment?	BMG
Who owns 19 Recordings?	19 Entertainment
Who owns the rights to all phonographic material done by the contestants?	19 Recordings
Who did 19 initially partner with to distribute the recordings?	BMG
Who did BMG partner with in 2005-2007?	Sony Music Entertainment
Who replaced Sony in 2010 as Idol's music label?	UMG's Interscope-Geffen-A&M Records
What company has a them park attraction known as The American Idol Experience?	The Walt Disney Company
In what year did The Walt Disney Company open The American Idol Experience?	2009
In what year did The Walt Disney Company close The American Idol Experience?	2014
What company had a partnership with The Walt Disney Company for The American Idol Experience?	19 Entertainment
When did the American Idol Experience open?	February 14, 2009
Where did it open?	Walt Disney World
What did the winner win?	Dream Ticket
When did the Experience close?	August 30, 2014
How many different countries air American Idol on television?	over 100
What network broadcasted American Idol live in Canada for thirteen seasons?	CTV
In what year did CTV stop showing live broadcasts of American Idol?	2014
What Canadian network began airing American Idol in 2015?	Yes TV
How many nations receive the Idol broadcast?	over 100
Who aired the first thirteen seasons in Canada?	CTV and/or CTV Two
Who stated in August 2014 that they picked up the rights beginning in its 2015 season?	Yes TV
What network in Italy aired American Idol in season twelve?	La3
How many days does someone in the United Kingdom have to wait to watch American Idol after its original broadcast?	one
What television network in Asia shows American Idol?	STAR World
On what days of the week does American Idol air in the Philippines?	Thursday and Friday
Who broadcasts Idol in southeast Asia?	STAR World
Who broadcast the 12th season in Italy?	La3
Producers have been accused of planting what within the show?	ringers
How many consecutive years was American Idol the top rated show?	seven
How many consecutive years did either the performance or results show rank number one?	eight
What is the three word Latin name for domesticated dogs?	Canis lupus familiaris
What is Canis familiaris?	domestic dog
How long has the domestic dog been selectively bred?	millennia
Along with various behaviors and physical attributes, what were domestic dogs bred for?	sensory capabilities
What decade had significant studies of dog genes to determine origins?	2010s
Testing revealed today's dogs trace back by how many years?	40,000
What is the region where domesticated dogs ancestry traces to?	Eurasia
What type of diet can modern domesticated dogs thrive eating that other dogs cannot?	starch-rich
What was undertaken in 2010 to determine where dogs originated from?	extensive genetic studies
What is the most common phrase, or nickname, used by people in the United States to describe dogs in general?	man's best friend
What moniker has been given to dogs in Western cultures?	man's best friend
Dogs are a source of what in some cultures?	meat
What is the Proto-Germanic word that "dog" may have come from?	dukkōn
What may be the earliest vocabulary that the word "dog" came from?	Proto-Indo-European
Where does the word dog originate?	Old English docga
Dog could also come from the original layer of what vocabulary?	Proto-Indo-European
What was the common 14th-century word for dogs for those who spoke English?	hound
What breed was so prolific it became a prototype of hound?	mastiff.
In what century did "hound" start to only apply to hunting dogs?	16th
What was the common term for all domesticated dogs in England during the 14th century?	hound
When did the word dog become the common term for canines?	16th century
Hound became the term for dogs who did what activity during this time?	hunting
What Proto-Indo-European word is hound from?	*kwon- "dog"
What are a single birth group of puppies of a dog called collectively?	a litter.
What is the male who is father of the pups called?	sire
What is the French word that "puppy" comes from?	poupée
What is giving birth to dogs called?	whelping
What is the English word for female dog that has also become profanity?	bitch
A male canine is called a dog while a female canine is called a what in reference to breeding?	bitch
What are canine offspring referred as?	litter
What is the father of a litter referred as?	sire
What is the mother of a litter referred as?	dam
What are the individual litter canines called?	pups
What is the Latin term for "dog.?"	Canis
What year are dogs first listed in Systema Naturae?	1758
Who published Systema Naturae?	Linnaeus
What is the modern single English word for Canis lupus?	wolf
What 1982 publication listed regular family dogs under wolves?	Mammal Species of the World
What is the Latin word for dog?	Canis
Canis familiaris is the classification for dogs, and is known as what?	family dog
What is the Latin name for a wolf?	Canis lupus
Feral dogs have what Latin classification?	Canis dingo
What year was Canis familiaris listed under Canis lupus?	1982
What year was it decided that if wolves and dogs were one species, then their scientific name is the name of the wild variety?	2003
What 2005 publication in its third edition kept to that ruling?	Mammal Species of the World
What Latin dog term is still used because wild and domesticated dogs are recognizably different?	Canis familiaris.
What official body recognizes both Canis lupus and Canis familiaris?	ICZN
Many researchers prefer what term?	Canis familiaris.
Who ruled in 2003 that scientific names for wild animals share the same scientific name as their domestic counterparts?	ICZN
What was this decision called?	Opinion 2027
What indicated dogs and gray wolves developed as two monophyletic clades?	genetic studies
The common relative of dogs and existing wolves is now considered what?	extinct.
Modern dogs likely began when human beings were considered to be what?	hunter-gatherers
Due to admixture, what species are many Arctic dogs related to?	Taimyr wolf of North Asia
Rather than with agriculturists, dogs seemingly were during the time of who?	human hunter-gatherers
Most breeds share a genetic likeness to what animal?	gray wolf
Some Arctic breeds are more like what wolf rather than the gray wolf?	Taimyr
What species shows more difference in size, looks and actions than any other?	Modern dog breeds
What are dog teeth best suited for?	catching and tearing.
Dogs are considered to be predators and what else?	scavengers
What bones in dog legs are fused?	wrist
A dog's heart and vascular ability if best suited for sprinting and what else?	endurance
What are a dog's teeth mainly used for?	catching and tearing
Dogs originated as predators and what?	scavengers
Dogs show an extreme range in what two characteristics?	height and weight.
What breed was the largest dog known to have lived?	English Mastiff
What is the biggest known dog?	English Mastiff
Which coat is more common with dogs living in colder climates?	double
Along with a gruff guard hair, what else makes up the double coat?	soft down hair
What is the more common coat for dogs from colder climates?	double
What is a single coat?	topcoat only
When a dog has a camouflage pattern on its coat, this is called what?	countershading
A dog with countershading has dark coloring where?	upper surfaces
A natural camo pattern is known as what?	countershading
What color is on a dogs upper surfaces if it has countershading?	dark coloring
What is reduced when a dog has countershading?	visibility
What part of a dog can be straight, curly or cork-screwed?	tails
What does a dog communicate with its tail?	emotional state
What part of a dog can be straight, curled, or cork-screwed?	tails
What are some dogs prone to?	genetic ailments
What are all dogs susceptible to?	parasites
Pyometra usually affects what type of female dog?	unspayed
Who does pyometra affect?	unspayed females
What are fleas, ticks and mites called?	parasites
Some foods that are okay for people to eat are what to dogs?	toxic
Grapes, raisins, onions, garlic and what common sugar alcohol (sweetener) is toxic to dogs?	xylitol
What type of nut is poisonous to dogs?	macadamia
What is the chemical in chocolate that is poisonous to dogs?	theobromine
Some human foods can be what to dogs?	toxic
What in tobacco can hurt dogs?	nicotine
What form of chocolate is especially toxic to dogs?	dark
Mutts, dogs that have several breed characteristics, live how much longer than purebred dogs?	1.2 years
Do bigger dogs typically have longer or shorter lives?	shorter
When was a study done that discovered mixed breeds tend to live longer than pure breeds?	2013
Typically, how much longer do mixed breeds live?	1.2 years longer
What is the median lifespan of canines?	10 to 13 years.
What is the canine breed with shortest median lifespan?	Dogue de Bordeaux
What is the median length of life for the canine breed that lives the least amount of years?	5.2 years
What is the average lifespan of an Irish Wolfhound?	6 to 7 years.
Which dog has the shortest lifespan?	Dogue de Bordeaux
What is the average lifespan for a Dogue de Borddeaux?	5.2 years
What is the average length of years of life for canines with long lifespans?	14 to 15 years.
What is the name of the canine that is reported to have lived the longest?	Bluey
What is the name of the dog in the Guinness Book of World Records for longest lived?	Pusuke
What year did the dog die that is reported to be the longest lived but not officially in a record book?	1939
What was the name of the dog who lived to be 29.5 years?	Bluey
When did Bluey die?	1939
Who did the Guinness Book of World Records say was the oldest dog in 2011?	Pusuke
How many times per year do female dogs go into heat?	two
What does going into heat (estrous) prepare a female dog for?	pregnancy.
Some larger breeds could take how long to become sexually mature?	two years
What does a female dog experience at sexual maturity?	first estrous cycle
How long do female dogs carry before delivering puppies?	58 to 68 days
What is the average length of dog pregnancy?	63 days
What is the average number of pups in a litter?	about six
For small dogs, what is the average number of pups in a litter?	one to four
What is the average for a dog to bear her litter?	63 days
What is the average number of pups per litter?	six
Smaller dogs tend to have how many pups per litter?	one to four
What is it called when an animal is altered to prevent procreation?	Neutering
According to the text, what agency recommends altering dogs to prevent pregnancies?	the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA)
What is typically surgically removed on male dogs to prevent procreation?	testicles
What is usually removed in female dogs to prevent pregnancy?	ovaries and uterus
In neutering, what is removed in a male dog?	testicles
In neutering, what is removed in female dogs?	ovaries and uterus
What does the ASPCA recommend for dogs who are not used for breeding purposes?	neutered
Hypersexual behavior in male dogs is diminished by what?	Neutering
According to the text, what is a possible side effect of neutering a female dog?	urinary incontinence
Female dogs are less likely to develop cancer if what happens?	Spayed
What is increased in female dogs with neutering?	urinary incontinence
What is increased in male dogs with neutering?	prostate cancer
What is the name of the dog that could ID over 200 things?	Rico
What is the name of the Border collie that knew over 1000 words?	Chaser
In addition to interpreting body language and verbal commands dogs can also interpret what two other things?	gesturing and pointing
What wild canine did better at a problem-solving experiment?	Australian dingos
What is one thing, according to the text, that domesticated dogs use humans for?	to solve their problems for them.
Perceiving information and retaining it is what?	intelligence
How many labels does Rico the dog know?	over 200
What kind of memory skills do dogs have?	advanced
How many words did Chaser know?	over 1,000
Dogs are estimated to be domesticated as far back as what date range of years on the calendar?	9,000–30,000 years BCE
Dog minds have been shaped by thousands of years of contact with what species?	humans.
What do some dog skills parallel in human beings?	social-cognitive skills of human children
Dogs are  very well attuned to what other species' behaviors?	humans.
Dogs can understand and communicate with what other species?	humans.
What is a dog's responses to stimuli known as?	Dog behavior
More than any other species, dogs are able to do what with people?	understand and communicate
Dogs have some social skills that parallel what?	human children
What is gustatory communication include in dogs?	scents, pheromones and taste
People communicate with dogs by voice commands, body language or posture and what else?	hand signals
Eye gaze, vocalization and body posture are examples of what?	Dog communication
In addition to vocalization and body posture, how do people communicate with dogs?	hand signals
Which typically has thicker skin, dogs or wolves?	dogs.
Dogs having ears that are not erect may be due to what?	atrophy of the jaw muscles.
What kind of features differentiate gray wolves from dogs?	diagnostic features
How often do female wolves enter estrus?	once a year.
Instead of genetic traits for production, dogs are bred for what?	behaviors.
How many "fixed" genes demonstrate the differences between the wolf and dog?	11
The gene differences indicate what two things done by selection in dogs during breeding for domestication?	morphology and behavior
What is the common trait selected for dogs in overall breeding?	tameness
What do most dogs show less of than wolves?	fear and aggression
Most domestic animals were selected for what traits?	production-related traits
Why were dogs initially selected?	for their behaviors.
For wolves and dogs, how many fixed genes show a variation?	11
Dogs show less fear and what as opposed to wolves?	aggression
What is the larger count for numbers of dogs considered to populate the planet?	525 million
How many dogs are estimated to be in the world?	525 million
What are dog population estimates based on other than land uses?	human population densities
Like wolves, big domesticated dogs are considered what type of predator?	apex
Wolves may act in what behavioral manner when attacking dogs?	fearless
What animal is reported to be killed more often than sheep by wolves in Croatia?	dogs
Like wolves, what kind of predators are large dogs?	apex
Dogs die as a result of Croatian wolf encounters more than what kind of animal?	sheep
What limits the feral dog population in Russia?	Wolves
What large cat has a particular taste for dogs no matter how big the dog is?	leopards.
What is a typical predator of dogs in places such as Turkmenistan?	Striped hyenas
What two reptiles kill dogs and consume them?	alligators and pythons
What big cat has a tendency to attack dogs?	Leopards
What big cats in Indonesia also attack dogs?	Tigers
What type of reptiles eat dogs?	alligators and pythons
What is a known predator of village dogs in India?	Striped hyenas
Dogs exhibit carnivore as well as what other type of dietary behavior?	omnivores
Dogs can digest meat as well as what else?	vegetables and grains
Cats are known as what type of carnivore?	obligate
Because of what they eat, dogs are classified as what?	carnivores or omnivores
Dogs do not require a very high level of what when eating?	protein
Dogs have genes that allow them to thrive on what when compared to wolves, who cannot?	starch
The majority of dog breeds have only been around for how long?	a few hundred years
People selected dogs they wanted based on what two things?	particular morphologies and behaviors
Hundreds of different dog breeds exist because of what?	selective breeding
Height measurements in dogs go from six inches for Chihuahuas to 30 inches in what breed?	Irish Wolfhound
How old are most dog breeds?	a few hundred years old
How many different breeds are there?	hundreds
Gray color is often called what when referring to dogs?	blue
Natural selection and what makes certain dogs behave certain ways?	selective breeding
What distinguishes different types of dogs from one another?	breed
Who keeps classifications of different dog breeds?	modern kennel clubs.
What is responsible for different dog types and breeds today?	natural selection and selective breeding
Animals that share characteristics that are different than what other animals in that species have is known as what?	breeds
Modern dog breeds are what type of classification which is maintained by modern kennel clubs?	non-scientific
The methods kennel clubs used to classify dogs is what?	unsystematic.
A scientific study of dog genetics has shown only how many  types of dogs being determinably distinct?	four
What, according to the text, are two examples of "old world" dogs?	Malamute and Shar Pei
the Border collie is an example of what type of dog?	herding
How many main types of dogs are there?	four
What type of dogs are Shar Peis?	old world dogs
What are the other modern and hunting types of dogs called?	all others
What is one of the complex behaviors pet dogs have gotten from wolves?	bite inhibition
What may make dogs have the ability to be trained by, play with and fit in with people?	sophisticated forms of social cognition and communication
Higher social attributes  and human relationships may have caused dogs to reach what as a species?	one of the most successful species on the planet today.
What is a complex behavior that dogs inherited from wolves?	bite inhibition
Dogs had a worth to what type of early humans?	hunter-gatherers
Dogs have hunted with and done other things for people for a long time, but what is a more recent help to people they provide?	aiding handicapped individuals.
Because of a dog's resourcefulness to people, they have been given what nickname?	man's best friend
Some cultures treat dogs as what rather than companions?	a source of meat
What did dogs clean up to help with keeping habitations of people clean?	food scraps.
What do Australian aborigines call a frigid night?	three dog night
What did a dog's good hearing help humans with?	early warning.
How could dogs have helped with sanitation issues in camps?	cleaning up food scraps
What is the Australian Aboriginal expression that indicates a very cold night?	three dog night
What type of hunting is it called when humans and dogs hunt together?	cooperative hunting
What year was research completed to demonstrate humans benefited by having dogs hunt with them?	2004
What would have been the top benefit for dogs in camps?	sense of smell
The successful mixing of dogs with hunting is often given as a primary reason for what?	the domestication of the wolf
What type of working dog may have been the reason so many humans were able to get into North America 12,000 tears ago?	sled dogs
What did ancient people walk across from Siberia into North America?	Bering land bridge
How old are the oldest findings of dogs in North America?	9,400 years
Evidence places dogs in North America when?	12,000 years ago
Dogs were the only domesticated animals for what North American population?	Athabascan
Dogs contributed to what migration 1400 years ago?	Apache and Navajo tribes
People still used dogs as pack animals even after what other animal began being used for this purpose?	horse
A grave from 12,000 BC was found to contain an older person and what else?	puppy
What two species have the most widespread bonding?	humans and dogs
When did more people begin to keep dogs as pets?	after World War II
What decade showed a change in the way people kept dogs as pets?	1980s
In the 1950s and 1960s most dogs where kept where?	outside
Historically, who in particular had dogs as companions?	elites
Dogs were kept where in the 1950s and 1960s as compared to today?	outside
When did the role of dogs change to be more than guardians or walking companions?	1980s
Shaping dogs to what people want is called what?	commodification
The idea of what constitutes a family, from the human perspective, has enlarged to include what?	dogs.
How many big trends are involved in how much the position of dogs has changed in human civilization?	two
When a person shapes a dog to conform to his expectations of behavior, it is called what?	commodification
A second major trend has been increasing the idea of family and home to include dogs in what?	everyday routines
It is easy to turn a canine into the perfect companion because so much of what is available?	commodity forms
Dog training can be researched back to what century?	18th
How do dogs establish their territory as far as scent is concerned?	urine marking
How far back can dog training be found?	18th century
How do dogs mark their territory?	urine marking
What has become important to ensure dogs do not do things that humans don't want them to do, such as jumping?	training
How do most people describe the relationship with their dogs?	part of the family
What television show uses a dominance model of dog and human relationships?	Dog Whisperer.
Most people today describe their dogs as what?	part of the family
What TV show promotes a dominance model for the relationships people have with their dogs?	Dog Whisperer
A study showed that a task dogs do is bringing in what from the lawn?	newspaper
Dogs often help clean in the kitchen by licking what?	plates
In addition to dog dancing, what is another activity that families are doing that is centered around their pet?	dog yoga.
What do many dogs have to do in the families where they live?	set tasks or routines
What are dogs often taught to bring in from outdoors?	the newspaper
The National Pet Owner Survey reported how many people had pet dogs in America between 2009 and 2010?	77.5 million
How many people in the United States are said to own dog?	77.5 million
What type of imaging was used to study the relationship between humans and dogs?	magnetic resonance imaging
An MRI study on dogs proved that dogs have the same response as humans to what?	voices
An MRI study on dogs proved that dogs use the same parts of what as humans?	the brain
Because dogs respond to voices the same way humans do, they are able to recognize what in human sounds, making them social?	emotion
What technology was used to show that dogs respond to voices in the same brain parts as people?	MRI
Dogs have the ability to recognize what type of human sounds?	emotional
What nickname have dogs earned for their relationship to humans?	man's best friend
Pointers and hounds are bred to do what?	hunt
Certain dogs are bred to help fishermen with what?	nets
Who was the first dog to orbit the earth in 1957?	Laika
What breed was Laika?	husky-terrier mix
What phrase describing dogs is used in different languages?	man's best friend
What dog types, in the text, are used for hunting?	pointers and hounds
Some dogs help fishermen with what?	nets
What is the name of the dog to first orbit the Earth?	Laika
What year was the first dog sent into space?	1957
What kind of dogs help people with physical or mental disabilities?	Service dogs
Early warning allows epileptics to get to safety, get medication or what else?	medical care.
What are conformation shows also known as?	breed shows
Who evaluates dogs at breed shows?	a judge
What is the judge looking for in specific breeds?	conformity with their established breed
What is the only standard judged?	externally observable qualities
What is another word for "breed shows"?	conformation shows.
What is the evaluator called in a breed show?	a judge
The breed standard only is about what?	externally observable qualities
Abilities and what else are not tested at breed shows?	health
Where do some people eat dogs?	East Asian countries
In addition to others, Western culture considers eating dog meat as what?	taboo.
In rural Poland areas, what is considered medicinal for lungs?	dog fat
What do people who eat dog meat consider Western culture, since people there do eat many different animals?	western hypocrisy
The West, South Asia and Middle East think eating dogs is what?	taboo
Dog fat in some parts of Poland is thought to have what?	medicinal properties
What is the best known Korean dish made with dog meat?	gaejang-guk
What is Gaejang-guk?	a spicy stew
Why do people eat Gaejang-guk in the summer months?	to balance the body's heat
What is dog meat boiled with to create Gaejang-guk?	scallions and chili powder.
When is the Korean dog recipe usually eaten?	the summer months
What are two other ingredients in the dog meat recipe in Korea?	scallions and chili powder.
How many people are bitten by dogs every year in America?	4.5 million
During the 1980s and 1990s, how many people were killed annually because of dog bites?	17
In the 2000s, how many people died every year because of dog bites?	26
According to a 2008 CDC report, how many are bitten in the United States annually?	4.5 million
What decade saw an increase from 17 to 26 deaths caused by dogs?	2000s
According to a Colorado study, dog bites are what in children as compared to adults?	less severe
Out of 10,000 people, how many people are bitten by dogs in the United States?	12.9
Out of 10,000 boys between five and nine years old, how many are bitten annually by dogs?	60.7
Children are often bit where by dogs?	the face or neck.
A dog scratch can lead to what medical condition?	infections.
Where was the study done that showed dog bites were less serious in children than adults?	Colorado
About 12.9 out of 10,000 are bit by dogs, but what is the number in 10,000 for young boys from 5 to 9?	60.7
According to the text, dog scratches can cause what?	infections.
In addition to dogs, what other animal is responsible for over 86,000 falls every year?	cats
Vehicle accidents with resulting injuries that involve dogs are more common with what type of vehicle?	two-wheeled vehicles.
What sort of vehicle is most likely associated with accidents involving dogs?	two-wheeled vehicles
What is the common name of the species that causes Toxocariasis?	dog roundworm
How are Toxicara canis infections spread?	dog feces
About how many people get a Toxocara infection each year?	10,000
Toxocariasis can lead to what in humans?	retinal damage and decreased vision.
Toxocariasis is caused by what kind of eggs in dog feces?	roundworm
What percentage of people in America are infected with the Toxocara infection?	14
How many Toxocara infection cases are reported annually in the US?	10,000
What percentage of soil contained T. canis eggs in Great Britain public parks?	24
If toxocariasis is left untreated, what can happen to a person?	retinal damage and decreased vision
What year did a publication come out indicating having a pet does not mean lower risk of heart disease in the elderly?	2005
What is lowered in children who have pets?	absenteeism from school
What year did a report state that research did not support better health for elderly people who own pets?	2005
People with dogs get more of what than people with cats or no animals?	exercise
People with dogs do what more than people who have cats or no pets?	exercise
What do humans get exposed to with pets that may help them not get sick?	immune-stimulating microorganisms
Dogs can act as a facilitator of what between human beings?	social interactions
What year was the study done that indicated people with pets are more likely to get to know neighbors?	2015
What is lessened when people are with their pet dogs?	anxiety
People in wheelchairs have better social interactions with who when dogs are involved?	strangers
Dogs were taken where to help people with mental disorders socialize?	mental institutions
Therapy dogs can help increase what in people suffering with Alzheimer's?	social behaviors
What was decreased in children with ADHD when they were exposed to therapy dogs?	antisocial and violent behavior
When did people start using dogs as therapy?	the late 18th century
Where were dogs introduced then to help people socialize people?	mental institutions
Children who have ADHD or conduct disorders respond better when what is a part of their treatment plan?	dogs
People with Alzheimer's smile and laugh more with what kind of therapy?	animal-assisted therapy
What can trained dogs detect by sniffing a person or a sample of their urine?	diseases
How much larger is a dog brain olfactory cortex when compared to humans?	40 times larger
A dog can detect smells in one part per what?	trillion
How much larger is a dog's olfactory cortex than a person's?	40 times larger
How many cancer patients has Daisy detected?	551
What is the name of the dog with three heads in Greek mythology?	Cerberus
What did Cerberus guard?	the gates of Hades.
What is the name of the dog with four eyes in Norse mythology?	Garmr
What is the name of the dog in Philippine mythology who is responsible for lightning?	Kimat
Kimat is the dog of Tadaklan, who is the god of what?	thunder
In what mythology do two canines watch over the Chinvat Bridge?	Persian
Who is the three headed watchdog guarding Hades?	Cerberus
Who is the dog that guards Helheim?	Garmr
Who is Tadaklan?	god of thunder
Who is Tadaklan's pet that is responsible for lightning?	Kimat
In Hindu mythology, what do the two dogs who are owned by the god of death watch over?	the gates of Naraka.
What is the name of the god of death?	Yama
Offerings at the Muthappan Temple shrine take on what form?	bronze dog figurines.
Who owns two dogs with four eyes each in Hindu mythology?	Yama
What do Yama's dogs watch over?	the gates of Naraka
What does Muthappan use for his hunting dog for?	mount
Offerings left at the Muthappan Temple shrine take on what form?	bronze dog figurines
How are dogs viewed in Islam?	as unclean
Why are dogs viewed as unclean in Islam?	scavengers
What city made owing dogs illegal in 2015?	The Hague
In Britain, a dog used in a search at a mosque or a home occupied by Muslims must wear what?	leather dog booties
Why are dogs seen as unclean in Islam?	scavengers
When did it become illegal for a person to own a dog in The Hague?	2015
Where did activists want dogs kept out of neighborhoods because it violated religious freedom?	Lérida, Spain
What are sniffer dogs used by British police allowed to touch instead of a passenger?	their luggage
What do dogs represent to Christians?	faithfulness.
Jewish law dictates that anyone owning a dog must feed the dog before who?	themselves
If a Jewish person owns a dog, he must do what to do the dog before he does it to himself?	feed
What does a dog represent in the Christian culture?	faithfulness
Three Asian countries see dogs as what?	kind protectors.
What country has the dog as part of its 12 animals that represent years?	China
How are dogs viewed in Asian countries?	as kind protectors
Thousands of years ago, dogs were depicted on the walls of what?	caves.
What scenes were popular in art during the Middle Ages?	Hunting
Dogs were depicted as art on the walls of what?	caves
What kind of art scene was popular in the Middle Ages?	Hunting scenes
As relationships between people and dogs got closer, what happened to the art that had dogs in it?	became more elaborate
Dogs can have the same health issues as who?	humans
Which dog is not able to mount a female dog?	Male French Bulldogs
When these feral dogs are approached by a person, they tend to do this 52% of the time?	run away
When these feral dogs are approached by a person, they tend to do this 11% of the time?	respond with aggression
Dog cognition has been studied on what kind of dogs?	pet dogs living in human homes.
What would wolves have gotten from living with humans?	significant benefits
What has likely led to human success?	the domestication of dogs
Studies that people are better off with dogs have been criticized for being what?	poorly controlled
People who have cats or dogs make fewer visits where?	to the doctor
When did the tradition of people carrying the Olympic torch before the Olympic games begin?	1936 Summer Olympics.
How many days did people carry the Olympic torch before the 2008 Summer Olympics?	129 days
What was the theme for the torch relay?	one world, one dream
What did the organizers of the torch relay call it?	Journey of Harmony
What was the 2008 Olympic slogan?	one world, one dream
Where were the details of the torch relay made known?	Beijing, China.
What was the torch relay referred to as by organizers?	"Journey of Harmony"
How many miles was the Olympic torch relayed?	85,000 mi
What day was the Olympic torch lit for the 2008 games?	March 24
Where did the Olympics originate?	Olympia, Greece
When did the Olympic torch reach Beijing?	March 31
How many continents did the torch visit after Beijing?	six
The torch was on what road to symbolize historic links between China and the world?	Silk Road
Where was the Olympic torch lit?	Olympia, Greece
What date was the Olympic torch lit?	March 24
What is the name of the stadium in Greece were the torch was taken to?	Panathinaiko Stadium
What date did the Olympic torch arrive at its destination in China?	March 31.
What mountain was the torch taken up?	Mount Everest
How many people protested on the San Francisco torch route?	hundreds
How many people protested at the Pyongyang torch route?	effectively none
What were some groups doing along the torch route that was not supportive of the Olympics?	protesting
Who put out the torch along the route for protection?	Chinese security officials
Who condemned the various attacks on the torch relay route?	the Chinese government
In San Francisco, who had a larger presence than the protesters?	supporters
Who overwhelmed the protesters in Japan?	counter-protesters
Who amassed in large scale against protesters?	counter-protesters
What was said to have occurred between some supporters and protesters?	skirmishes
What three areas of the globe were protests reported as not big?	Latin America, Africa, and Western Asia
Who is the president of the International Olympic Committee?	Jacques Rogge
Athletes wearing what kind of flag at any Olympic venue faced the possibility of expulsion from the Olympics?	Tibetan
Because of the relay issues, IOC decided to no longer have what in subsequent Olympics?	global relays
What is the name of the man who said the protesting of the torch relay as a "crisis"?	Jacques Rogge
What could happen to Olympic sports participants who showed a Tibetan flag at events?	could be expelled
Who asked that the torch relay be ended?	IOC members.
What was halted with the torch relay for future Olympics?	global relays
The international torch relay was canceled for what event in June 2008?	Paralympic Games
For what events was the torch relay decided to not be held?	Paralympic Games
What is the Chinese design used on the Olympic Torch?	Lucky Cloud
What is the Olympic Torch made from?	aluminum.
How much does the Olympic Torch weigh?	985 grams
What is used to light the flame on the Olympic Torch?	An ignition key
What was the design name of the Chinese Olympic Torch?	Lucky Cloud
What metal is the torch constructed from?	aluminum.
What wind speed will the torch flame still stay lit in MPH?	37
How much rainfall in inches per hour can the torch stay lit under?	2
What fuel is used for the torch?	propane.
When it was necessary for the Olympic Torch to be on an airplane, which one was used?	a chartered Air China Airbus A330
What color was the chartered plane?	red and yellow
When was it decided that Air China would be the official torch carrier?	March 2008
How many days did the plane travel?	130 days
What type of aircraft did the Torch team travel in?	Airbus A330
What colors was the aircraft painted?	red and yellow
What was the name of the airline that transported the Olympic Torch?	Air China
How many days did the plane travel with the Torch team?	130
How many different places were visited by the aircraft taking the Torch team?	21
How many continents did the torch visit?	six
What was the stop that was to happen between Ho Chi Minh City and Hong Kong?	Taipei
The Republic of China felt that the wrong decision could place Taiwan on the same level as what two areas?	Hong Kong and Macau
The torch route covered six what?	continents
What government disagreed on the language used to describe the torch route?	Taiwan.
What two places did Taiwan not want to be considered equal with in the language of the torch's route description?	Hong Kong and Macau
How many kilometers was the torch supposed to go through Taiwan?	24
On what date did the Olympic Flame get lit?	March 24, 2008
Where did the Olympic Flame get lit?	Olympia, Greece.
Who was the first person to carry the torch?	Alexandros Nikolaidis
Who initially lit the Olympic Torch?	Maria Nafpliotou
When did demonstrators yell for Tibet to be freed?	March 30, 2008
Where is the location of the original Olympic events?	Olympia, Greece.
What is the name of the woman who lit the torch for the new games?	Maria Nafpliotou
What medal did the first torchbearer have from prior games?	silver
What is the name of the first torchbearer for the 2008 Olympics?	Alexandros Nikolaidis
What place had police experience violent problems with protesters?	Nepal.
Action was taken to boycott which company?	Carrefour
Who was the biggest shareholder of Carrefour?	the LVMH Group
What did some protesters burn?	the French flag
Where were anti-protesters blocked from entering a Carrefour store with Chinese flags?	Kunming
Who was said to have given money to the Dalai Lama?	the LVMH Group
What method did the Chinese government use to ease the boycott situation?	censorship
What French company was being boycotted?	Carrefour
In what publication were Chinese people asked to be orderly and legal because of the protests and demonstrations?	People's Daily
What is the name of the publication where Chinese people were advised to be calm and rational about patriotism?	People's Daily
The Chinese people were told to show patriotism in an orderly and what manner?	legal
What virgin site did the torch visit on April 2?	Almaty
Who was the first person to be handed the torch in Almaty?	Nursultan Nazarbaev.
Who is Nursultan Nazarbaev?	the President of Kazakhstan
The route in Almaty went from Medeo Stadium to where?	Astana Square.
What kind of activists were arrested in Almaty?	Uighur activists
What country did the torch get to for the first time?	Kazakhstan
What is the name of the president who was the first torchbearer in Almaty?	Nursultan Nazarbaev.
What was the distance in kilometers for the route in Kazakhstan?	20
What activists were reported to have been arrested?	Uighur
When was the torch in Istanbul?	April 3
Where did the torch end up in Istanbul?	Taksim Square
Where did the torch start in Instanbul?	Sultanahmet Square
Who protested for their compatriots who were in Xinjiang?	Uyghurs living in Turkey
What city was the Olympic Torch at on April 3rd?	Istanbul
What is the name of the place in the city where the torch relay started in Turkey?	Sultanahmet Square
Where did the torch relay finish in Turkey?	Taksim Square.
What people in Turkey protested for their people living in China?	Uyghurs
What happened to protesters who tried to interrupt the carrying of the torch?	arrested
When did the torch arrive in Saint Petersburg?	April 5
Where was the start of the torch route in Saint Petersburg?	Victory Square
Where did the torch route end in Saint Petersburg?	Palace Square
Who is the first MMA fighter to participate in carrying the Olympic torch?	Fedor Emelianenko
Where in Russia was the first stop for the relay?	Saint Petersburg
What city location did the torch relay begin in Russia?	Victory Square
What was the last location for the relay in Russia?	Palace Square.
What is the name of the MMA fighter who carried the torch in Russia?	Fedor Emelianenko
Which city hosted the 2012 Summer Olympics?	London
When did the torch route begin in London?	April 6
How much did security cost for the torch relay in London?	£750,000
What city held the Olympics in 2012?	London
Where did the torch relay begin in London for the 2008 Olympics?	Wembley Stadium
Where did the relay end in London?	O2 Arena
How many miles was the relay in England?	30 mi
What word was used by London officials to describe Chinese security guards for their treatment of protesters?	thugs
How many torchbearers took part in the London route?	80
Who was the first person to hold the torch for the London route?	Sir Steve Redgrave
Along with Francesca Martinez, who decided to not carry the torch?	Richard Vaughan
Who was outside at 10 Downing Street to welcome the torch without actually touching it?	Prime Minister Gordon Brown
Who got emails asking him to boycott the torch relay?	Sir Steve Redgrave
How many people carried the torch in England for the 2008 Olympics?	80
What two people in England declined to bear the torch?	Francesca Martinez and Richard Vaughan
Where did Gordon Brown welcome the torch?	10 Downing Street
Where was an attempt made to take the torch?	Ladbroke Grove
When did the torch relay in Paris occur?	April 7
Where did the Paris route start for the torch relay?	the Eiffel Tower
Rather than being carried by an athlete, how did the torch end its route in Paris?	by bus
The flame of the torch was put out when David Douillet was ready to hand it to who?	Teddy Riner
What date did the torch relay begin in France?	April 7
What city in France did the torch relay start at?	Paris
Where location was the torch relay started in the city in Paris?	Eiffel Tower
About how many police were said to have protected the torch in France?	3,000
How many times was the torch put out in France die to security concerns?	five
Who threw a a Tibetan flag from a City Hall window?	Green Party officials.
Which torchbearer was in a wheelchair?	Jin Jing
What was Jin Jing called by ethnic Chinese?	Angel in Wheelchair
What was stopped due to protest interruptions?	torch relay ceremony
What is the name of the handicapped bearer of the torch?	Jin Jing
What did the ethnic Chinese call the disabled torch bearer?	Angel in Wheelchair
Who put a flag of Tibet out of the window at City Hall?	Green Party officials.
Which organization planned several protests?	Reporters Without Borders
What did Reporters Without Borders scale in order to put a protest banner on it?	the Eiffel Tower
Which cathedral did Reporters Without Borders hang another protest banner?	Notre Dame cathedral
What was hung from the Eiffel Tower?	banner
Who climbed the Eiffel Tower to hang a protest banner?	Reporters Without Borders
Where else was a copy of the banner at Eiffel Tower hung?	Notre Dame cathedral.
Where did hundreds of pro-Tibet protesters meet?	the Trocadéro
Who spoke to the media about China's lack of freedom of speech?	Jane Birkin
Who is the President of the French Tibetan community that urged protesters to remain peaceful?	Thupten Gyatso
Where did pro-Tibetan protesters get together?	Trocadéro
The Trocadéro was not disruptive of the relay and said to have been what?	peaceful
Who, of the Trocadéro protest, spoke to the media?	Jane Birkin
What did the person who spoke to the media at Trocadéro say China lacked?	freedom of speech
What did the political parties request a brief stop in?	the National Assembly's session
What text was on the banner that the politicians unrolled outside?	Respect for Human Rights in China
What did MPs yell when the torch passed them?	Freedom for Tibet!
Various French politicians started protests including members of what?	Parliament
All the French political factions requested a temporary halt to what?	National Assembly's session
Why did the banner say that was unveiled during the temporary halt?	Respect for Human Rights in China
What did the Parliamentary members yell as the relay passed?	Freedom for Tibet!
What did French police take from demonstrators?	Tibetan flags
Which newspaper reported that only the Chinese could express themselves?	Libération
Where was the only place the Tibetan flag could be held?	the Trocadéro
Who was the Minister of the Interior?	Michèle Alliot-Marie
What did French law enforcement take from protesters?	Tibetan flags
Where was the only place Tibetan flags were permitted?	the Trocadéro.
Who said the police acted on their own in taking the flags?	Michèle Alliot-Marie
Who rendered a France 2 camera person unconscious?	a police officer
Where did the torch start it's North American route?	San Francisco
What day did the torch arrive in San Francisco?	April 9
What is the name of the first North American torchbearer?	Lin Li
The route end was changed from Justin Herman plaza to what?	San Francisco International Airport
Who was the head of the U.S. Olympic Committee?	Peter Ueberroth
What city in the United States held the 2008 Olympic Torch relay?	San Francisco
What was the date of the relay in the United States?	April 9.
What is the name of the person who handed off the torch to the torchbearer in the United States 2008 Olympic relay?	Norman Bellingham
What is the name of the location where the relay ending event was canceled?	Justin Herman Plaza
Who approved a resolution concerning human rights on April 1, 2008?	San Francisco Board of Supervisors
The concern was over what in China and Tibet?	human rights abuses
What date was the protest which was led by Gere and Tutu?	April 8
When was a resolution agreed to about Chinese human rights issues in San Francisco?	April 1, 2008
Who approved the resolution?	San Francisco Board of Supervisors
Where was a protest planned in San Francisco?	United Nations Plaza
What actor was scheduled to attend a San Francisco Olympic protest?	Richard Gere
Three protester climbed what to hang two banners on April 7, 2008?	Golden Gate Bridge
Laurel Sutherlin spoke to which TV station about his concerns?	KPIX-CBS5
Who asked that the San Francisco relay route be shortened?	China
What famous bridge had two banners hung from it by protesters?	Golden Gate Bridge
Who spoke to station KPIX-CBS5 about the bridge banner protests?	Laurel Sutherlin
How many supporters face charges for the bridge stunt?	five
How many activists may be charged with crimes for the bridge stunt?	three
Where did the first relay runner disappear to with the torch??	a warehouse
Which wheelchair-bound torchbearer was ejected from the relay for showing a Tibetan flag?	Andrew Michael
What wheelchair-bound bearer of the Olympic torch displayed a Tibetan flag?	Andrew Michael
Where was the last part of the San Francisco torch relay carried through before getting on a bus?	Marina district
Where was a makeshift closing ceremony held for the torch relay in San Francisco?	San Francisco International Airport
After the bearer of the torch disappeared into a warehouse, what road did the relay reappear on?	Van Ness Avenue
When did the Olympic torch relay begin in Buenos Aires?	April 11
Where did the torch route start in Buenos Aires?	the Lola Mora amphitheatre
Who was the mayor of Buenos Aires?	Mauricio Macri
Where did the Olympic torch relay begin in Argentina?	Buenos Aires
What place held an opening show for the relay?	Lola Mora amphitheatre
What is the name of the mayor who passed off the torch to the first bearer in Argentina?	Mauricio Macri
Who was the first bearer of the torch in Argentina?	Carlos Espínola.
What was showered along the route in some places?	confetti
What is the name of the activist who promised peaceful protests?	Jorge Carcavallo
What route was planned for an alternative march?	from the Obelisk to the city hall
What was on the banner that was displayed where the torchbearers would carry the torch?	Free Tibet
What is the name of the protester who said they would not try to extinguish the torch?	Jorge Carcavallo.
Where did the other march travel form and to?	Obelisk to the city hall
What was the name given to the torch carried on the alternative march?	Human Rights Torch.
What did the large banner say that was along the alternative march route?	Free Tibet
What was the unsanctioned alternative relay called?	Human Rights Torch Relay
Who was the outreach director of HRTR?	Susan Prager
What was the non profit that was funded by Mark Palmer?	Friends of Falun Gong
Which footballer decided to not be a torchbearer because of the controversy?	Diego Maradona
How many police officers were in place to avoid controversy along the torch route?	1200
What was thrown to try and put out the flame?	water balloons
What is Susan Prager communication director of?	Friends of Falun Gong
What football star backed out due to relay controversy?	Diego Maradona
How many police officers were part of the security operative?	1200
What was tossed at the torch trying to put it out?	water balloons
The protests were considered to be overall what in nature?	peaceful
Where was the only African destination for the torch?	Dar es Salaam
When did the torch arrive in Dar es Salaam?	April 13
Where did the route start for the torch in Dar es Salaam?	the TAZARA Railway
Where was the solitary place the relay was held in Africa?	Dar es Salaam
What is the name of the railway where the Olympic torch relay began in Africa?	TAZARA
Where did the relay terminate in Africa?	Benjamin Mkapa National Stadium
What country paid for the stadium through aid money?	China
Who it the torch in Africa?	Vice-President Ali Mohamed Shein.
Which Middle East location was the only area the torch visited?	Muscat
When did the torch arrive in Muscat?	April 14
Which actress carried the torch for part of the route?	Sulaf Fawakherji
Where was the only place the Olympic torch was carried in the Middle East?	Muscat
How far was the relay route in kilometers in the Middle East?	20
What is the name of the Syrian actress who was one to bear the torch?	Sulaf Fawakherji.
When did the torch arrive in Islamabad?	April 16
Where was an indoor ceremony held since the outdoor relay was cancelled?	Jinnah Stadium
Who spoke at the opening ceremony in Islamabad in addition to President Musharraf?	Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani
Where did the Olympic torch relay start in Pakistan?	Islamabad
Instead of a traditinal relay, where was the track the torch was carried in Pakistan?	Jinnah Stadium.
When did the torch visit New Delhi?	April 17
How many runners carried the torch in New Delhi?	70
Which football captain did not participate in the relay to show support for Tibet?	Baichung Bhutia
How many torchbearers did not participate because of their concerns with Tibet?	five
Where did the torch relay happen in India?	New Delhi
How long was the route in India in miles?	1.5
How many bearers of the torch were used in India?	70
How many bearers decided not to participate?	five
What is the name of the footballer who refused to be a part of the relay?	Baichung Bhutia
The security given to the torch relay in New Delhi is reminiscent of the security of what?	Republic Day celebrations
The Chinese presented a list of vulnerable relay locations to who?	Nirupama Sen.
Who supposedly cancelled a trip to Beijing in protest?	India's Commerce Minister
Who was said to have canceled an official trip to China in protest?	Kamal Nath
At what time in the middle of the night was the diplomat summoned?	2 am
The Olympic relay had the same security precautions taken as what other special day?	Republic Day
What kind of targets do Republic Day events present as?	terrorist targets.
How many people comprised the Tibetan exile community?	150,000
India refused China's request that the Tibetan exile community be avoided because they said India is what?	a democracy
Where is the exiled Tibetan government?	India
How many Tibetan exiles are said to be in India?	150,000
A wholesale ban on what was denied?	protests
What Olympic group was denied by India?	Olympic Holy Flame Protection Unit
What deteriorated between India and China?	relations
Who said they did not support relay interruptions?	the Tibetan government in exile
Who did not want to participate in the relay as 'caged woman'?	Kiran Bedi
Where was Bedi retired from?	Indian Police Service
Which actress decided to not participate on April 15?	Soha Ali Khan
When did a protest in Delhi occur to protest against Chinese repression in Tibet?	April 16
What retired police officer refused to carry the torch in India?	Kiran Bedi
What actress removed herself from participation in the relay?	Soha Ali Khan
Where was a protest organized about the Olympic relay in India?	Delhi
Who disbanded the protest in Delhi?	police.
The retired police officer said she would not run as what?	caged woman
When did the Olympic torch reach Bangkok?	April 18
Who is the Green World Foundation chairwoman who refused to participate in the relay?	M.R. Narisa Chakrabongse
The media was told that the Chinese supplied with shirts and transportation?	students
When did the torch go through Bankok?	April 18
The relay route was a little over how many kilometers?	10
Who were told they would be banned from reentering Thailand?	foreign protesters
What scheduled bearer of the torch boycotted?	Mom Rajawongse Narissara Chakrabongse
When did the torch visit Malaysia?	April 21
What is the capital city of Malaysia?	Kuala Lumpur
Where did the route begin in Malaysia?	Independence Square
Prior to the 2008 games, when did Malaysia last see an Olympic torch relay?	1964
What is the location of the start of the relay in Malaysia?	Independence Square
Where did the relay end in Malaysia?	Petronas Twin Towers.
What year was the last torch relay event in Malaysia?	1964
How many Special Police protected the relay event?	1000
Which supporters protested near the Chinese embassy in Malaysia?	Falun Gong
Supporters of what demonstrated at the Chinese embassy in Malaysia?	Falun Gong
What were a Japanese family who unveiled a Tibetan flag hit with?	plastic air-filled batons
What did the Chinese group yell?	Taiwan and Tibet belong to China.
What did Chinese volunteers take from two Malaysian demonstrators?	placards
When did the Olympic torch visit Jakarta?	April 22
Who requested that the original route be cancelled?	the Chinese embassy
Along with invited people, who were the only other people allowed in the stadium?	journalists
Where did the torch relay begin in Indonesia?	Jakarta
How many kilometers was the planned route that was cancelled?	20
Why was the first route not taken?	security worries
What type of facility was the torch carried at instead.	stadium.
Where did protests occur when non one except invited guests and the press were allowed inside the stadium?	outside the stadium.
When did the torch arrive in Canberra?	April 24
Who received the flame from Chinese officials in Canberra?	Agnes Shea
What did Agnes Shea give to the Chinese in return?	a message stick
Who publicly argued at a press conference?	Australian and Chinese officials
Where was the relay held in Australia?	Canberra
How many kilometers was the route in Australia?	16
What was the location of the beginning of the Olympic torch route in Australia?	Reconciliation Place
Who kept the demonstrators separated?	Australian Federal Police.
What is the name of the Aboriginal elder who received the torch from Chinese officials?	Agnes Shea
Who did the Chinese want to deploy to Canberra to protect the flame?	People's Liberation Army personnel
Chinese Australian students were told to defend what against scum and separatists?	sacred torch
Who was the chairman of the Australian Council of Chinese Organisations?	Tony Goh
Who was the Foreign Minister who said he was okay with protests as long as they were peaceful?	Stephen Smith
What group did China want along the relay route in Canberra?	People's Liberation Army
Who was given permission to search attendees of the relay?	Australian police
Who said that thousands of pro-Beijing supporters would be bused in?	Tony Goh
Who told the media that Chinese diplomats were arranging a "peaceful show of strength"?	Zhang Rongan
Who was the Foreign Minister who indicated Chinese officials wanted supporting demonstrators to show up and show their point of view?	Stephen Smith
Who withdrew as a torchbearer because of her concerns about human rights?	Lin Hatfield Dodds
Who said Dodds' withdrawal was a good example of peacefully protesting?	Foreign Minister Stephen Smith
Who withdrew from the torch event?	Lin Hatfield Dodds
Who was the foreign minister that said her decision was a good example of peacefully making a point?	Stephen Smith
Who was the head of the Canberra torch relay committee?	Ted Quinlan
How many supporters of Tibet were expected in Canberra to protest?	600
ACT Chief Minister Jon Stanhope said which organization intended to ensure that China supporters outweighed Tibet supporters?	the Chinese embassy
Which athlete carried the torch for the final leg?	Ian Thorpe
How many supporters of Tibet were expected to attend the torch relay?	Up to 600
It was thought that how many Chinese supporters would attend the torch relay?	between 2,000 and 10,000
Who did not expect that reaction from the Chinese community?	Ted Quinlan
Who was involved to ensure the pro Chinese demonstrators outweighed the Tibetan demonstrators?	the Chinese embassy
Who hosted the 1998 Winter Olympics?	Nagano
When did the torch arrive in Nagano?	April 26
Where was the torch relay held in Japan?	Nagano
Which Olympics did Nagano host?	1998 Winter Olympics
What location was supposed to be the start of the relay event in Nagano?	Japanese Buddhist temple Zenkō-ji
When monks pulled out of the event, where was the new starting point for the relay?	a municipal building
How many Chinese guards were allowed to go with the torch?	two
Where was the torch relay event held in South Korea?	Seoul
When did Seoul host the Olympics?	1988 Summer Olympics
Where was the start point for the relay?	Olympic Park
Who became violent during the relay route and was promised deportation when caught?	Chinese students
Where was the relay event held in South Korea?	Seoul
Which Olympics did Seoul host?	1988 Summer Olympics
When did the torch arrive in Pyongyang?	April 28
Who presided over the torch event in North Korea?	Kim Yong Nam
Who was the first torchbearer in North Korea?	Pak Du Ik
Where did the relay start?	the Juche Tower
Where was the relay event held in North Korea?	Pyongyang.
What date did the torch relay event take place?	April 28.
What did people in the crowd wave at the beginning of the relay?	pink paper flowers and small flags
Who was the first runner with the torch?	Pak Du Ik
The United Nations Organization and UNICEF felt the relay could be used as what?	a propaganda stunt.
North Korea is often listed among the worst offenders in the world in what regard?	against human rights.
What is the children's agency of the United Nations Organization?	UNICEF
Both organizations withdrew what?	their staff
What is the mission of the organizations?	raising awareness of conditions for children
Who is often listed amongst the world's worst offenders when it comes to human rights?	North Korea
When did the torch arrive in Vietnam?	April 29
Where was the torch event held in Vietnam?	Ho Chi Minh City
How many torchbearers carried the torch in Vietnam?	60
Where did the torch event begin in Vietnam?	the downtown Opera House
Where did the torch event end?	the Military Zone 7 Competition Hall stadium
Where was the torch event held in Vietnam?	Ho Chi Minh City.
What areas are involved in the dispute between Vietnam and China?	the Spratly and Paracel Islands
The Chinese government established what city in this disputed area?	Sansha
As a result, demonstrations were held in what two cities in December 2007?	Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.
Who was the Prime Minister of Vietnam?	Nguyễn Tấn Dũng
How many people protesting China were arrested in Hanoi prior to the rally?	seven
Which blogger calling for demonstrations was arrested for tax evasion?	Điếu Cày
Which torchbearer sent a letter of protest to the president of the International Olympic Committee?	Lê Minh Phiếu
How many protesters were arrested in Hanoi prior to the rally?	seven
What is blogger Điếu Cày's real name?	Nguyễn Văn Hải
Though he urged for demonstrations in Vietnam, Nguyễn Văn Hải was charged with what crime?	tax evasion.
What is the name of the torchbearer who wrote a letter to the IOC president about discrepancies on a website?	Lê Minh Phiếu
What was removed from the website that Lê Minh Phiếu had written about?	disputed islands and dotted lines marking China's maritime claims
When did the torch arrive in Hong Kong?	May 2
Who was the first torchbearer in Hong Kong?	Lee Lai Shan
Where was the torch event started in Hong Kong?	Hong Kong Cultural Centre
Where did the torch relay end in Hong Kong?	Golden Bauhinia Square in Wan Chai
How many torchbearers participated in the relay event in Hong Kong?	120
When was the relay event held in Hong Kong?	May 2.
Who handed the torch to Lee Lai Shan, the first torchbearer?	Donald Tsang
What was used to get the torch across the Shing Mun River?	a dragon boat
How many torchbearers carried the torch?	120
The torchbearers included athletes, celebrities and who?	pro-Beijing camp politicians.
What did Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China members wave to symbolize democracy?	plastic Olympic flames
This group wanted accountability for what 1989 event?	Tiananmen Square protests
Who wrapped a Tibetan flag around her body and later waved it?	Christina Chan
Who removed Chan from the protest?	police
Why is Chan suing the Hong Kong government?	her human rights were breached.
Some people waved plastic inflated flames, saying they symbolize what?	democracy.
Who was proud that Hong Kong still has brave people speaking out?	Leung Kwok-hung
What did radio host Christina Chan wear before waving it?	Tibetan snow lion flag
Which group did Jens Galschiøt lead?	The Color Orange democracy group
What did Galschiøt construct in Hong Kong in reference to the Tiananmen Square protests?	Pillar of Shame
Galschiøt and two fellow protesters were denied to entry to Hong Kong for what reason?	immigration reasons
Which American actress was questioned at the Hong Kong airport?	Mia Farrow
A legislator said that by allowing Farrow to enter Hong Kong while denying others was a violation to what policy?	one country, two systems
What group did Jens Galschiøt lead?	The Color Orange
What structure did Jens Galschiøt build to monumentalize the Tianamen Square protests in 1989?	Pillar of Shame
Why was Jens Galschiøt made to leave Hong Kong?	immigration reasons
Which actress from America was initially held and then gave a speech about China and Sudan?	Mia Farrow
When did the torch visit Macao?	May 3
Where was the torch ceremony held in Macao?	Macau Fisherman's Wharf
How many torchbearers participated in Macao?	120
Who was the first torchbearer in Macao?	Leong Hong Man
A newspaper article criticized that there were not enough of what kind of person among the torchbearers?	athletes
When was the torch relay event held in Macao?	May 3
How many torchbearers carried the torch in Macao?	120
Who was the first person to carry the torch in Macao?	Leong Hong Man
Which casino tycoon participated in the torch relay event?	Stanley Ho.
Which publication was unhappy with the amount of non-athlete torchbearers?	Macao Daily News
A Macau citizen was arrested for posting a plea to disrupt the relay on what website?	cyberctm.com
In addition to cyberctm.com, what other website was shut down for two days?	orchidbbs.com
Who was arrested on April 26 for posting an online message?	A Macau resident
Where was the message posted?	cyberctm.com
Who denied the shutdown was motivated by politics?	The head of the Bureau of Telecommunications Regulation
After its April departure, when did the torch return to China?	May 4
What actor attended a torch celebration in China?	Jackie Chan
When did the torch reach Sanya, Hainan?	May 4
When was the last time the torch had been in China?	April.
Who attended the celebrations?	IOC
Which actor also attended the celebrations?	Jackie Chan.
The Chinese coverage of torch relay events has been accused by Western reporters as being what?	partial and censored
In turn, Chinese supporters have accused Western media of being what in their coverage?	biased.
Which French newspaper was accused of being biased by Chinese State press agency Xinhua?	Libération
What was under scrutiny?	media coverage
Coverage in China is reported to be partial and what?	censored
What organization interrupted the relay and was not broadcast by the Chinese media?	Reporters Without Borders
Chinese State Press said what French newspaper was biased?	Libération
The Chinese State Press said the French newspaper was supporting a handful of what?	saboteurs
What did the Chinese media focus on as far as human rights protesters?	the more disruptive protesters
Xinhua and CCTV focused on people who what?	condemned the protests
Which athlete was ignored by media for supporting the protesters?	Marie-José Pérec
What did Xinhua call protesters?	radicals
Which athlete showed support for the people protesting?	Marie-José Pérec
Which publication said that protesters were trampling human rights?	Xinhua
Though several torchbearers withdrew from the torch relay, the official website for China stated that Indian torch participants vowed to run for what?	spirit of Olympics
What did Ayaan Ali Khan and Manavjit Singh Sandhu say should not be mixed?	sports and politics
Though four withdrew, it was reported that Indian torchbearers vowed to what?	run for spirit of Olympics
Several torchbearers said what two things should not be combined?	sports and politics
Which United Kingdom newspaper published a Chinese ambassador's opinion that Western media had demonized China with torch coverage?	The Daily Telegraph
What French newspaper did the Chinese media accuse of bias?	Libération
Some Chinese have accused Western media of what in their reportings?	Western media bias.
Who was the Chinese ambassador to the U.K.?	Fu Ying
Which newspaper published these accusations?	The Daily Telegraph
What other newspaper was accused of bias?	Libération
 Who did Xinhua accuse of biased reporting on April 17?	CNN
Who was accused of bias on April 17 by Xinhua?	CNN
Who wanted CNN to apologize for its insult to Chinese people?	the Chinese government
What article did BBC put out about China just days earlier?	The challenges of reporting in China
Who stated that Chinese people could access the BBC news website after years of not being able to?	Paul Danahar
How many people gathered in protest at these two buildings?	1,300
Who commented that Chinese people can look at the BBC news site for the first time?	Paul Danahar
Where is BBC banned from reporting?	Tibet
Who published "Overseas Chinese rally against biased media coverage" on April 20?	People's Daily
Which publication published a report about the Chinese rallying against media bias?	People's Daily
What was the Chinese government reported running on April 4?	an anti-CNN website
Who supposedly created the site?	a Beijing citizen.
Who takes credit for creating the site?	a Beijing citizen.
Who felt that the government was involved in the website?	foreign correspondents
How many attendants accompanied the flame during it's travels?	30
When were the 30 team members sworn in?	August 2007
What were their official team outfits?	matching blue tracksuits
Which team member has his own fan following?	Second Right Brother
How many attendants were used from the People's Armed Police for the flame's entire journey?	30
When were these 30 sworn in?	August 2007
What did these 30 attendants wear?	blue tracksuits
What is the attendant who has a large fan base called?	Second Right Brother
Which French company was boycotted?	Carrefour
Carrefour was boycotted because of which shareholder?	LVMH Group
Who was the LVMH Group accused of supporting?	the Dalai Lama
What was burned during these boycotts?	the French flag
Who was accused of helping the Dalai Lama?	LVMH Group
Boycotters accused France of being pro-seccessionist and what?	anti-Chinese racism.
The Chinese government tried to tamper the boycott, trying to avoid a similar outcome to which protests in 2005?	anti-Japanese protests
Which newspaper urged citizens to protest peacefully?	People's Daily
Which website had mentions of the Carrefour boycott removed by the government?	Sohu.com
When did protests in front of Carrefour's stores occur in China?	May 1
The Chinese government did not want a repeat of what protests?	the anti-Japanese protests in 2005.
Which newspaper asked the Chinese people to protest peacefully?	People's Daily
Who removed Carrefour boycott comments from some websites?	the Chinese government
What day did protests occur in front of Carrefour stores?	May 1.
Who was the mayor of Nagano?	Shoichi Washizawa
How did Washizawa refer to the city having the torch relay?	great nuisance
What was vandalized after a relay event was cancelled there?	a major Buddhist temple
Who was the mayor of Nagano?	Shoichi Washizawa
What did he call the opportunity for Nagano to host the torch event?	great nuisance
Where was the inital opening ceremony to be held in Nagano?	a major Buddhist temple
In what is the torch flame kept lit when the torch must be off?	lanterns.
The torch is put out at night, on aircraft, during storms and what else?	during protests
Who was Michael Mak Kwok-fung?	Hong Kong legislator
Which athlete did the official website call an angel?	Jin Jing
Which media outlets gave Jin Jing little notice?	Western media
How many additional teams will help with the Mainland China route?	Two
How many members are on each of these two teams?	40
Despite its imperfection, what are now considered valuable achievements of Principia Mathematica?	the book popularized modern mathematical logic and drew important connections between logic, epistemology, and metaphysics
What is the general consensus of the axioms and inference rules declared in Principia Mathematica?	mixed
Who discovered the incompleteness theorem of 1931?	Kurt Gödel
What did the incompleteness theorem of 1931 indicate regarding Principia Mathematica?	for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics, there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced
Why was Gödels finding ironic?	Gödel could not have come to this conclusion without Whitehead and Russell's book
When was Kurt Godel's incompleteness theorem?	1931
What did Kurt Godel's theorem demonstrate about axioms and the inference rules?	some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them
Godel couldn't have come to his conclusion without what book?	Principia Mathematica
Besides logic and epistemology, what else did Principia Mathematica connect?	metaphysics
What is the origin of the title of the book?	The essay from which Aims of Education derived its name was delivered as an address in 1916
How did Whitehead define "inert ideas"?	ideas that are disconnected scraps of information, with no application to real life or culture
What was Whitehead's criticism of the use of inert ideas in education?	"education with inert ideas is not only useless: it is, above all things, harmful."
When was "The Aims of Education and Other Essays" published?	1929
During what periods of time were the essays and address contained in "The Aims of Education and Other Essays" composed?	between 1912 and 1927
What year was The Aims of Education and Other Essays published?	1929
What was the Aims of Education and Other Essays comprised of?	numerous essays and addresses
What teaching did Whitehead caution against teaching?	inert ideas
What did Whitehead believe regarding the variety of subjects in education?	Whitehead advocated teaching a relatively few important concepts
How did Whitehead propose that students would expand their knowledge beyond the subjects taught in school?	important concepts that the student could organically link to many different areas of knowledge, discovering their application in actual life
What was Whitehead's general opinion of what the school model should be?	For Whitehead, education should be the exact opposite of the multidisciplinary, value-free school model
What was Whitehead's opinion on the inclusion of values and general principles in education?	it should be transdisciplinary, and laden with values and general principles that provide students with a bedrock of wisdom
Whitehead's education style was to teach what?	a relatively few important concepts
What should Whitehead's students organically link due to his teaching methods?	different areas of knowledge, discovering their application in actual life.
Whitehead believed education should be the opposite of what?	value-free school model
What was the extent of Whitehead's education in philosophy?	he never had any formal training in philosophy beyond his undergraduate education
What was Whitehead's opinion of his own knowledge of metaphysics in that correspondence?	"This further question lands us in the ocean of metaphysic, onto which my profound ignorance of that science forbids me to enter."
How did Whitehead eventually become regarded in the field of metaphysics?	in later life Whitehead would become one of the 20th century's foremost metaphysicians
With what friend and former student did Whitehead correspond regarding the goals of science?	Bertrand Russell
What is the highest Whitehead was trained in philosophy?	undergraduate
What is the relationship between Whitehead and Russell?	friend and former student
What did Whitehead consider himself as a philosopher?	rank amateur
What was Whitehead considered as a metaphysician?	one of the 20th century's foremost metaphysicians.
What quotation of Whitehead's was noted by a student in 1927?	"Every scientific man in order to preserve his reputation has to say he dislikes metaphysics. What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized."
What was Whitehead's opinion of basic assumptions in metaphysics?	such assumptions are not easily seen precisely because they remain unexamined and unquestioned
What did Whitehead feel was necessary regarding basic assumptions in metaphysics?	people need to continually re-imagine their basic assumptions about how the universe works if philosophy and science are to make any real progress
What was Whitehead's opinion of metaphysical investigations?	Whitehead regarded metaphysical investigations as essential to both good science and good philosophy
What do philosophers do, in Whitehead's view?	make metaphysical assumptions about how the universe works
Assumptions of how the universe works are difficult to see precisely because of what?	they remain unexamined and unquestioned
What did Whitehead ask people to reimagine in order for philosophy to make progress?	basic assumptions about how the universe works
What did Whitehead regard as essential to good science and good philosophy?	metaphysical investigations
What Cartesian concept did Whitehead believe to be erroneous?	reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter that exist totally independently of one another
What theory did Whitehead prefer to the Cartesian concept?	event-based or "process" ontology in which events are primary and are fundamentally interrelated and dependent on one another
How did whitehead define "experience"?	He used the term "experience" very broadly, so that even inanimate processes such as electron collisions are said to manifest some degree of experience
How did Descartes' distinguish types of existence?	two different kinds of real existence, either exclusively material or else exclusively mental
How did Whitehead identify his system of metaphysics?	"philosophy of organism"
What idea states that reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter?	Cartesian idea
Whitehead rejected the Cartesian idea in favor of what?	an event-based or "process" ontology
Whitehead believed instead of matter existing independently of each other, it did what?	interrelated and dependent
Whitehead believed that reality should be regarded as what?	experiential
Whitehead's system as "philosophy of organism" became widely known as what term?	process philosophy
How did Whitehead define the "fallacy of misplaced concreteness"?	By assuming that enduring objects are the most real and fundamental things in the universe, materialists have mistaken the abstract for the concrete
What basic concepts did Whitehead believe were questionable?	"quality", "matter", and "form"
Why did he believe those concepts were inaccurate?	These "classical" concepts fail to adequately account for change, and overlook the active and experiential nature of the most basic elements of the world.
How did Whitehead classify what is usually seen as an individual person?	a continuum of overlapping events
How did Whitehead refer to the combination of a person's separate experiences?	a "society" of events
What are the concepts quality, matter, and form considered?	"classical" concepts
Concepts such as quality, matter, and form fail to account for what?	change
What concepts overlook the experiential nature of basic elements?	quality", "matter", and "form"
What does Whitehead call experiences that are progressively connected?	society
Instead of being a single person, what does Whitehead view a person as?	continuum of overlapping events
What did Whitehead believe were essentially the only things that truly exist?	discrete "occasions of experience" that overlap one another in time and space, and jointly make up the enduring person or thing
Regarding the idea that individuals or objects don't fundamentally change, what terms can be used to describe what an object or individual actually is?	"defining essence" or a "core identity"
In that line of thinking, how are changes described?	qualitative and secondary to their core identity
The idea that people are unchanging and stay the same even through changes is considered what?	defining essence
In Whitehead's cosmology, what are the only things that fundamentally exist?	occasions of experience
Where do occasions of experience overlap?	time and space
Instead of having an enduring essence, what does Whitehead believe?	all things flow"
In Whitehead's view, identities do not define people, but what?	people define identities
Why did Whitehead think people continued to subscribe to materialistic thinking?	it is easy and convenient to think of people and objects as remaining fundamentally the same things
What did Whitehead believe regarding factors that limit people's understanding of his concepts?	should not prevent people from realizing that "material substances" or "essences" are a convenient generalized description of a continuum
What did Whitehead believe was one of the biggest reasons materialistic thinking endured?	limitations of language
What did Whitehead state about the belief that a person is exactly the same from moment to moment?	it is not philosophically or ontologically sound
Why couldn't each moment of each person's life be given a different proper name?	limitations of language
What did Whitehead believe was a culprit in maintaining a materialistic way of thinking?	limitations of language
Whitehead's main philosophy on humans changing is what?	each thing is a different thing from what it was a moment ago
What is the general materialistic view of an object?	Each object is simply an inert clump of matter that is only externally related to other things
How the fundamental concept of matter influence people to view objects?	The idea of matter as primary makes people think of objects as being fundamentally separate in time and space, and not necessarily related to anything
What is Whitehead's belief regarding the importance of relations?	in Whitehead's view, relations take a primary role, perhaps even more important than the relata themselves
What is the materialistic view of matter in relation to other objects?	It sees every object as distinct and discrete from all other objects.
What is another issue that Whitehead had with materialism?	it obscures the importance of relations
What obscures the importance of relations according to Whitehead?	materialism
What does Materialism see each object as?	distinct and discrete
How is each object related to other things?	externally
How does Whitehead characterize anything that exists?	in some sense nothing more and nothing less than the sum of its relations to other entities – its synthesis of and reaction to the world around it
How does he describe what makes something real?	A real thing is just that which forces the rest of the universe to in some way conform to it
In Whitehead's thinking, what could be said about something that has no effect on any other person or object?	if theoretically a thing made strictly no difference to any other entity (i.e. it was not related to any other entity), it could not be said to really exist
What did Whitehead believe about the concept of relations in the context of defining an entity?	Relations are not secondary to what a thing is, they are what the thing is.
Whitehead believes any entity is in some sense what?	nothing more and nothing less than the sum of its relations to other entities
If an object made no difference to any other entity, what could be said about it?	not be said to really exist.
If relations are not secondary to what a thing is, what is it?	they are what the thing is
What makes up the sum of relations to an entity?	rld around it
A real object forces the universe to do what?	in some way conform to it
In what areas of the world has interest in Whitehead's work spread in recent decades?	Europe and China
Who was one of the first theologians to try to interact with Whitehead's ideas?	William Temple
What was the basis for "Nature, Man and God"?	Temple's Gifford Lectures of 1932-1934
According to Isabelle Stengers, what are unifying factors in diverse practices (like ecology and feminism) that have become interested in Whitehead's work?	practices that unite political struggle and spirituality with the sciences of education
What other fields have shown more recent interest in Whitehead's work?	ecology, physics, biology, education, economics, and psychology
Where were the first followers mainly found?	at the University of Chicago's Divinity School
Who began the interest in Whitehead at Chicago's Divinity School?	Henry Nelson Wieman
Who id the most well-known Whitehead scholar?	John B. Cobb
What professors established the importance of Whitehead's work?	Wieman, Charles Hartshorne, Bernard Loomer, Bernard Meland, and Daniel Day Williams
Where is interest in Whitehead's work growing the fastest today?	China
What challenges are China using Whitehead's ideas to help manage?	modernization and industrialization
What types of traditions are China blending with Whitehead's "constructive post-modern" philosophy?	traditions of Taoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism
What philosphers' writings are becoming required reading for graduate students in China?	John Cobb and David Ray Griffin
Why does John Cobb believe China has become interested in process philosophy?	interdependence of humanity and nature, as well as his emphasis on an educational system that includes the teaching of values rather than simply bare facts
what is an example of Whitehead's ideas being counter-intuitive?	his assertion that matter is an abstraction
Why do some people believe Whitehead's writings may have restricted his influence?	the sheer difficulty and density of his prose
What is a common opinion of metaphysics?	perception of metaphysics itself as passé
What is the general opinion of Whitehead in most philosophical schools?	Whitehead has not been recognized as particularly influential within the most dominant philosophical schools
What philosophy is closely related to process philosophy?	American pragmatism
What pragmatists did Whitehead acknowledge in the preface to "Process and Reality"?	William James and John Dewey
Who is a philosopher that promotes process philosophy and pragmatism currently?	Nicholas Rescher
What founder of pragmatism's collected papers did Charles Hartshorne ans Paul Weiss edit?	Charles Sanders Peirce
What important neopragmatist was Harthorne's student?	Richard Rorty
How was Whitehead's theory of gravitation received?	It has been severely criticized
What physicists in the field of quantum theory have been influenced by Whitehead?	Henry Stapp and David Bohm
What affect  did the discovery of gravitational waves have on Whitehead's theory?	Whitehead's view has now been rendered obsolete, with the discovery of gravitational waves
What are gravitational waves?	phenonena observed locally that largely violate the kind of local flatness of space that Whitehead assumes
How must Whiteheads cosmology now be considered?	Whitehead's cosmology must be regarded as a local approximation
What award did Cobb and Daly receive for the book?	Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order
What was the first book on environmental ethics by an individual author?	Is It Too Late? A Theology of Ecology
On which economics book did Cobb collaborate with Herman Daly?	For the Common Good: Redirecting the Economy toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future
What other economics book did Cobb go on to author?	Sustaining the Common Good: A Christian Perspective on the Global Economy
What was the goal of Cobb's second book on economics?	to challenge "economists' zealous faith in the great god of growth."
Who established the FEELS model in China?	Xie Bangxiu
What does "FEELS" stand for?	Flexible-goals, Engaged-learner, Embodied-knowledge, Learning-through-interactions, and Supportive-teacher
What is the purpose of the FEELS model?	It is used for understanding and evaluating educational curriculum under the assumption that the purpose of education is to "help a person become whole."
What entities are working together to promote the FEELS model?	Chinese government organizations and the Institute for the Postmodern Development of China
What prominent business professor has been heavily influenced by Whitehead?	Mark Dibben
What does Dibben call his philosophy on management and business administration?	"applied process thought"
In what fields has Dibben published two books and other papers?	philosophy of management and business ethics
What business fields has Whitehead influenced?	philosophy of business administration and organizational theory
According to Dibben, what are the benefits of applying process metaphysics to examining management and business administration as a component of social science?	this allows "a comprehensive exploration of life as perpetually active experiencing, as opposed to occasional – and thoroughly passive – happening."
During which decade did Whitehead's focus start shifting away from mathematics?	1910s
After moving away from mathematics, what subjects did Whitehead explore?	philosophy of science, and finally to metaphysics
As opposed to physical objects, what did Whitehead believe reality is composed of?	processes
What was the predominant theory of reality that Whitehead opposed?	reality is fundamentally constructed by bits of matter that exist independently of one another
What book of Whitehead's is now considered a primary source of process philosophy?	Process and Reality
What did Whitehead first study?	mathematics
What was Whitehead's second area of study?	philosophy
What was Whitehead's final area of study?	metaphysics
What type of system did he develop?	metaphysical
What did Whitehead argue reality consists of?	processes
Where was Alfred North Whitehead born?	Ramsgate, Kent, England
In what year was Whitehead born?	1861
Who founded Chatham House Academy?	Thomas Whitehead, Alfred North's grandfather
What was Whitehead's father's profession?	minister and schoolmaster of Chatham House Academy
Who was Whitehead's mother?	Maria Sarah Whitehead, formerly Maria Sarah Buckmaster
Where was Alfred North Whitehead born?	Ramsgate, Kent, England
What year was Whitehead born?	1861
What was Whitehead's father's profession?	minister and schoolmaster
What was Whitehead's mother's name?	Maria Sarah Whitehead,
What was Whitehead's wife's name?	Evelyn
In which educational system was Whitehead employed in the late 1910s?	University of London system
What was Whitehead's title at the University of London in late 1918?	Dean of the Faculty of Science
What was Whitehead's last position before he traveled to America?	chairman of the Senate's Academic (leadership) Council
In which year did Whitehead relocate to America?	1924
What degree program did Whitehead contribute to establishing at University of London?	Bachelor of Science
When did Whitehead accept administrative positions?	1918
What was he elected at the University of London?	Dean of the Faculty of Science
Where did Whitehead accept administrative positions?	University of London
When did Whitehead go to America?	1924
Who authored Whitehead's biography that is considered to be the most reliable description of Whitehead's life?	Victor Lowe
Why was no Nachlass left behind after Whitehead's death?	his family carried out his instructions that all of his papers be destroyed after his death
What was Whitehead's opinion on privacy?	almost fanatical belief in the right to privacy
What did the author of Whitehead's biography comment on the first page regarding the difficulty of obtaining information about Whitehead?	"No professional biographer in his right mind would touch him."
How many volumes is the biography of Whitehead?	two
Who wrote the biography of Whitehead?	Victor Lowe
What was Whitehead's wish upon his death for his family?	all of his papers be destroyed after his death.
What did Whitehead believe in so profusely that it was difficult to write a biography on him?	right to privacy
What was Whitehead's first published book on mathematics?	A Treatise on Universal Algebra
With what mathematician and philosopher did Whitehead collaborate to write Principia Mathematica?	Bertrand Russell
Who was the intended audience of Whitehead's first two mathematics books?	professional mathematicians
What was Whitehead's final book on mathematics?	An Introduction to Mathematics
What is the significance of Principia Mathematica currently?	regarded as one of the most important works in mathematical logic of the 20th century
What did Whitehead publish numerous articles about?	mathematics
How many books on mathematics did Whitehead write?	three
Who co-wrote Principia Mathematica with Whitehead?	Bertrand Russell
Which of Whitehead's books is known as one of the most important works in mathematical logical?	Principia Mathematica
When did Whitehead write his first book?	1898
What did Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions demonstrate a need for?	the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively multiplicative class
How did Alexander Macfarlane summarize the relationship between different methods in "A Treatise on Algebra" in his review?	comparative study of their several structures
What was G.B. Matthew's opinion of "A Treatise on Algebra"?	"It possesses a unity of design which is really remarkable, considering the variety of its themes."
Lie algebras and hypobolic quanternions drew attention to the need for what?	expand algebraic structures
What did reviewer GB Mathews say algebraic structures possessed?	unity of design
Reviewer Alexander Macfarlane believed that the main idea of the work is a comparative study of what?	several structures
How long did Whitehead and Russell expect to spend creating Principia Mathematica?	a year
How long did it actually take to complete Principia Mathematica?	ten years
Why was there a funding shortfall for the publishing of Princpia Mathematica?	the three-volume work was so massive (more than 2,000 pages) and its audience so narrow (professional mathematicians)
Who supplied the funding to cover the shortfall?	00 of which was paid by Cambridge University Press, 200 by the Royal Society of London, and 50 apiece by Whitehead and Russell
How prevalent is Principia Mathematica today?	today there is likely no major academic library in the world which does not hold a copy of Principia Mathematica
How long did Whitehead and Russell think it would take them to complete Principia Mathematica?	a year
How long did it actually take Whitehead and Russell to complete Principia Mathematica?	ten years
How many volumes was Principia Mathematica?	three
How many pages was Principia Mathematica?	2,000
Who paid to publish Principia Mathematica?	Cambridge University Press
What is the general opinion of the difficulty level of Whitehead's work in philosophy?	generally considered to be among the most difficult to understand in all of the western canon
What lectures did Whitehead present in 1927-28?	Gifford lectures
Under what name were those lectures later published?	Process and Reality
Who also struggled to follow Whitehead's writings?	professional philosophers
Following Arthur Eddington's lectures, what did Whitehead  publish?	Process and Reality
When did Whitehead delivery the Gifford lectures?	1927–28
In all of the western canon, what is Whitehead's work considered?	the most difficult to understand
What affect did Matthews' opinion of the difficulty of Whitehead's works have on his interest in them?	Mathews' frustration with Whitehead's books did not negatively affect his interest
How did many philosophers and theologians at Chicago's Divinity School view Whitehead's work?	perceived the importance of what Whitehead was doing without fully grasping all of the details and implications
What expert on Whitehead delivered a lecture at the school to explain Whitehead's ideas?	Henry Nelson Wieman
What was the result of that lecture?	Wieman's lecture was so brilliant that he was promptly hired to the faculty and taught there for twenty years
Who was frustrated in Whitehead's books but still interested?	Mathews
What school recognized the importance of Whitehead's work?	Chicago's Divinity School
When was Henry Nelson Wieman invited to the Chicago Divinity school?	1927
Who was invited to the Chicago Divinity school as one of Whitehead's only experts?	Henry Nelson Wieman
What happened after Henry Nelson Wieman gave a lecture about Whitehead?	hired
How has "Process and Reality" been described?	"arguably the most impressive single metaphysical text of the twentieth century,"
What did Isabelle Stengers say is the reason that "Process and Reality" is not commonly read and understood?	it demands – as Isabelle Stengers puts it – "that its readers accept the adventure of the questions that will separate them from every consensus."
What effect did Whitehead have on the future of metaphysics?	he managed to anticipate a number of 21st century scientific and philosophical problems and provide novel solutions.
Which publication is considered the most impressive metaphysical text?	Process and Reality
Who thought Process and Reality was little-read because the reader has to separate them from normal thought?	Isabelle Stengers
What philosophy in the west was challenged by Whitehead?	how the universe works
What was Whitehead's philosophy able to anticipate for the 21st century?	scientific and philosophical problems
What was the outcome of anticipating the scientific and philosophical problems Whitehead proposed?	novel solutions
What did Whitehead believe regarding creativity?	creativity is the absolute principle of existence
An entity is a sum of relations, a valuation of them and what else?	reaction to them.
Most entities do not have what?	consciousness
All entities, being unable to predict behavior, are because of what?	the fundamental creativity/freedom of all entities
Not being able to predict what any entity is going to do is what principle b Whitehead?	creativity is the absolute principle of existence
Other than the combination of its relations, what else defines an entity?	an entity is not merely a sum of its relations, but also a valuation of them and reaction to them
What did Whitehead believe about an entity's relation to other entities?	has some degree of novelty in how it responds to other entities, and is not fully determined by causal or mechanistic laws
What is the origin of the word "prehension"?	comes from the Latin prehensio, meaning "to seize."
What is a basic description of the theory of representative perception?	the mind only has private ideas about other entities
What term did Whitehead describe that perception is not limited to the living?	prehension
What language does the term "prehensio" come from?	Latin
What does the word "Prehensio" translate into?	to seize
What entities does the term prehension apply to?	conscious or unconscious
How many modes does perception occur in according to Whitehead?	two
What is prehension used to define?	a kind of perception that can be conscious or unconscious, applying to people as well as electrons
What does the term "prehension" signify regarding an entities perceptions and relations?	entities are constituted by their perceptions and relations, rather than being independent of them
What did Whitehead state are the two types of perception?	causal efficacy (or "physical prehension") and presentational immediacy (or "conceptual prehension")
How do the senses affect causal efficacy?	unmediated by the senses
What can be said about the accuracy of presentational immediacy?	it is pure appearance, which may or may not be delusive
What is the term for the experience dominating primitive organisms that have a sense for fate?	causal efficacy
What is the other term for "pure sense perception"?	Presentational immediacy
What is it called if you mistake a reflection in a mirror for the real thing?	Presentational immediacy
How does Whitehead define causal efficacy?	"the experience dominating the primitive living organisms, which have a sense for the fate from which they have emerged, and the fate towards which they go."
How does Whitehead define presentational immediacy?	"pure sense perception", unmediated by any causal or symbolic interpretation, even unconscious interpretation
Which concept does Whitehead state is more dominant in a lower mentality?	causal relationships
What is Whitehead's term for the two modes of perceptions combining?	symbolic reference
What dominates more basic mentality in symbolic reference?	causal relationships
What does symbolic reference link appearance with?	causation
What does having sense perceptions conclude about a person?	higher grade mentality
What is the purpose of symbolic reference?	links appearance with causation in a process that is so automatic that both people and animals have difficulty refraining from it
How does Whitehead describe the process of a typical person noticing a chair?	An ordinary person looks up, sees a colored shape, and immediately infers that it is a chair
How might an artist view a chair differently than a typical person?	"might have stopped at the mere contemplation of a beautiful color and a beautiful shape."
How does Whitehead say a dog may interpret the presence of a chair?	"would have acted immediately on the hypothesis of a chair and would have jumped onto it by way of using it as such."
What observation did Whitehead make about life?	"life is comparatively deficient in survival value."
What did Whitehead state was the biggest indicator of a higher form of life?	they are actively engaged in modifying their environment
What did Whitehead believe are the goals f life?	living, living well, and living better
What did Whitehead believe was the fundamental purpose of life?	increasing its own satisfaction
Whitehead observes that life is deficient in what?	survival value
What are higher life forms actively engaged in?	modifying their environment
How many goals of living is there?	three
Whitehead sees life as directed towards what purpose?	increasing its own satisfaction
Without Whitehead's proposed purpose, life would be what?	unintelligible
What was Whitehead's response to questions about why complex life evolved?	"they certainly did not appear because they were better at that game than the rocks around them."
What was Whitehead's description of God?	"the brief Galilean vision of humility"
What is Whitehead's most well-known critical statement regarding the Christian notion of God?	"the Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to Caesar."
What qualities dis Whitehead state that Christians attributed to their version of God?	primarily a divine king who imposes his will on the world, and whose most important attribute is power
What was Whitehead's belief about God in relation to religion?	God is not necessarily tied to religion
In what did Whitehead believe that those concepts existed?	primordial nature of God
What did Whitehead view as the second nature of God?	the consequent nature
What type of God did Whitehead believe existed?	dipolar
Why did Whitehead view the existence of God as a necessity for his metaphysical system?	His system required that an order exist among possibilities, an order that allowed for novelty in the world and provided an aim to all entities.
How does Whitehead define he consequent nature of God?	God's reception of the world's activity
What does Whitehead say that God does with all experiences?	God saves and cherishes all experiences forever
How does Whitehead describe the judgment of God?	It is the judgment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved.
What effect does Whitehead claim that experiences have on God?	those experiences go on to change the way God interacts with the world
What conclusion does Whitehead draw about God's treatment of humans' experiences?	God is really changed by what happens in the world and the wider universe, lending the actions of finite creatures an eternal significance.
In what way did Whitehead view God as deficient?	deficient in actuality and change
What did Whitehead claim God would be without the world?	merely eternally unrealized possibilities
How does Whitehead view the relationship between God an the world?	Whitehead thus sees God and the world as fulfilling one another
How does he define entities' need for God?	He sees entities in the world as fluent and changing things that yearn for a permanence which only God can provide
How dis Whitehead believe God provided permanence to entities?	by taking them into God's self, thereafter changing God and affecting the rest of the universe throughout time
What did Whitehead believe was the basis of religion?	individual
What is Whitehead's most famous statement on religion?	"religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness ... and if you are never solitary, you are never religious."
How did Whitehead define religion?	a system of general truths that transformed a person's character
How did Whitehead define "dangerous delusion" as it relates to religion?	while religion is often a good influence, it is not necessarily good
In what state did Whitehead believe religion began?	solitariness
What realization did Whitehead believe religion made necessary?	"the value of the objective world which is a community derivative from the interrelations of its component individuals."
What did Whitehead believe was necessary for an entity to have meaning and value?	meaning and value do not exist for the individual alone, but only in the context of the universal community
How does Whitehead describe religion as world-loyalty?	The spirit at once surrenders itself to this universal claim and appropriates it for itself
What did Whitehead believe was the relationship between the individual and social aspects of religion?	the individual and universal/social aspects of religion are mutually dependent
Where has interest outside of those areas mainly come from?	through the work of his students and admirers rather
What French sociologist and anthropologist stated that Whitehead was "the greatest philosopher of the 20th century"?	Bruno Latour
Where are Whitehead's works primarily studied in English-speaking countries?	Claremont and a select number of liberal graduate-level theology and philosophy programs
Who are two of Whitehead's students that have gone on to become renowned in the field of analytic philosophy?	Bertrand Russell, and he also taught and supervised the dissertation of Willard Van Orman Quine
What did Gilles Deleuze say about Whitehead?	"he stands provisionally as the last great Anglo-American philosopher before Wittgenstein's disciples spread their misty confusion, sufficiency, and terror."
In what field of study has Whitehead's work been most influential in the United States?	American progressive theology
Who was the most important early supporter of Whitehead's work in the context of theology?	Charles Hartshorne
What advancement of Whitehead's process philosophy is attributed to Charles Hartshorne?	developing Whitehead's process philosophy into a full-blown process theology
Who are some other distinguished process theologians?	John B. Cobb, Jr., David Ray Griffin, Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, C. Robert Mesle, Roland Faber, and Catherine Keller
What aspect of God is usually emphasized in process theology?	God's relational nature
How is God usually perceived by process theologians?	"the fellow sufferer who understands", and as the being who is supremely affected by temporal events
Why did Hartshorne feel that God must be affected by people?	people would not praise a human ruler who was unaffected by either the joys or sorrows of his followers – so why would this be a praise-worthy quality in God?
Why would God being substantially affected by the world be beneficial?	as the being who is most affected by the world, God is the being who can most appropriately respond to the world
What type of process theology does C. Robert Mesle promote?	"process naturalism", i.e. a process theology without God.
What subjects has John B. Cobb, Jr. written books on other than process theology?	biology and economics
What theories do Roland Faber and Catherine Keller combine with Whitehead's ideas?	poststructuralist, postcolonialist, and feminist theory
What was Charles Birch's profession besides theologian?	geneticist
Who authored "Syntheism - Creating God in the Internet Age"?	Alexander Bard and Jan Söderqvist
Why is there difficulty in defining process theology ?	process theologians are so diverse and transdisciplinary in their views and interests
What was Whitehead's technical definition of religion?	"an ultimate craving to infuse into the insistent particularity of emotion that non-temporal generality which primarily belongs to conceptual thought alone."
What did Whitehead believe religion did with strong emotions?	religion takes deeply felt emotions and contextualizes them within a system of general truths about the world
What purpose did Whitehead believe religion served?	a kind of bridge between philosophy and the emotions and purposes of a particular society
What did Whitehead believe was the job of religion regarding philosophy?	It is the task of religion to make philosophy applicable to the everyday lives of ordinary people.
What is Mary Parker Follett known for?	pioneer in the fields of organizational theory and organizational behavior
What do Margaret Stout and Carrie M. Staton view as commonalities between Whitehead and Follett?	ontology that "understands becoming as a relational process; difference as being related, yet unique; and the purpose of becoming as harmonizing difference."
What book did Stout and Jeanine M. Love author that further examines the on between Whitehead and Follett?	Integrative Process: Follettian Thinking from Ontology to Administration
What did many asset managers decide to do to the detriment of their clients?	continue to invest client funds in over-priced (under-yielding) investments
What led to bad investments by asset managers in over-priced credit assets?	a conflict of interest
Who is compensated based on the volume of client assets they have under management?	Professional investment managers
What is the incentive for asset managers to expand their assets under management?	to maximize their compensation
What rationale did asset managers who continued to invest in over-priced investments to the detriment of their clients use?	plausible deniability
Who was Southern California-based IndyMac a spin-off of?	Countrywide Financial
On what date did IndyMac fail?	July 11, 2008
Which financial institution was the first one visible to run into trouble in the United States?	IndyMac
Before its failure, which savings and loan association was the seventh largest mortgage originator in the United States?	IndyMac Bank
Who was IndyMac's parent corporation?	IndyMac Bancorp
When did Moody's and Standard & Poor downgrade a significant number of IndyMac's MBS bonds?	April 2008
If IndyMac's downgraded MBS bond ratings had been in effect at March 31, 2008, what would the bank's capital ratio have been?	9.27%
What was the value of IndyMac's MBS bonds retained in its MBS portfolio that were downgraded in April 2008?	$160 million
What was one of the agencies that downgraded a significant number of IndyMac's MBS bonds in April 2008?	Moody's
What is a well capitalized ratio?	minimum 10% risk-based
Who is the Senator that asked FDIC if it had considered ordering IndyMac to reduce its reliance on brokered deposits?	Charles Schumer (D-NY)
What does the abbreviation FDIC stand for?	Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
How much of IndyMac's total deposits of $18.9 billion on March 31, 2008 were considered brokered deposits?	a little over $7 billion
Had the FDIC disallowed IndyMac from acquiring new brokered deposits on this date, the threat of brokered deposit losses would have been $500 million a month?	June 30
How much was the threat of brokered deposit losses per month to IndyMac?	$500 million
How much in deposits did account holders withdraw from IndyMac in late June 2008?	$1.55 billion
What percent of IndyMac's deposits were withdrawn by account holders in late June 2008?	7.5%
What was the value of loans IndyMac was forced to hold when the secondary mortgage market collapsed in late 2007?	$10.7 billion
Who is the Senator that released a letter to the FDIC and OTS that prompted a "run" on IndyMac?	Charles Schumer
What was the underlying cause of the failure on IndyMac?	unsafe and unsound manner in which the thrift was operated
What was the name of the bridge bank established to assume control of IndyMac Bank's assets, liabilities and deposit accounts?	IndyMac Federal Bank, FSB
What is the maximum amount of funds the FDIC guarantees in insured accounts?	US$100,000
How many IndyMac account holders held funds in excess of the FDIC's insured amount of US$100,000?	roughly 10,000 depositors
On what date did the FDIC put IndyMac Bank into conservatorship?	July 11, 2008
On what date did the FDIC plan to open IndyMac Federal Bank, FSB?	July 14, 2008
How many mortgage lenders went bankrupt during 2007 and 2008?	Over 100
Who is the investment bank that was feared to collapse in March 2008 and was sold in a fire-sale to JP Morgan Chase?	Bear Stearns
When did the financial institution crisis hit its peak?	September and October 2008
When did Lehman's former CEO appear before Representative Henry A. Waxman?	Oct. 6, 2008
What firm filed the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history?	Lehman Brothers
The equivalent of a bank run on which funds occurred in September 2008?	money market funds
What do money market funds frequently invest in?	commercial paper issued by corporations
When did the financial crisis hit its most critical stage?	September 2008
How much was withdrawn from money markets during one week in September 2008?	$144.5 billion
What was the record high for the TED spread on October 10, 2008?	4.65%
Economist Paul Krugman explained the credit crisis via the implosion of which system?	shadow banking system
What is the system with nearly equal the importance of traditional commercial banking?	shadow banking system
The shadow banking system could not provide funds to mortgage firms and other corporations without the ability to obtain which funds?	investor funds
What was Timothy Geithner's position during the fall of 2008?	U.S. Treasury Secretary
How much of the U.S. lending mechanism was frozen until June 2009?	nearly one-third
What is the primary cause of the reduction in funds available for borrowing?	the collapse of the shadow banking system
What institution reported that the traditional banking systems does not have the capital to close the gap in the lending mechanism?	Brookings Institution
What is likely to vanish forever, as a result of excessively loose credit conditions?	some forms of securitization
As of June 2009, the Brookings Institution reports that traditional banking system does not have enough of what to close the lending gap?	capital
How much net worth did Americans lose between June 2007 and November 2008?	more than a quarter
In November 2008, how much was the U.S. stock index down from its 2007 high?	45%
In November 2008, how much had housing prices drop from their 2006 peak?	20%
How much was home equity valued in the United States at its peak in 2006?	$13 trillion
How much was home equity valued in the United States in mid-2008?	$8.8 trillion
According to economist Dean Baker, a homeowner who has no equity if this type default risk?	serious
What is one of the major problems with the economy in November 2008?	loss of close to $6 trillion in housing wealth
How many homeowners who had substantial equity in their homes two years ago, have little no equity as of November 2008?	Tens of millions
What does the creditworthiness of businesses depend on?	future profits
How did profit prospects for businesses look in November 2008 compared to November 2007?	much worse
In 2008, what type collapse was feared?	global economic collapse
What investment bank stated on October 6 that 2008 would see a global recession lasting for at least two years?	UBS
On October 16, 2008, how long did UBS predict the United States' recession would last?	three quarters
Relative to the size of its economy, what country's banking collapse was the largest experienced by any country in economic history?	Iceland
What was one of the actions taken by government to fix the financial crisis?	capital injection
According to The Brookings Institution report in June 2009, how much growth did U.S. consumption account for between 2000 and 2007?	more than a third
For the first quarter of 2009, what was the annualized rate of decline in GDP in Germany?	14.4%
For the first quarter of 2009, what was the annualized rate of decline in GDP in Mexico?	21.5%
Who depended on the U.S. consumer as a source of global demand?	the rest of the world
What is one reason for the decline in growth around the world in 2009?	recession in the U.S.
What is the growth forecast for Cambodia in 2009?	close to zero
How much were remittances sent from migrant workers in 2007?	$251 billion
How many people live below the poverty line in Bangladesh?	300,000
What does Bruno Wenn of the German DEG recommend to attract new investors?	sound economic policymaking and good governance
According to Overseas Development Institute, what is one reason for the reduction in growth in developing countries?	falls in trade
What area of the world was less severely affected by the credit crunch according to The World Bank report In February 2009?	Arab World
What does the abbreviation FDI stand for?	Foreign Direct Investment
Arab countries entered the financial crisis in exceptionally strong positions giving them a cushion against this?	global downturn
What will have the greatest impact on the global economic crisis?	lower oil prices
What is the single most important determinant of economic performance?	oil prices
What was the U.S. unemployment rate in October 2009?	10.1%
What was the average hours per work week in October 2009?	33
What was the annual rate of decrease for the output of goods and services produced by labor and property in 4Q 2008 and 1Q 2009?	6%
The U.E. employment rate was 10.2% in October 2009, which was the highest rate since what year?	1983
The decline of gross domestic product also caused a decline in innovation, evidenced by the flat-lining of what?	patent applications
Critics argue that Basel III doesn't address which problem?	faulty risk-weightings
What term describes creating risk-free assets out of high risk collateral?	financial engineering
What did European regulators introduce to increase the oversight of banks?	Basel III regulations
Who argued that regulations led to excessive lending to risky governments?	Johan Norberg
What was increased by Basel III regulations?	capital ratios
When did the U.S. recession that began in December 2007 end?	June 2009
When did the financial crisis appear to have ended?	June 2009
When does the United States Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission date the crisis to?	2008
What was the name of the article that appeared in TIME magazine in April 2009 declaring the crisis over?	More Quickly Than It Began, The Banking Crisis Is Over."
On what date did President Barack Obama declare that the markets are stabilized?	January 27, 2010
Who led global economic growth after the financial crisis?	"emerging" and "developing" economies
How much global GDP did emerging and developing economies account for from 2007 to 2014?	69%
What relationship between advanced and emerging/developing was completely overturned by the financial crisis of 2007?	global economic growth
How much global GDP did "advanced" economies account for from 2007 to 2014?	31%
What economies led global economic growth prior to the financial crisis?	Advanced economies
Who believed that the growth of the commercial real estate bubble indicated that U.S. housing policy was not the cause of the crisis?	Krugman
When did Xudong An and Anthony B. Sanders issue a report about commercial mortgage-backed securities?	December 2010
According to business journalist Kimberly Amadeo, when did the first signs of decline in real estate occur?	2006
What are CMBS?	commercial mortgage-backed securities
According to most analysts, what crisis took place after the crisis in residential real estate?	the crisis in commercial real estate
What is one investment assigned safe ratings by the credit rating agencies?	collateralized debt obligation
How much was invested worldwide in fixed income investments?	$70 trillion
How much did the pool of money invested worldwide in fixed income investments grow in size from 2000 to 2007?	roughly doubled in size
What is an example of a product Wall Street invented to answer the demand for income generating investments?	mortgage-backed security
In the 2000s, investors were seeking higher yields than those offered by this investment?	U.S. Treasury bonds
What is the name of the securities that enabled financial institutions to obtain investor funds to finance subprime?	collateralized debt obligation
What was the outcome of collateralized debt obligations?	extending or increasing the housing bubble
What type ratings did securities first in line receive from rating agencies?	investment-grade ratings
What type pool do collateralized debt obligations place their payments from mortgages into?	single pool
What securities had lower credit ratings but potentially a higher rate of return?	Securities with lower priority
How much had average U.S. housing prices declined by September 2008?	over 20%
When was the peak of U.S. housing prices?	mid-2006
How many foreclosure proceedings were initiated by lenders in 2007?	nearly 1.3 million
What was the percentage increase on foreclosure proceedings from 2007 to 2008?	81%
How many U.S. mortgages were either delinquent or in foreclosure by September 2009?	14.4%
Was was the federal funds rate target lowered to by the Federal Reserve in 2003?	1.0%
What is one reason the Federal Reserve lowered the federal funds rate target to 1.0% in 2003?	to combat a perceived risk of deflation
In the early 2000s, what type bubble did some economists believe the Fed needed to create to replace the Nasdaq bubble?	a housing bubble
What contributed greatly to the severity of the financial crisis of 2007?	excessive credit growth
What encouraged borrowing from 2000 to 2003?	Lower interest rates
Per Bernanke, how much did the U.S. current account deficit increase between 1996 and 2004?	$650 billion
What percentage of GDP was the U.S. current account deficit in 2004?	5.8%
What emerging economies did the U.S. borrow money from between 1996 and 2004 to finance its imports?	Asia and oil-exporting nations
What type account is needed by the U.S. to balance an account deficit?	capital account
Where did the U.S. obtain capital to finance its imports?	foreign funds
When did the Fed begin raising Fed funds rate significantly?	July 2004
What does ARM stand for:	adjustable-rate mortgage
How do asset prices generally move in relation to interest rates?	inversely
Beginning in July 2004, what did the Fed do to make ARM rates more expensive for homeowners?	raised the Fed funds rate
How did U.S. housing and financial assets react to the housing bubble burst?	dramatically declined in value
Richard M. Bowen III testified to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission regarding his tenure at which financial institution?	Citigroup
How many underwriters was Richard M. Bowen III responsible for at Citigroup?	220
What percent of mortgages purchased by Citigroup in 2006 were defective?	60%
In 2006, how many mortgage companies were contractually responsible to meet Citi's standards?	1,600
During 2007, what was the percent of defective mortgages not underwritten to Citi's standards?	over 80%
Who was the largest residential loan due diligence and securitization surveillance company?	Clayton Holdings
According to Clayton Holdings, how many mortgages issued from January 2006 to June 2007 met underwriting standards?	54%
How many investment and commercial banks were included in Clayton Holdings' analysis of January 2006 to June 2007 loans?	23
Per Clayton's analysis of loans issued from January 2006 to June 2007, what percent of loans did not meet minimal standards of any issuer?	28%
How many mortgage loans did Clayton Holdings review in their analysis?	900,000
What is the name for lending that entices borrowers to enter into unsafe secured loans?	Predatory lending
What company used a classic bait-and-switch method by advertising low interest rates?	Countrywide Financial
Which type loan would the consumer be put into instead of the 1% or 1.5% interest rate loan as advertised?	adjustable rate mortgage (ARM)
What was created when the interest charged was greater than the amount of interest paid?	negative amortization
What type predatory lending method did Countrywide Financial use?	classic bait-and-switch
Who sued Countrywide for unfair business practices and false advertising?	California Attorney General Jerry Brown
What type mortgages allowed homeowners to make interest-only payments?	adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs)
What happened to home equity when housing prices decreased?	disappeared
Who made the decision to seize Countrywide after their financial condition deteriorated?	Office of Thrift Supervision
What type credit did borrowers obtaining mortgages from Countrywide have?	weak credit
What economist believed that regulations did not keep up with financial innovation?	Paul Krugman
Who was the U.S. Treasury Secretary dealing with the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007?	Timothy Geithner
Which group's study suggested that Basel accords encourage unconventional business practices?	OECD
It has been argued that what did not keep up with financial innovation?	regulatory framework
What accords possibly contributed to or reinforced the financial crisis?	Basel
What did financial institutions do prior to the crisis?	became highly leveraged
What type financial instruments are off-balance sheet securitization and derivatives?	complex
Who bailed out financial institutions?	government
Which option was nearly impossible for financial institutions to reorganize under?	bankruptcy
What are the type financial instruments that were difficult for creditors and regulators to monitor?	complex financial instruments
How many U.S. investment banks significantly increased their financial leverage from 2004 to 2007?	five
U.S. investment banks Increased their financial leverage and also increased their vulnerability to what?	financial shock
Changes in what intended to keep U.S. banks competitive with their European counterparts?	capital requirements
How much debt did the top five U.S. investment banks report in fiscal year 2007?	over $4.1 trillion
What financial institution went bankrupt and was liquidated in 2007?	Lehman Brothers
What is an example of something that can be detrimental if too many individuals pursue the same behavior?	saving more during adverse economic conditions
What is it called when too many consumers attempt to save or pay down debt at the same time?	paradox of thrift
What will happen if too many consumers save or pay down debt simultaneously?	can cause or deepen a recession
Who is the economist who described a "paradox of deleveraging"?	Hyman Minsky
Financial institutions cannot all de-leverage simultaneously without a decline in the value of this?	their assets
Who was the U.S. Federal Reserve vice-chair in April 2009?	Janet Yellen
What happened soon after the massive credit crunch hit?	we were in a recession
What deepened the credit crunch when demand and employment fell?	recession
What was one of the actions businesses took to preserve cash?	cancelling planned investments
What occurred in nearly every corner of the economy after the financial crisis of 2007?	balance sheet deleveraging
What term refers to the ongoing development of financial products?	financial innovation
What is an example of financial innovation pertinent to the financial crisis?	adjustable-rate mortgage
What is the abbreviation for a form of credit insurance called credit default swaps?	CDS
What is the financial innovation that bundles subprime mortgages?	mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
What happened to the usage of financial innovation products in the years leading up the financial crisis?	expanded dramatically
When did the issuance of CDO peak?	Q1 2007
What was the estimated value of CDO issuance in Q1 2004?	$20 billion
What was the estimated value of CDO issuance at it's peak in Q1 2007?	over $180 billion
What percent of CDO assets were subprime and other non-prime mortgage debt in 2007?	36%
What was the estimated value of CDO issuance in Q1 2008?	under $20 billion
Which products created more complexity in the financial markets?	innovative financial products
What effect did the introduction of innovative financial products have on a single mortgage?	multiplied the number of actors connected
What did institutions rely more on as increasing distance from underlying assets occurred?	indirect information
What is a type of indirect information that financial institutions and investors used to judge the risk?	computer models of rating agencies
In what year did a group of computer scientists build a model for ratings produced by rating agencies that turned out to be accurate for what happened in 2006-2008?	2005
What is a measurement of pricing of risk?	interest rates or fees
What is the incremental compensation required by investors for taking on addition risk called?	pricing of risk
According to several scholars, what prevented markets from correctly pricing risk before the crisis?	lack of transparency about banks' risk exposures
How should risk levels have been disclosed according to several scholars?	straightforward, readily understandable format
What was the outcome of the financial crisis since risk levels were not adequately disclosed?	far more disruptive
What did market participants fail to measure accurately?	risk inherent with financial innovation
What are the reasons market participants did not understand the impact financial innovation products would have?	a variety of reasons
How much did JPMorgan estimate was the average recovery rate for high quality CDOs that had been liquidated?	approximately 32 cents on the dollar
How much did JPMorgan estimate was the average recovery rate for mezzanine CDOs that had been liquidated?	approximately five cents for every dollar
How much did banks estimate was the value of CDOs sold between late 2005 to the middle of 2007?	$450bn
What firm insured obligations of various financial institutions using credit default swaps?	AIG
What does the abbreviation CDS stand for?	credit default swaps
When did the government take over AIG?	September 2008
How much money did taxpayers provide in government support to AIG during 2008 and early 2009?	over $180 billion
What did AIG receive for promising to pay Party A in the event that Party B defaulted?	a premium
Who commented that the super-boom got out of hand when products became so complicated that risk could not be accurately calculated?	George Soros
What happened to financial assets that made them harder to value?	more complex
Who did rating agencies rely on for information to rate financial innovation products?	the originators of synthetic products
When authorities could no longer calculate the risks of complex financial innovation products, who did they rely on for information?	the banks
Who reassured investors by showing the risk of complex financial innovation products was actually less than they proved to be?	international bond rating agencies
Who published "Credit Correlation: Life After Copulas" in 2007?	World Scientific
When did relevant warnings and research on CDOs appear in an article by Donnelly and Embrechts?	2006
The volume "Credit Correlation: Life After Copulas" summarizes a 2006 conference held by what firm in London?	Merrill Lynch
What did the volume "Credit Correlation: Life After Copulas" propose models to rectify?	some of the copula limitations
What year did the book by Brigo, Pallavicini and Torresetti report warnings and research on CDOs?	2006
Who was President and CEO of the New York Federal Reserve Bank in June 2008?	Timothy Geithner
What year did Timothy Geithner become U.S. Treasury Secretary?	2009
In a June 2008 speech, Timoty Geithner placed blame for credit market freezing on which system?	"parallel" banking system
What is the "parallel" banking system also called?	shadow banking system
What is the term defined as being vulnerable by borrowing short-term in liquid markets to purchase long-term illiquid and risky assets?	maturity mismatch
When did the securitization markets supported by the shadow banking systems start to close down?	spring of 2007
When did the securitization markets supported by the shadow banking system nearly shut-down completely?	fall of 2008
How much of the private credit markets become unavailable as a source of funds?	More than a third
What is the firm who reported that the traditional banking system does not have capital to close the gap as of June 2009?	Brookings Institution
How many years would of strong profit would it take to generate enough capital to support additional lending?	a number of years
What economist testified to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission in January 2010?	Mark Zandi
In January 2010, what markets did Mark Zandi testify about that remain impaired and investors anticipate more loan losses?	securitization markets
What was the value of CDOs at their peak in 2006?	close to $2 trillion
What was the private issuance of CDOs in 2009?	less than $150 billion
Almost all of the asset-backed issuance in 2009 was supported by what Federal Reserve program?	TALF
Following the collapse in the housing bubble, what happened to a number of commodity prices?	Rapid increases
How much did the price of oil increase from early 2007 to 2008?	nearly tripled from $50 to $147
What did the price of oil began doing when the financial crisis began to take hold in late 2008?	plunging
What is one of the reasons experts believe contributed to the volatilaty in oil prices in 2008?	monetary policy
Consumers tend to have less money to spend on other goods, when the price of which commodity is higher?	gasoline
Who was the former director of the CFTC that testified before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation on June 3, 2008?	Michael Greenberger
Who did Michael Greenberger erronesously name as a key player in speculative run-up of oil futures?	IntercontinentalExchange
Who founded the Atlanta-based Intercontinental Exchange?	Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and BP
Who purchased the International Petroleum Exchange in 2001?	IntercontinentalExchange (ICE)
Where are regulated future exchanges located?	London and New York
Who is one of the feminist economists that believe the financial crisis revealed a crisis of mainstream economics and call for a complete reshaping of the economy?	Ailsa McKay
Feminist economists Ailsa McKay and Margunn Bjornhold believe that the financial crisis and response reveal a crisis of ideas in this?	mainstream economics
According to feminist economists McKay and Bjornholt, would type economics should be included in a reshaping?	feminist economics
What do economists McKay and Bjornholt want to occur in the economy, economic theory, and economics profession?	a reshaping
Who was the current Governor of the Reserve Bank of India that predicted the crisis in 2005?	Raghuram Rajan
When did Raghuram Rajan become chief economist the the International Monetary Fund?	2005
In 2005, where did Rajan deliver a controversial paper that was critical of the financial paper?	at a celebration honouring Alan Greenspan
What was the name of Raghuram Rajan's controversial paper delivered in 2005?	"Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?"
What are risks called that generate severe adverse consequences with small probability but generous compensation the rest of the time?	tail risks
Who was one of the only mainstream economist to predict the financial crisis?	Raghuram Rajan
What did Raghuram Rajan speak of?	Great Moderation
Who credit 12 heterodox economists with predicting the crisis in his research credits?	Dirk Bezemer
How did the Austrian economic school regard the crisis?	as a vindication
Which former Fed Chair confessed in Congressional testimony to being forced to return to lax monetary supply?	Alan Greenspan
Which magazine ran a cover story claiming that most economists failed to the the financial crisis?	BusinessWeek
The financial crisis of 2007 was the worst economic crisis since which crisis that occurred in the 1930s?	Great Depression
Which school at University of Pennsylvania examined in their online business journal why economists failed to predict the crisis?	The Wharton School
Which economist did the New York Times state warned of a crisis as early as September 2006?	Nouriel Roubini
What was economist Roubini called by the New York Times for predicting a collapse of the housing market?	"Dr. Doom"
Who wrote the 2007 book The Black Swan?	Nassim Nicholas Taleb
What journalist from the New York Times stated his believe in Nassim Nicholas Taleb?	David Brooks
What did Nassim Nicholas Taleb warn about for years prior to the financial crisis of 2007?	the breakdown of the banking system
What did Nassim Nicholas Taleb make a fortune on by making a big financial bet?	banking stocks
Who is the market strategist that believes distinctions exist between the current crisis and the Great Depression?	Phil Dow
How much did the Dow Jones average fall during a period of 17 months?	50%
What was the percentage the Dow Jones fell in the Great Depression?	54.7%
Who was the chief financial correspondent of The New York Times in March 2009?	Floyd Norris
Which medium sized British bank was the first victim of the financial crisis?	Northern Rock
Who did Northern Rock request security from?	Bank of England
When did Northern Rock investors panic and a bank run begin?	September 2007
When was Northern Rock taken into public hands?	February 2008
Which bank early problems in 2007 were an indicator of the troubles that would soon befall other banks and financial institutions?	Northern Rock
IndyMac often made loans without verifying what?	the borrower’s income
What was questionable on IndyMac's underlying collateral?	Appraisals
IndyMac gave loans to borrower's with what type credit histories?	poor
IndyMac offered this type of questionable loans to borrowers?	risky
IndyMac resisted efforts by regulators to tighten this criteria of their loans?	issuing criteria
How many of the poorest families did not have any wealth decline during the financial crisis?	half
In a Federal Reserve survey of 4,000 households, what percent reported wealth decline between 2007 and 2009?	63
How many of the richest families had a decrease in total wealth between 2007 and 2009?	77
How many families at the bottom of the pyramid had a decrease in total wealth between 2007 and 2009?	50
Which families experienced the least decline in wealth between 2007 and 2009?	poorest families
On November 3, 2008, who predicted extremely weak GDP growth for the Eurozone in 2009?	European Commission at Brussels
How much did the European Commission estimate the GDP growth for Eurozone countries would be in 2009?	0.1%
How much did the European Commission estimate the GDP growth for the UK would be in 2009?	−1.0%
On November 6, in Washington, D.C., who predicted a worldwide recession for 2009?	the IMF
On November 5, 2008, the Bank of England reduced their interest rate from 4.5% to what?	3%
What have central banks around the world done to avoid the risk of a deflationary spiral?	expand money supplies
What have governments done to offset the reduction in private sector demand?	enacted large fiscal stimulus packages
What is the U.S. Federal Reserve's traditional role during a crisis?	lender-of-last-resort
What did the U.S. Federal Reserve do to increase access to liquidity?	expanded liquidity facilities
What type decline does lower wages and higher unemployment lead to?	self-reinforcing decline
What brought the global financial system to the brink of collapse?	credit freeze
How much government debt and troubled private assets did central banks purchase during the last quarter of 2008?	US$2.5 trillion
How much preferred stock did governments of European nations and the USA purchase in their major banks?	$1.5 trillion
In October 2010, who was the Nobel laureate that explained how the U.S. Federal Reserve was creating currency to combat the liquidity trap?	Joseph Stiglitz
What did the banks chose to do with the money created by the Federal Reserve instead of financing more domestic loans and refinancing mortgages?	investing internationally in emerging markets
What was introduced by President Barack Obama in June 2009?	a series of regulatory proposals
What was one of the items important to consumers that was addressed by the new regulatory proposals introduced in June 2009?	consumer protection
Regulations were proposed by Obama in January 2010 to limit the ability of banks to engage in which type trading?	proprietary
Who were proposed new regulations called "The Volcker Rule" named after?	Paul Volcker
Who publicly argued for changes limiting the ability of banks to engage in proprietary trading?	Paul Volcker
When did the U.S. Senate first pass a financial reform bill?	May 2010
When did the U.S. House first pass a financial reform bill?	December 2009
What rule against proprietary trading was not part of legislation passed by either the Senate or House?	Volcker Rule
Which bill gave regulators the discretion to prohibit proprietary trades?	Senate
What action in 2007 by national governments prevented the collapse of large financial institutions?	bailout of banks
How much estimated consumer wealth was lost as a result of the financial crisis of 2007?	trillions of U.S. dollars
What is the date the active phase of the financial crisis began as a liquidity crisis?	August 9, 2007
What year did the global recession that followed the financial crisis of 2007 end?	2012
What was the name of the company that terminated withdrawals from three hedge funds in 2007 citing a liquidity crisis?	BNP Paribas
What year did the U.S. housing bubble peak?	2004
What year did Congress pass the American Recover and Reinvestment Act?	2009
Overvaluation of bundled subprime mortgages was based on the theory that housing prices would continue to do this?	escalate
One of the causes of the financial crisis was easier access to loans by this type borrower?	subprime
In 2007, banks and insurance companies did not have adequate holdings of which type to back their financial commitments?	capital
What is the name of the U.S. Senate report giving their conclusions for the cause of the crisis?	Levin–Coburn Report
Which act was repealed in 1999 effectively removing the separation between investment and deposit banks?	Glass-Steagall Act
What is the name of the commission who concluded the financial crisis was avoidable?	Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission
What agency failed to accurately price risk involved in mortgage-related financial products?	credit rating agencies
What practices should have been adjusted by governments to address 21st-century financial markets?	regulatory
What are MBS as related to the housing and credit booms?	mortgage-backed securities
What are CDO as related to the housing and credit booms?	collateralized debt obligations
When housing prices declined, who reported significant losses from being heavily invested in subprime MBS?	major global financial institutions
Who could invest in the U.S. housing market through MBS and CDO?	institutions and investors around the world
MBS and CDO derive their value from?	mortgage payments and housing prices
How much are total losses estimated to be from falling home prices?	trillions of U.S. dollars
What is the financial incentive when a home is worth less than the mortgage loan?	foreclosure
What year did the foreclosure epidemic begin?	late 2006
What other financial instruments had significant defaults and losses as a result of the crisis expanding from housing to other parts of the economy?	other loan types
What continues to drain consumer wealth and erode the strength of banks?	foreclosure epidemic
What institutions comprise the shadow banking system?	investment banks and hedge funds
What institutions are not subject to the same regulations as commercial banks?	investment banks and hedge funds
What process caused the financial system to both expand and become fragile?	financialization
What policy has U.S. Government emphasized from the 1970's onward?	deregulation
Since the 1970's, what has emphasized deregulation to encourage business, but resulted in less oversight and less disclosure?	U.S. Government policy
Some regulated banks did not have sufficient financial cushions in place to absorb what losses as a result of the financial crisis of 2007?	MBS
What was a consequence of the large loan defaults and MBS losses in 2007?	slowing economic activity
Who provided funds to encourage lending and restore faith in commercial banks in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007?	central banks
Who bailed out key financial institutions and implemented economic stimulus programs as an answer to the financial crisis of 2007?	Governments
What impacted the ability of financial institutions to lend in the financial crisis of 2007?	large loan defaults or MBS losses
When did the U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report its findings?	January 2011
What was one of  the conclusions of the U.S. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission regarding the financial crisis of 2007?	the crisis was avoidable and was caused by: widespread failures in financial regulation
What agency failed to stem the tide of toxic mortgages contributing to the financial crisis of 2007?	Federal Reserve
Who was not prepared for the financial crisis in 2007 by lacking a full understanding of the financial system?	key policy makers
Which business sector contributed to the financial crisis by acting recklessly and taking on too much risk?	financial firms
What caused mortgage lenders to relax underwriting standards and approve riskier mortgages?	tough competition
In what year were high underwriting standards relaxed?	2003
What years were the worst mortgage loans originated?	2004–2007
What years had the most intense competition between securitizers and the lowest market share for GSEs?	2004–2007
Who policed mortgage originators and maintained relatively high standards prior to 2003?	government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)
How many Democratic appointees wrote the majority report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission?	six
Who claimed that the GSE never purchased subprime loans - a claim that is widely disputed?	Paul Krugman
Several reports written by various agencies  concluded that which policy was not the primary cause of the financial crisis?	government affordable housing policy
According to reports, which loans performed better than some loans securitized by private investment banks?	GSE loans
How many Republican appointees wrote the minority report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission?	4
How many estimated substandard loans did Fannie and Freddie have in 2008?	13 million
What was the value of the estimated 13 million substandard loans held by Fannie and Freddie in 2008?	over $2 trillion
Which government-sponsored entities had massive risky loan purchases?	Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
Peter J. Wallison believes that the one of the roots of the financial crisis can be traced to affordable housing policies by which agency in the 1990s?	HUD
How many ex-executives of Fannie and Freddie were named in the SEC's December 2011 securities fraud case?	6
Who uncovered accounting discrepancies in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?	Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO)
Which administration called for investigation into the soundness of GSEs in the early and mid-2000s?	Bush administration
On what date did the House Financial Services Committee hold a hearing to assess safety and soundness issues regarding Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?	September 10, 2003
What was the result of the House Financial Services Committee on September 10, 2003 regarding Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?	The hearings never resulted in new legislation or formal investigation
Who rebuked OFHEO in 2003 for their attempt at regulation of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac?	House Financial Services Committee
What was the value of mortgage lending made by Community Reinvestment Act covered lenders to low and mid level income borrowers and neighborhoods from 1993-1998?	$467 billion
What percent of mortgage lending was made by Community Reinvestment Act covered lenders from 1993 to 1998?	10%
What does CRA stand for?	Community Reinvestment Act
What percent of sub-prime lending occurred at CRA-covered institutions in the run-up to the financial crisis?	25%
What percent of sub-prime loans had some connection with CRA in the run-up to the financial crisis?	25%
When did CRA make rule changes to relax underwriting standards?	1995
How much were CRA loan commitments between 1994 and 2007?	$4.5 trillion
What was the Federal Reserve's assumption regarding what makes a loan subprime?	high-interest-rate loans (3 percentage points over average)
How did the Federal Reserve classify CRA loans?	prime
When were ultra-low interest rates initiated by the Federal Reserve?	after the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001
What financial innovation enabled investment banks and hedge funds to make large wagers?	credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations and synthetic CDOs.
Credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations and CDOS are all types of what?	derivatives
Which magazine had an article where Michael Lewis spoke with a trader about bad loans?	Portfolio Magazine
What financial innovation allows investment banks and hedge banks to make large wagers?	derivatives
What are some names of derivatives?	credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations and synthetic CDOs
Peter J. Wallison believes that the huge number of these loans led to the financial crisis?	substandard
What type downpayments do substandard loans generally have?	low or no downpayments
According to Peter J. Wallison, why did the U.S. residential housing bubble led to financial crisis?	it was supported by a huge number of substandard loans
Other countries had large residential housing bubbles that deflated during what years?	1997–2007
Peter J. Wallison's conclusions regarding the financial crisis are not in agreement with this economist's views?	Krugman
How many Miles East of Puerto Rico is St. Barts?	160
What lies between St. Barts and Saint Martin island?	the Saint-Barthélemy Channel
What does "Roques" mean in English?	little Turtle rocks
St. Barts is one of the what group of islands?	the Renaissance
What is Île Frégate in relation to St Barts?	satellite islets
What are the people of St. Barts called?	Saint-Barthélemoise
What is the native language of St. Barts?	French
About how many people speak Patois French in St. Barts?	500–700
Of what nation do the people of St. Barts claim citizenship?	French
How does the determination between Patois and Creole French usually determined?	racially
What island besides St. Barts was granted COM status by France in 2007?	Saint Martin
How many years does a president have in office in St. Barts?	five
When was the last election held for the executive council positions?	in March 2012
When did the COM status for St. Barts take effect?	15 July 2007
How many people are on the Territorial Council?	nineteen
When was the last senate election in St. Barts?	September 2014
What organization did St. Barts become a part of in 2012?	the European Union
How many senators represent St. Barts in France?	One
What year was the first senate election held for the St. Barts?	2008
How many policemen does the French government pay for on St. Barts?	thirteen
What is often difficult on the island?	Agricultural production
What is grown in patches on the island?	Sweet potato
What seasoning is found naturally on the island?	salt
What type of activity did early settlers use to get food that didn't involve farming?	fishing
What is the name of the main commercial port in St. Barts?	Gustavia
St. Barts is considered a playground for whom?	the rich and famous
How many tourists visit St. Barts each year?	200,000
What is the highest propoerty value recorded in St. Barts?	€61,200,000
What besides investment is responsible for the high standard of living on the island?	wealth generated by wealthy tourists
Besides boats how does St. Barts import most of its food?	by airplane
About how many hotels does St. Barts have?	25
How many rooms does the largest hotel in St. Barts have?	58
Which country besides Brazil does St. Barts import its labor force from?	Portugal
How many rooms does the most expensive hotel on the island have?	12
About how many villas are available for rent in St. Barts?	400
What types of plants are usually found at St. Barts?	succulent
Which half of the island is usually greener due to more rainfall?	The eastern part
A 1994 found how many different species of plants native to the island?	several hundred
What besides palm trees is a common plant to see in St. Barts?	Sea grapes
Where was the coconut palm brought to St. Barts from?	the Pacific islands
What plant was brought to St. Barts from the Mediterranean?	aloe or aloe vera
What is the name of the night blooming flower on St. Barts?	cereus
Where was the plant yellow bell brought from?	South America
When did the british army invade the island?	1773
What type of fig grows on the island?	barbary
When is the end of the dolphin migration period in St. Barts?	May
When is the beggining of the whale migration season?	December
What protected species is a common sight along the beaches of St. Barts?	Turtles
What is the favorite prey of leatherback sea turtles?	jellyfish
Where do green turtles live?	amidst tall sea grasses
What color are conch shells?	pearly-pink
What common sea creature produces a collectable Item?	conch
Where are surgeonfish found in St. Barts?	shallow waters
What kind of crabs besides hermit crabs are common on the beach in St. Barts?	ghost
What do hermit crabs eat?	garbage and sewerage
How many hectares does the marine preserve cover?	1.200
What general species of animal was the marine reserve designed to protect?	sea turtles
What is prohibited in all zones of the marine reserve at St. Barts?	Anchoring
What is the sea life reserve named at St. Barts?	Reserve Naturelle
Colombier Bay has what type of helpful structures placed in the water?	mooring buoys
Who built the three forts on St. Barts?	the Swedes
What was the former name of Fort Oscar?	Gustav Adolph
When was Fort Gustav built?	1787
Most of the Forts in St. Barts are now all what?	ruins
On what part of the island is Fort Oscar located on the far side of?	La Pointe
How many restaurants does the island have?	over 70
Where are most of the nice restaurants located?	in the hotels
What do the French call snack restaurants besides les snacks?	les petits creux
Creole food is often what?	spicier
What type of cuisine related events does the island host each year?	gastronomic
How often is the AG2R Race held?	every alternate year
Where does the AG2R originate from?	Concarneau
What type of vehicles participate in the AG2R Race?	boats
What is the size requirement for entry into the AG2R Race?	10 m
How many people are in the vehicle for the AG2R Race?	two
Where is the airport located on the island?	the north coast
What other than small commercial aircraft can land at the airport on St. Barts?	charters
What is the name of the nearest large commercial airport?	Princess Juliana International Airport
What Island is the nearest major airport located on?	Sint Maarten
What is the name of the airport in St. Barts?	Gustaf III
What country is Saint-Barthélemy a collectivity of?	France
What is the French abbreviation for Saint-Barthélemy?	Saint-Barth
In what language is Saint-Barthélemy abbreviate St. Barts?	English
What did the native peoples of Saint-Barthélemy call the island?	Ouanalao
In which direction is Puerto Rico from the island of Saint-Barthélemy?	west
What kind of island is St. Barts?	volcanic
What is the population of St. Barts?	9,035
What is the capital of St. Barts?	Gustavia
What country besides France had colonies on the island for a substantial period of time?	Swedish
When is the busiest time for tourism in St. Barts?	the winter holiday season
St. Barts was formerly a part of what French commune?	Guadeloupe
When did the residents of St. Barts file for separation from Guadeloupe?	2003
When did St. Barts finally received its independence?	2007
What is the current name of the building in St. Barts that serves as town hall?	Hotel de la Collectivité
Who officially represents St. Barts in French legislation?	A senator
What is the name of the deepest bay at St Barts?	Colombier Bay
Grande Saline Bay provides docking for what kind of boats?	small
The North and East sides of St. Barts are fringed by what?	visible coral reef
Reefs are almost always in what type of water?	shallow
Some of the offshore reefs of St. Barts are part of what?	a marine reserve
How many public beaches are there in St. Barts?	22
How many beaches in St. Barts are suitable to swim in?	15
What is the portion of the island called that is protected from the sea by the island itself?	leeward
What is the portion of the island called that is open to the storms and high sea winds?	windward
The windward side of St. Barts is popular for what type of activity?	windsurfing
What type of climate does St. Barts typically have?	arid
How many hectares does the island have in total?	2,500
How much average rainfall does St. Barts get per year?	1000 mm
When does summer end in St. Barts?	November
What is the lowest nighttime temperature recorded at St. Barts?	13 °C
When did the British invade the harbour town in St. Barts?	1744
What year did the Swedes add more buildings to the harbour town?	1785
What was the port known as prior to the Swedish occupation of St. Barts?	Carénage
What was the name of the port changed to after the Swedish occupation?	Gustavia
What war occurred in the 18th century?	the Caribbean war
What is the English name of the historic museum in St. Barts?	St. Barts Municipal Museum
What is the French name for the historic museum in St. Barts?	Musée Territorial de St.-Barthélemy
What town is the Museum located in?	Gustavia
Besides the French and Swedish, who else occupied the island?	British
What type of houses are on display at the museum in St. Barts?	Creole
In what fields of science is the genome studied?	molecular biology and genetics
What is the content of the human genome?	DNA
What constitutes the viral genome?	RNA
Who coined the word genome?	Hans Winkler
In what year was the word genome first created?	1920
At what university was Hans Winkler employed when he created the word genome?	University of Hamburg
Which two similar words share etymology with genome?	biome, rhizome
A gamate has how many chromosomes relative to a somatic cell?	half
What process splits the chromosome between gametes?	meiosis
What are two cellular organelles which contain genetic material?	mitochondria and chloroplasts
What is the science that deals with the common genetic characteristics of related organisms called?	genomics
In contrast to genomics, genetics usually studies what?	single genes or groups of genes
What is the catalog of contents of a particular species' genetic makeup?	sequenced
What is the relation between the number of base pairs and total complement of genes in a species called?	C-value paradox
Which organism has the most genes?	trichomoniasis
How many genes is the trichomoniasis estimated to have?	60,000
Relative to the human genome, how many more genes does trichomoniasis have?	three times
Who was the first person to sequence a viral genome?	Walter Fiers
Which viral genome did Fiers sequence?	Bacteriophage MS2
Who was first to sequence a DNA-based genome?	Fred Sanger
What organization first sequenced a bacterial genome?	Institute for Genomic Research
In what year was the archaeon genome sequenced?	1996
Which U.S. government agency keeps a large amount of information on genomes?	US National Institutes of Health
What is a mammal whose genome has been sequenced?	mouse
What is a fish whose genome has been sequenced?	puffer fish
When was the Neanderthal's genome sequenced?	December 2013
How old in years was the material that was used to sequence the Neanderthal genome?	130,000
What is a recent development in sequencing methods?	massive parallel sequencing
Which company has led the way in sequencing of individual genetic makeup?	Manteia Predictive Medicine
Whose complete genetic information was recorded in 2007?	James D. Watson
What is Watson famous for helping discover?	the structure of DNA
What is the term for something that lists the important and notable parts of a genome?	genome map
Which group was created to generate a genome map of human genetic material?	The Human Genome Project
Whose genome map greatly aided the Human Genome Project?	Jean Weissenbach
Where did Weissenbach and his colleagues work?	Genoscope
What is the term that accounts for the constituents of the haploid genome?	Genome composition
What aspect of a genome can genome compositions help researchers in learning about?	evolutionary history
What two types of organisms have remarkable differences in their genomic composition?	prokaryotes and eukaryotes
What type of organizing can be observed in eukaryote genomes?	exon-intron
In what types of eukaryotes is there a large amount of non-coding DNA?	mammals and plants
What is an example of an organism that has a portion of its genetic material outside of its chromosomes?	pathogenic microbe
What is an example of an organism whose full complement of genetic material resides in its chromosomes?	virus
Where is additional genetic material found in pathogenic microbes?	plasmids
What are examples of classes of eukaryotes where genome only refers to the information found in chromosomes?	plants, protozoa and animals
What is a name for the genetic material found within chloroplasts?	plastome
What is a name for the genetic makeup of mitochondria?	mitochondrial genome
What is the name for the count of all DNA base pairs in a single haploid genome?	Genome size
What does genome size have a direct relationship with in prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes?	morphological complexity
What accounts for the breakdown of the relation between genome size and morphological complexity in higher eukaryotes?	repetitive DNA
What is a name for the reduced complement of genetic material necessary for an organism to live?	minimal genomes
In what experimental contexts are experiments being carried out on minimal genomes?	in vivo and in silico
What are two types of non-repetitive DNA?	Protein-coding genes and RNA-coding genes
In higher eukaryotes, what has an inverse relationship with genome size?	proportion of non-repetitive DNA
What is the size of non-repetitive DNA divided by to get the proportion of non-repetitive DNA?	genome size
What is an example of an organism which does not contain any repetitive DNA?	E. coli
What are two organisms that have more non-repetitive than repetitive DNA?	C. elegans and fruit fly
What is the percentage of non-repetitive DNA in some plant and amphibian genomes?	20%
What are two types of repetitive DNA found in genomes?	tandem repeats and interspersed repeats
What is found by dividing size of repetitive DNA by length of total genome?	proportion of repetitive DNA
Unequal crossing over can create what type of repetitive DNA?	Tandem repeats
What are two examples of tandem repeats in DNA?	satellite DNA and microsatellites
What is the most common type of repetitive DNA in mammals?	interspersed repeats.
What is the main source of interspersed repeats?	Transposable elements
What do researchers think transposable elements are key factors in when considering higher eukaryotes?	genome evolution
What are the constituents of Class 1 transposable elements?	retrotransposons
What are the constituents of Class 2 transposable elements?	DNA transposons
What kind of genetic material can be produced from retrotransposons?	RNA
What is a term that can describe how DNA transposons move?	cut and paste
DNA transposons do not use which genetic material used by Class 1 TEs?	RNA
What is another word for the total count of chromosomes?	karyotype
Aside from karyotype, what are other genomic traits studied by scientists?	genome size, gene order, codon usage bias, and GC-content
What type of generation of genetic material has a big part in making the genome what it is?	Duplications
What is a possible product of duplications?	genetic novelty
What is an explanation for the resemblance between disparate parts of the genome?	Horizontal gene transfer
In which organisms does horizontal gene transfer appear to occur commonly?	microbes
Parts of which organelle genomes are thought to have ended up in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells via transfer?	chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes
What kind of school does not base its admissions on academic merit?	comprehensive school
What kind of school system uses academic success to judge admissions?	selective school system
What countries used comprehensive schools extensively?	England and Wales
How many secondary school students attend comprehensive schools in England?	90%
What is the German analogue of the comprehensive school?	Gesamtschule
What are some areas of learning in comprehensive schools that were not found often in grammar schools?	design and technology and vocational learning
What two kinds of schools were developed in response to the costs of post-16 comprehensive school education?	Sixth Form colleges and Further Education Colleges
Which types of school projects have called the model of comprehensive schools into question?	City Technology Colleges and Specialist schools programmes
How many selective grammar schools are still currently functioning in England and Wales?	164
In what year were comprehensive schools first created?	1965
What is a word that can be used to describe the scope of a comprehensive school's intake?	neighbourhood
What are some new initiatives that may impact the concept of comprehensive schools?	Academies Programme, Free Schools and University Technical Colleges
In what decade did Finland begin employing comprehensive schools?	1970s
What age ranges does Finnish comprehensive school cover?	7 to 16
What type of school is the Gesamtschule?	comprehensive
What kinds of courses are offered to students who are not experiencing academic success?	remedial
What are the different kinds of certificates that Gesamtschule students can earn?	the Hauptschulabschluss, the Realschulabschluss or the Abitur
What percentage of Brandenburg students went to a Gesamtschule in 2007?	50%
What percentage of Bavarian students went to a Gesamtschule in 2007?	less than 1%
What was the combination of Hauptschulen with Realschulen and Gesamtschulen called in Hamburg?	Stadtteilschule
What was the combination of Hauptschulen with Realschulen and Gesamtschulen called in Berlin?	Sekundarschule
In what school year were Hauptschulen first combined with Realschulen and Gesamtschulen?	2010/2011
What kind of classes are not offered in Mittelschule?	college preparatory classes
What certificate is not available to Mittelschule students?	Abitur
What kind of school is not available in some parts of Germany?	Hauptschule
What type of misconduct have comprehensive schools been alleged of engaging in?	grade inflation
Which German minister criticized comprehensive schools' ability to help students succeed?	Barbara Sommer
Which German politician defended comprehensive schools?	Sigrid Beer
Which party does Barbara Sommer belong to?	Christian Democratic Union
Which party does Sigrid Beer belong to?	Alliance '90/The Greens
Who could be made vulnerable by the Gasemtschulen?	bright working class students
From what group does an achievement gap separate working class students at comprehensive schools?	middle class peers
At which school do students achieve the least success?	Hauptschule
Who conducted a study on comprehensive schools?	Helmut Fend
To which system did Fend compare comprehensive school alumni?	tripartite system
When was the first comprehensive school opened in Gibraltar?	1972
Where can students go after finishing comprehensive school in Gibraltar?	sixth form
What examinations do students prepare for in the sixth form?	A-levels
When did Ireland first open comprehensive schools?	1966
Who was responsible for creating comprehensive schools in Ireland?	Patrick Hillery
What was the only state-run educational system in Ireland prior to comprehensive schools?	vocational school system
What type of school has surpassed comprehensive schools in Ireland?	community school
In what decade were community schools conceived?	1970s
Who owns the land on which Irish comprehensive schools are found?	The state
What did the community school system remove from the comprehensive school model?	the denominational basis of the schools
What is a term for a grouping of local schools that cannot exist independently?	Community colleges
In what year was the Walworth School established?	1946
Who established the Walworth School?	London County Council
What comprehensive school was established in Anglesey?	Holyhead County School
When was Holyhead County School established?	1949
Which comprehensive school openend in coventry?	Woodlands Boys School
Who was responsible for the proliferation of comprehensive schools in 1965?	Anthony Crosland
what was Anthony Crosland's role in government?	Secretary of State for Education
Which type of school was not in widespread usage?	Secondary technical schools
Who was made Secretary of State for Education in 1970?	Margaret Thatcher
What kind of school did Thatcher end the compulsion for existing schools to convert to?	comprehensive
What party was in power when Margaret Thatcher was made Secretary of State for Education?	Conservative
By what year did the 11-plus exam mainly fall out of use?	1975
What did secondary modern and grammar schools combine to become?	neighbourhood comprehensives
Grammar schools that did not close were converted to what?	comprehensive schools
What are two locations in which all secondary schools were converted to comprehensives in the '70s?	Sandwell and Dudley
Who initiated the scrutiny of the educational system in 1976?	James Callaghan
What is the only kind of school operating in Wales?	Comprehensive school
Which political party was James Callaghan a member of?	Labour
What law enables parents full control over their child's education?	Education Reform Act
In what year was the Education Reform Act made into law?	1988
What concept does the government currently support for education?	specialisation
Parental choice has informed what controversial practice?	league tables of school performance
All public primary and secondary schools in Scotland are of what type?	comprehensive
What has Scotland refused to adopt?	specialist schools
When was Scotland's latest rejection of the specialist school model?	2005
Which country is Northern England's school system most different from?	Scotland
Which countries have school systems somewhat similar to Northern Ireland?	England and Wales
What is the French term for the Republic of the Congo?	République du Congo
Which country lies on Congo's northeast border?	Central African Republic
Whic country lies on Congo's western border?	Gabon
Which country lies on Congo's northwest border?	Cameroon
In what part of Africa is the Congo located?	Central Africa
What language was spoken in the area that became the Congo?	Bantu
When did the Congo gain its independence from colonial rule?	1960
Who is the ruler of the Congo?	Denis Sassou Nguesso
What title does Nguesso hold?	President
What is the Congo's rank among other oil generating nations in the Gulf of Guinea?	fourth
What income is subject to uneven distribution in the Congo?	oil revenues
What group of people were living in the area that would become the Congo prior to the arrival of Bantu tribes?	Pygmy
When did Bantu tribes arrive in the area formerly populated by the Pygmy people?	1500 BC
The Bakongo were a group derived from which tribes?	Bantu
Whose expedition arrived at the mouth of the Congo River in 1484?	Diogo Cão
What was Diogo Cao's nationality?	Portuguese
What did European traders exchange with Bantu people?	commodities, manufactured goods, and people
When did formal colonization of the Congo River delta begin?	late 19th century
Colonization reduced the power of what groups in the Congo River basin?	Bantu societies
When did the French take control of the region to the north of the Congo River?	1880
Who brokered a traty with the Makoko people?	Pierre de Brazza
What was the French Congo's name changed to in 1903?	Middle Congo
What group of French colonies was created in 1908?	French Equatorial Africa
How many people are estimated to have died as a result of the creation of the Congo-Ocean Railroad?	14,000
What served as the capital of France in spirit during the Occupation?	Brazzaville
What meeting brought about changes in France's policy towards its colonies?	Brazzaville Conference of 1944
When did Brazzaville get its own local government?	1946
What did the 1946 constitution establish Brazzaville as?	the Fourth Republic
When was the Fifth Republic founded?	1958
What was disbanded in 1958?	the AEF
In 1958, what did the Middle Congo change its name to?	the Republic of the Congo
When did the Congo establish its first constitution?	1959
On what date was the Congo made fully independent from colonial rule?	August 15, 1960
Who was the first leader of the independent Congo?	Fulbert Youlou
Who replaced Youlou?	Alphonse Massamba-Débat
Who were responsible for the revolts that ended with Youlou's removal?	labour elements and rival political parties
Who took control of the company during the transition from Youlou to Debat?	Congolese military
Who became president of the Congo in 1963?	Massamba-Débat
What was a term that could describe the political philosophy of the Congo under Massamba-Debat?	scientific socialism
Soldiers from which country were brought to the Congo?	Cuban
When did Massamba-Debat lose power in the Congo?	September 1968
Who became president of the Congo in 1968?	Marien Ngouabi
What did the Congo's name become under Ngouabi?	People's Republic of the Congo
What did the National Revolutionary Movement's name become?	Congolese Labour Party
In what year was a coup attempted against Ngouabi?	1972
On what date was Ngouabi assassinated?	March 16, 1977
Which group of nations did Nguesso side the Congo with?	Eastern Bloc
Which Eastern Bloc nation did Nguesso sign a pact with?	the Soviet Union
What is a word that can be used to describe Sassou's type of government?	dictatorship
What was an important tool of the Sassou government?	political repression
Who was elected president of the Congo in 1992?	Pascal Lissouba
Who supported the measures of liberalisation Lissouba tried to employ to reform the economy?	IMF
What interrupted the renewal of the IMF agreement with the Congo?	civil war
What does ESAF stand for?	enhanced structural adjustment facility
Which two figures clashed over leadership of the Congo in 1997?	Lissouba and Sassou
What is the name of Sassou's personal army?	Cobras
What nationality were the forces that invaded the Congo to assist Sassou in taking control of the country?	Angolan
In what month did Sassou regain the presidency?	October
Which politican left the presidential race after supporting a boycott by voters?	Milongo
How long did the presidential term become under the new constitution?	seven years
When was the new constitution ratified?	January 2002
When was an end brought to the fighting between the government and Ntumi's rebels?	April 2003
Who won the presidential election in 2009?	Sassou
Which group provided oversight for the electoral process in 2009?	Congolese Observatory of Human Rights
What kind of turnout did the Congolese Observatory of Human Rights experience in the 2009 elections?	very low
What kind of political system has existed in Congo-Brazzaville since the '90s?	multi-party
Which party does Sassou belong to?	Congolese Labour Party
What is the French term for Sassou's political party?	Parti Congolais du Travail
What has Sassou's regime attempted to censor?	corruption revelations
What country found bank accounts and real estate owned by the Sassou regime?	France
When did Sassou reveal that there would be a vote to alter the 2002 constitution?	March 27, 2015
Which term did the new constitution allow Sassou to pursue?	third
Who controlled the media in the Congo in 2008	the government
How many government TV stations exist?	one
How many smaller stations exist that are not government-run?	10
Who is considered to own members of the Pygmies?	Bantus
The treatment of Pygmies has been compared to the treatment of what?	pets
When did the government of the Congo pass a law to assist indigenous people?	December 30, 2010
Between which two lines of latitude is the Congo located?	4°N and 5°S
Between which two lines of longitude is the Congo located?	11° and 19°E
What ocean connects to the Congo?	Atlantic Ocean
Which country lies southwest of the Congo?	Cabinda
What is another name for Cabinda?	Angola
What is the capital of the Congo?	Brazzaville
On what river can Brazzaville be found?	Congo River
What lies directly across the Congo River from Brazzaville?	Kinshasa
What country does Kinshasa serve as capital of?	Democratic Republic of the Congo
What kind of terrain is found in the southwest part of the Congo?	coastal plain
Which river serves as drainage for the southwest plain of the Congo?	Kouilou-Niari River
The middle of the country features what kind of geography?	plateau
What areas are facing pressure to be used for commercial gain?	Forests
On what major line of latitude is the Congo located?	Equator
What is the average temperature in the Congo when the sun is up?	24 °C (75 °F)
What is the average temperature range in the Congo during the night time?	16 °C (61 °F) and 21 °C (70 °F)
When does the Congo experience dry season?	June to August
Which group studied gorillas in 2006-07?	Wildlife Conservation Society
What region is home to the gorillas studied by the Wildlife Conservation Society?	Sangha Region
What was responsible for maintaining the separation between the gorillas and humans?	inhospitable swamps
What is the focus of the Congo's industrial production?	Petroleum
What are two issues in the Congolese government?	budget problems and overstaffing
What did petroleum production replace as the focus of the economy?	forestry
What percentage of the Congo's gross domestic product did petroleum account for in 2008?	65%
What percentage of exported goods did oil account for in 2008?	92%
What did income from petroleum allow the government to fund in the early '80s?	large-scale development projects
What was the Congo's annual increase in gross domestic product in the early '80s?	5%
By how much were Franc Zone currencies devalued in January of 1994?	50%
How much inflation did the Congo experience as a result of the devaluation of the Franc?	46%
What caused reform efforts to cease in 1997?	civil war
What are two reasons why the economy was not able to progress following the civil war?	slumping oil prices and the resumption of armed conflict
When did military conflict resume in the Congo?	December 1998
What are two economic issues faced by the Congolese government?	stimulating recovery and reducing poverty
What two exports has the Congo begun producing recently?	Natural gas and diamonds
When was the Congo allowed back into the Kimberley Process?	2007
What precious metals and minerals have yet to be utilized in the Republic of the Congo?	base metal, gold, iron and phosphate
What business organization is the Congo a member of?	Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa
How much land did the Congolese government agree to lease to South Africans in 2009?	200,000 hectares
What forms of transport are available in the Congo?	land, air and water
When was the Congo's train system built?	1930s
What is a common destination outside of Africa for Congolese airlines?	Paris
On what ocean is a major port located?	Atlantic Ocean
In what part of the country can most of the Congo's citizens be found?	southwest
How long is the track connecting Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire?	534-kilometre (332 mi)
How many languages are used in the Congo?	62
What is the most populous ethnicity in the Congo?	Kongo
How much of the population is constituted by Pygmies?	2%
What percentage of the population of the Congo is Boulangui?	12%
Prior to the civil war in '97, how many non-Africans lived in the Republic of the Congo?	about 9,000
What was the dominant nationality among Europeans living in the Congo prior to the civil war?	French
How many Americans live in the Congo?	Around 300
What is the most commonly practiced religion in the Congo?	Catholics
What percentage of Congolese citizens identify as Awakening Lutherans?	22.3%
What portion of the Congolese population is Protestant?	19.9%
What is the percentage of Muslims living in the Congo?	1.6%
Who form the majority of Islamic residents of the Congo?	foreign workers
How much of the gross domestic product was spent on public health in 2004?	8.9%
What was the overall incidence of HIV or AIDS throughout the 15 to 49 year old population?	2.8%
How much was spent per capita on health in 2004 as measured in US dollars?	$30
For every 100,000 people, how many phyisicians were there in the Congo in the early '00s?	20
As measured in 2010, how many deaths occurred for every 100,000 live births in the Congo?	560
What does FGM stand for?	Female genital mutilation
How many infants die for every 1,000 live births?	59.34
Public schooling is required for people under what age?	16
What was the school enrollment rate in 2005?	44%
What do students who finish 13 years of schooling receive?	baccalaureate
What language is used in Congolese schools?	French
What branch of government does the prime minister lead?	executive
What group is the prime minister usually in charge of?	cabinet
In some political models like semi-presidential systems, what does the prime minister manage?	civil service
What is a parliamentary model on which other systems have been based?	Westminster system
What kind of role is the head of state in Westminster-based parliamentary governments?	ceremonial
What is a central duty of the prime minister?	ensure the passage of bills
What is it called when a monarch has a share of executive powers?	royal prerogative
Using royal prerogative does not require the consent of which body?	parliament
What are two other job titles of the Prime Minister of the  UK?	First Lord of the Treasury and Minister for the Civil Service
In addition to being Prime Minister, what other role did Winston Churchill serve during World War II?	Minister of Defence
When was the title of prime minister first used?	1625
Who coined the term prime minister?	Cardinal Richelieu
What country did Richelieu serve as prime minister for?	France
Who started a tradition of naming the head ministers something other than prime minister?	Louis XIV
When did the modern usage of prime minister come into being?	18th century
Who was referenced as prime minister in a negative manner when the term was first used in its modern sense?	Sir Robert Walpole
Who occupied the role that would later become prime minister under Henry VIII?	Thomas Cromwell
Who held the equivalent of the post of prime minister under Queen Anne?	Godolphin
Who served as the head minister under Charles II?	Clarendon
From whom did ministers derive their power?	the monarch
Who was responsible for naming people to serve in the cabinet?	the monarch
Who are the two ministers used by Queen Anne simultaneously?	Harley and St John
Who was exiled when he lost the favor of the monarch?	Clarendon
What 1688 event helped the parliament solidy its power against the monarch?	Glorious Revolution
What 1689 law contributed to parliament's growing power?	Bill of Rights
What body was incorporated into the government as a result of the Bill of Rights?	House of Commons
The reign of which king was a turning point in the growth of the position of prime minister?	George I
In what year did Queen Anne die?	1714
Where was George I's home?	Hanover
For how long did Robert Walpole serve as prime minister?	twenty-one years
What party did Walpole belong to?	Whig
What concept took shape during Walpole's tenure as prime minister?	doctrine of cabinet solidarity
What would a minister have to do if he did not publicly support a cabinet policy?	resign
Who is another prime minister who reiterated the principles of cabinet solidarity?	Lord Melbourne
Aside from Walpole, who else denied that there was no such thing as the prime minister?	parliamentarians and legal scholars
Which kings tried to get power back to the monarchy?	George II and George III
During whose government did prime minister first see use on official state documents?	Benjamin Disraeli
When was the position of prime minister finally formalized?	1905
In the U.S. and governments modeled on it, who holds executive power?	president
Which non-elected official has held the longest term as prime minister?	Sheikh Khalifah bin Sulman Al Khalifah
When did Khalifa first take the post of prime minister?	1970
What country does Khalifah serve for as prime minister?	Bahrain
Greece, Finland, Romania and Turkey use what kind of government?	parliamentary republics
In whic type of government is the leader elected?	parliamentary republics
What is the term for the head of China's government?	Premier of the State Council
What is another name for the Republic of China?	Taiwan
Whose consent is not required for the Taiwanese premier to take office?	legislature
What is the term for a situation in which the president and prime minister come from different political parties?	cohabitation
What can the French parliament cause in order to oust the prime minister?	resignation of the government
Which constitution details the role and abilities of the prime minister?	Bangladesh's
What other considerations are included in the constitution of Bangladesh as regards the prime minister?	the process of his/her appointment and dismissal
What is directly above the premier in the People's Republic of China?	the National People's Congress
What is the pinyin form of premier?	Zŏnglĭ
Which law first referred to the prime minister in Canada?	the Constitution Act
When was the Constitution Act passed?	1982
The Constitution Act mentions the prime minister in the context of which kinds of other ministers?	federal and provincial first ministers
What document details the role and abilities given to the prime minister of the Czech Republic?	constitution
When was prime minister first mentioned in a government document in the UK?	first decade of the twentieth century
Who was the last prime minister to serve simultaneously as Chancellor of the Exchequer?	Balfour
When did Balfour last hold the titles of prime minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer?	1905
Which prime minister was appointed only one time?	Margaret Thatcher
When was Thatcher appointed prime minister?	1979
When did Thatcher last hold power?	1990
What did Margaret Thatcher reconfigure following each general election?	cabinet
What is the name of the prime ministerial position in Ireland?	Taoiseach
From where is the Irish prime minister usually selected?	the political party that commands majority of seats in the lower house of parliament
When is the Irish Taoiseach renominated?	after every general election
Most parliamentary governments need to have the support of what governmental body?	lower house of parliament
Which political division does not often utilize its power, if it has any?	upper houses
What kind of referendum can the lower house of parliament take against the government?	vote of confidence
Who can put a stop the parliamentary attempts at dissovling itself in some areas?	head of state
If the head of state prevents the dissolution of parliament, what needs to happen?	resignation of the prime minister and his or her government
In contemporary parliamentary governments, which official is usually in charge of asking parliament to dissolve?	prime minister
When was the convention of prime ministers initiating the dissolution of parliament started?	1918
In Ireland, when was the power to dissolve parliament assigned to the prime minister?	1937
The 1922 Irish Free State Constitution previously gave what body the power to dissolve parliament?	the Executive Council
What was the Executive Council an alternate name for?	cabinet
What process signals the need for the prime minister to resign in Australia?	spill motion
What is the Russian term for prime minister?	Chairman of the government
What is the Israeli term for prime minister?	Rosh HaMemshalah
What is the term used in spain for prime minister?	President of the Government (Presidente del Gobierno)
What is the Irish term for prime minister?	Taoiseach
What is the Italian term for the prime minister?	president of the council of ministers
What is the native term for prime minister in Scandinavia?	statsminister
What is a term that is used to mean prime minister?	premier
Which countries use the term chancellor to denote the head of government?	Germany and Austria
What is the head of Monaco's government called?	Minister of State
What is the term for the highest position in government in Vatican City?	Secretary of State
What is the head of Iran's government called?	President
In what kinds of nations can the head of government attain the title of Excellency?	non-Commonwealth countries
What honorific title can be given to prime ministers in commonwealth nations?	Right Honourable
What are British prime ministers part of that grants them the title Right Honourable?	Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council
What is an example of a country where prime ministers can be called Right Honourable solely because of their position?	Canada
What kind of government is in operation in the United Kingdom?	devolved
What are the heads of government in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland called?	First Minister
What is the Indian term for Prime Minister?	Pradhan Mantri
What is the term for prime minister in Pakistan?	Wazir-e-Azam
What does Wazir-e-Azam mean in English?	Grand Vizier
What is the head of government's office called in Canada?	Office of the Prime Minister
What is the head of government's office called in the UK?	Cabinet Office
What's a common abbreviation for the term institute of technology?	IT
In what century did the term polytechnic first show up?	19th century
What school founded in 1794 first used a form of the word polytechnic in its name?	École Polytechnique
What language does the French word polytechnique come from?	Greek
What word means the same thing as "institute of technology"?	polytechnic
What was the first institute of technology in the world?	the Berg-Schola
What war led to the increased popularity of institutes of technology and polytechnics?	World War II
What was the founding name of the Braunschweig University of Technology?	Collegium Carolinum
In what year was the École Polytechnique founded?	1794
What kind of institutions do countries like Germany and Switzerland consider institutes of technology to be?	institutions of higher education
In what year were polytechnics in the UK given the university designation?	1992
What is the name of the Royal Polytechnic Institution now?	University of Westminster
What street is the University of Westminster on?	Regent Street
What term was used in some countries to describe select universities that focus on technological education in applied science and engineering?	polytechnics
What name did some universities switch to in the 1990s for marketing purposes?	University of Technology
What system were institutes of technology a part of during the seventies, eighties, and early nineties?	College of Advanced Education system
What's the four-letter abbreviation for technically minded technical and further education institutes?	TAFE
What is the new name of the Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE?	Melbourne Polytechnic
TAFE Tasmania started a three-year restructuring in what year?	2009
In Australia, how many universities are recognized as Universities of Technology?	seven
What's the German word for a tertiary education institution?	Fachhochschule
In addition to Bachelor's degrees, what other kind of degree can one earn from a Fachhochschule?	master's degrees
What term is used in Belgium and the Netherlands to refer to an institution like a German Fachhochschule?	hogeschool
What term refers to the process that a hogeschool undergoes before it's able to award Master's degrees?	academization
How many institutes of technology in the Netherlands have converted into full-fledged universities in the past few decades?	four
How many Technical Universities are there in the Netherlands today?	three
What country has Institutes of Technology/Polytechnic Institutes from which students can earn certificates, diplomas, and degrees?	Cambodia
What are polytechnic divisions of national universities called in Canada?	Affiliate Schools
In what city is the École Polytechnique de Montréal located?	Quebec
In addition to private equity and industry sources, what's a third source of research funding for institutions of higher learning in Canada?	public funding
What is Canada's national alliance of 11 research-focused schools called?	Polytechnics Canada
What kind of projects does Polytechnics Canada sponsor that can lead to technology commercialization?	collaborative institute-industry projects
In what year was the Imperial Tientsin University founded in China?	1895
What was the first university to offer courses in liberal arts?	Capital University
What portion of China's elite universities still have a primary polytechnical focus today?	half
What year did Croatia pass a law regarding polytechnic education?	1997
What institution is in charge of tracking volcanic activity in the Galápagos Islands?	The Geophysics Institute
What observatory is the National Observatory of Ecuador?	Quito Astronomical Observatory
What school oversees the Quito Astronomical Observatory?	National Polytechnic School
When was the Quito Astronomical Observatory founded?	1873
EPN's Nuclear Science Department is among how many of its kind in Ecuador?	one
If the mission is achieved, professionals will apply what they've learned to what goal?	the country's development
MIT raised money to cover tuition, room and board for what number of students?	50
What's the equivalent of Universities of Technology in French-speaking areas?	Instituts de technologie
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. (Tech.) degree before the Bologna Process?	180
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. from a traditional university prior to the Bologna Process?	160
In what country are polytechnic schools designated uniquely from academic universities?	Finland
What word means polytechnic school in Finnish?	ammattikorkeakoulus
What's the Swedish word for a polytechnic school?	yrkeshögskola
Universities that encompass several engineering schools provide curricula in sciences and what other field?	technology
What are an institute of technology called in France?	institut universitaire de technologie
What's the three-letter acronym for institut universitaire de technologie?	IUT
What's the term in German for what those in French-speaking Switzerland call haute école specialisée?	Fachhochschule
In Eastern Europe, what is the word for an institute of technology?	Polytechnicum
What century in France's history included the French École polytechnique that influenced education systems in other countries?	18th
What term in Brasil and Spain refers to a polytechnic institute?	Escola Politécnica
Fachhochschulen first came about in the early years of what decade?	1970s
Fachhochschulen favor an education in what, as opposed to research?	teaching
In addition to technology, Fachhochschulen offer courses in social science, medicine, design, and what other discipline?	business
What's the abbreviation for a Technische Universität?	TU
What's the main focus of a Technische Universität?	research
Which department's faculty can be associated with university hospitals?	medicine
How many Technische Universitäten make up the TU9 German Institutes of Technology?	nine
How many institutes of technology are there in Germany?	17
What's the approximate number of students in Germany who are enrolled in a university of technology?	290,000
Which German state has the highest ratio of universities of technology to standard universities?	Saxony
What's the joint project of TU Clausthal, TU Braunschweig, and the University of Hanover called?	Niedersächsische Technische Hochschule
What's the name of the Act that changed how Greek public institutes of technology were designated?	Higher Education Reform Act
What was the very first polytechnic school in Hong Kong?	The Hong Kong Polytechnic
What was the original name of Hong Kong Polytechnic?	Hong Kong Technical College
In what year was the City Polytechnic of Hong Kong founded?	1984
What Hong Kong university was created in 1991?	Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
When did the two polytechnic schools in Hong Kong receive status as universities?	1994
What kind of mining did the world's first institute of technology prepare students for?	copper
What's the founding year of the first institute of technology ever?	1735
Who established the Berg-Schola?	Court Chamber of Vienna
How many private institutes of technology are there in India?	16
How many government-affiliated institutes of technology are there in India?	30
What organization oversees India's technical education institutions?	AICTE
What's the name of the diploma awarded in India for technical or vocational coursework?	Diploma in Engineering
How many government-owned public institutes of technology does Indonesia have?	four
Rather than four-year Bachelor's degrees, Politeknik offer a diploma after how many years?	three
What was the original name of Ireland's Institute of Technology system?	Regional Technical College
What Irish institute of technology evolved independently of the Regional Technical College System?	Dublin Institute of Technology
What term in higher education refers to technical universities that award engineering degrees?	Politecnico
Traditionally, how many Politecnici were there?	two
What city houses the headquarters of the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia?	Genoa
What college was the forerunner for the engineering faculty at the University of Tokyo?	Imperial College of Engineering
What area of discipline do Japan's institutes of technology specialize in?	sciences
What country has operated polytechnic institutes for nearly 44 years?	Malaysia
What international organization partnered with Malaysia's Ministry of Education in 1969?	UNESCO
In what city in the state of Perak is the Politeknik Ungku Omar located?	Ipoh
How many polytechnic institutes does Malaysia have now?	32
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2009?	60,840
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2012?	87,440
What's the name of Mauritius's sole technical university?	University of Technology, Mauritius
What's the focus of Mauritius's University of Technology's specialized mission?	technology
What country considers their polytechnics, universities, and colleges state-owned institutions?	New Zealand
What does UCOL stand for?	Universal College of Learning
In what year was the Education Act originally passed in New Zealand?	1989
What school did Massey University combine with?	Wellington Polytechnic
In what decade did New Zealand's tertiary education institutions begin consolidation?	1990s
What school considered a merger with Waikato Institute of Technology that was later abandoned?	Central Institute of Technology
What island was Waiarapa Polytechnic located on before it merged with UCOL?	North Island
What's the only polytechnic school in New Zealand to be designated a university?	Auckland University of Technology
In Pakistan, a student's tests in what grade determine their admission to a diploma program?	10th
What are people being trained for, mainly, in Pakistan's polytechnic institutes?	trades
How many years does it usually take to earn a diploma from polytechnic schools in Pakistan?	three
What two-letter abbreviation is used for undergraduate engineering  courses?	BE
What's Pakistan's program called that's comparable to the British A Level?	F.Sc
What word do they use in Poland for an institute of technology?	Politechnika
What is the Portuguese word for the short-cycle degrees awarded prior to 1988?	bacharelatos
What process was instituted in 2007 that brought Master's degrees to the polytechnic education system?	Bologna Process
What's the name of Singapore's centralized institute that students can attend before university?	Millennia Institute
How many polytechnics are there in Singapore?	5
How many years of study would it take to obtain a degree from a polytechnic in Singapore?	three
What queen set up the Banská Akadémia?	queen Maria Theresa
What year was the Banská Akadémia founded?	1735
The Banská Akadémia was originally intended for training workers in what two precious metals?	silver and gold
What year did teaching start at the Banská Akadémia?	1764
What are the university buildings still standing at the Banská Akadémia used for now?	teaching
What are polytechnics called in South Africa?	Technikons
What year did Technikons gain the ability to give out technology degrees?	1993
When did Technikons start being integrated with traditional South African universities?	2004
Most institutes of technology in Thailand were born out of what other type of institutions?	technical colleges
What type of degree were Thailand's technical colleges historically not allowed to confer?	bachelor's degrees
What's the new name of Pathumwan Technical School?	Pathumwan Institute of Technology
What did the Thonburi Technology Institute become after its name change?	King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
What was the previous name of Rajamangala University of Technology?	Institute of Technology and Vocational Education
What is the name of Thammasat University's engineering school?	Sirindhorn International Institute of Technology
What is Thailand's only government-established and owned institute of technology?	Suranaree University of Technology
What year was Suranaree University of Technology founded?	1989
What is the name of the best-known private institute of technology in Thailand?	Mahanakorn University of Technology
What institute of technology opened in Bursa in 2010?	Bursa Technical University
When Konya Technical University opens, how many total institutes of technology will there be in Turkey and the Ottoman Empire?	six
What two cities in Turkey acquired institutes of technology in the 1950s?	Ankara and Trabzon
What year did UK polytechnics start functioning in a binary education system?	1970
What organization validates degrees received from polytechnic schools?	the UK Council for National Academic Awards
What two-word term does Scotland use to describe their technological universities?	Central Institutions
What was the first polytechnic in Britain originally named?	Royal Polytechnic Institution
How many Institutes of Science and Technology were affiliated with the University of Wales?	two
What was the name Loughborough University was known by from 1966 to 1996?	Loughborough University of Technology
In what decade did colleges of technology gain the University designation?	1960s
What act allowed polytechnic schools to become universities?	the Further and Higher Education Act 1992
The Further and Higher Education Act 1992 allows polytechnics to award degrees without what organization's approval?	CNAA
If a technical institute is affiliated with a local university, what does its designation become?	university colleges
What century brought the advent of technical schools or technical institutes?	20th century
A student would attend a technical institute before a university or polytechnic but after what?	high school
In what year was Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute founded?	1824
Which of the three earliest technological universities was founded most recently, in 1861?	Massachusetts Institute of Technology
What type of economy was technical education in Venezuela intended to support?	middle class
When did Venezuela begin to create institutes of technology?	1950s
What city in Venezuela had the first IUT?	Caracas
Who pioneered using the French system of technological education?	Dr. Federico Rivero Palacio
Where does the information stored on the Wayback Machine come from?	World Wide Web
Which company made the Wayback Machine?	Internet Archive
Where is Internet Archive headquartered?	San Francisco
What individuals founded Internet Archive?	Brewster Kahle and Bruce Gilliat
What is the term used by Internet Archive to describe the Wayback Machine?	three dimensional index
What operating system is used on Wayback Machine's servers?	Linux
When does Wayback Machine save a copy of a website?	if the content has changed
What is the ultimate aim of the Wayback Machine?	to archive the entire Internet
What TV show served as inspiration for the Wayback Machine's name?	The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show
Which characters on The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show used a device that allowed them to travel through time?	Mr. Peabody and Sherman
What was the machine used by Mr. Peabody and Sherman named?	WABAC machine
When was the program necessary to crawl and archive the web created?	1996
What is a term used for programs that automatically visit websites and record the data they find?	crawlers
What rule do crawlers abide by when determining which sites to record?	robots exclusion standard
What site was created to mitigate issues with incomplete copies of websites?	Archive-It.org
What medium was originally used to keep Internet Archive's data?	digital tape
Who were sometimes permitted to use the Archive's database?	researchers and scientists
At what milestone was the archive made public?	fifth anniversary
Where was the event launching the publicly-available archive held?	University of California, Berkeley
What are the saved versions of a site called?	Snapshots
What is the minimum amount of time that elapses before most snapshots are released for viewing?	six months
What term characterizes the rate at which snapshots are made of websites?	variable
When did it become a requirement for websites to appear on Open Directory for inclusion in the Archive?	After August 2008
Who stated that sites not on Open Directory were still being saved but would not be released until the Archive was reindexed?	Jeff Kaplan
When did Kaplan make comments about the status of non-Open Directory sites?	November 2010
In 2009, what size did the data saved by Wayback Machine reach?	three petabytes
As of 2003, what was the rate of increase in the amount of data recorded by the Wayback Machine?	12 terabytes/month
Where does Wayback Machine keep its information stored?	PetaBox rack systems
Who makes PetaBox rack systems?	Capricorn Technologies
When did Internet Archive chance its platform for data storage?	2009
Which platform did Internet Archive adopt in 2009?	Sun Open Storage
Where does Internet archive run a datacenter?	Sun Microsystems' California campus
When was an upgrade of the Wayback Machine released for testing?	2011
When were details of the test version of the updated Wayback Machine released?	March 2011
The older version of Wayback Machine did not have much new data past what year?	2008
The newer version of the Wayback Machine included date up to and including what year?	2010
What was the functionality called that gave users the ability to save a snapshot of a site?	Save a Page
When was Save a Page made available?	October 2013
What 2009 court battle involved the Wayback Machine?	Netbula, LLC v. Chordiant Software Inc.
Which company thought that Wayback Machine data was important for its argument?	Chordiant
What did Chordiant request that the court deactivate on Netbula's website?	the robots.txt file
Who did Netbula believe was the entity that should be responsible for the availability of its snapshots?	Internet Archive
Which party did Internet Archive side with?	Chordiant
Which judge presided over the Netbula v. Chordiant case?	Magistrate Judge Howard Lloyd
In what jurisdiction was the Netbula v. Chordiant case tried?	Northern District of California, San Jose Division
Which party won its argument regarding Netbula's robots.txt file?	Chordiant
What does Telewizja Polska operate?	TVP Polonia
What is EchoStar's platform?	the Dish Network
Which judge denied Telewizja Polska's attempt to block the use of Internet Archive contents as evidence?	Magistrate Judge Arlander Keys
Which judge overturned Keys' ruling?	district Court Judge Ronald Guzman
When are Internet Archive timestamps useful for patent offices?	in examining a patent application
What is an example of a condition that must be met for the Internet Archive data to be considered acceptable for submission to patent offices in the US and Europe?	authoritative statement of the archivist
What kind of limitations exist in keeping copies of a website?	technical
The omission of what element in screenshots can make them unreliable as evidence?	underlying links
What elements of webpages are not used by Wayback Machine?	forms
What kind of sites contain information that the Wayback Machine does not record?	e-commerce
What kinds of laws could the Wayback Machine be viewed as breaking in Europe?	copyright laws
What would the Internet Archive have to do if requested by someone whose content is available on Wayback Machine?	delete pages from its system
In what part of the website are Wayback Machine's rules regarding removing content?	FAQ
Web pages that contained content critical of what religous movement were taken off of the Internet Archive in 2002?	Scientology
Who was mistakenly credited for having the sites with criticism of Scientology removed from the Internet Archive?	the site owner
Who was the actual party that requested the critical sites be taken down?	Church of Scientology
Which law firm leveraged Wayback Machine to protect their client in 2003?	Harding Earley Follmer & Frailey
Which company filed suit against Harding, Earley, Follmer & Frailey's client?	Healthcare Advocates
Who did Healthcare advocates change their case to include as a defendant?	Internet Archive
What laws did Healthcare Advocates accuse Internet Archive of having broken?	the DMCA and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
What kind of protocol is the Robots Exclusion Standard?	voluntary
What file is utilized to exercise the rights promoted by the Robots Exclusion Standard?	Robots.txt
If a site prevents Internet Archive from recording it, what file is still saved?	Robots.txt
Who asserts that they will respond to direct contacts requesting material be removed from the archive?	Internet Archive
Who sued Internet Archive in 2005?	Suzanne Shell
What was the URL owned by Suzanne Shell?	profane-justice.org
In what jurisdiction were Internet Archive's counterclaims filed?	Northern District of California
In what jurisdiction where counterclaims nullified by the court?	District of Colorado
When did Suzanne Shell's suit against Internet Archive come to an end?	April 25, 2007
Who stated that they had no wish to violate individuals' copyrights?	Internet Archive
Who stated that they did not want to cause damage to the Internet Archive?	Suzanne Shell
What was the first method used by the actor in trying to get his images taken down?	DMCA requests
What legal system did the actor use after filing DMCA petitions?	Federal Court of Canada
What are some other names the Dutch Republic is known by?	the United Provinces (Verenigde Provinciën), Federated Dutch Provinces (Foederatae Belgii Provinciae), and Dutch Federation (Belgica Foederata)
The Dutch Republic was a republic of Europe during what time?	from 1581, when part of the Netherlands separated from Spanish rule, until 1795
What republics did the Dutch Republic come before?	Batavian Republic, the Kingdom of Holland, the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, and ultimately the modern Kingdom of the Netherlands
The Low Countries were made up of which present day countries?	Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg
Which counties in the Low Countries were not ruled by the Holy Roman Empire?	Flanders
The majority of the Low Countries were ruled by which houses?	the House of Burgundy and subsequently the House of Habsburg
Who issued the Pragmatic Sanction?	Holy Roman Emperor Charles V
In what year did the Netherlands rise up against Philip II?	1568
Why did the people of the Netherlands rise up against Philip II?	high taxes, persecution of Protestants by the government, and Philip's efforts to modernize and centralize the devolved-medieval government structures of the provinces
In what year was the Union of Utrecht signed?	1579
Who signed the Union of Utrecht?	a number of the northern provinces of the Low Countries
What was the declaration of independence of the provinces from Philip II called?	the Act of Abjuration
In what year was the Act of Abjuration signed?	1581
What was the purpose of the Union of Utrecht?	to support each other in their defence against the Spanish army
In what year did the United Provinces invite Francis, Duke of Anjou to lead them?	1582
In what year did Francis, Duke of Anjou leave the Netherlands?	1583
When was William of Orange assassinated?	10 July 1584
Who agreed to turn the United Provinces into a protectorate of England?	Elizabeth I
In what year did the United Provinces become a confederacy?	1588
What events created the Batavian Republic?	a series of republican revolutions in 1783–1795
The republican forces fled to which country?	France
The Napoleonic Kingdom of Holland replaced which republic?	the Batavian Republic
In what year did the Netherlands gain independence from France?	1813
What names were used in the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814?	"United Provinces of the Netherlands" and "United Netherlands"
The Kingdom of the Netherlands was formed by which countries?	Austrian Netherlands, Luxembourg and Liège
The Dutch Republic dominated world trade during what time?	the Dutch Golden Age
What was the wealthiest and most urbanized region in the world during the 17th century?	The County of Holland
When was the stock exchange founded in the Netherlands?	1602
Which city in the Netherlands has the oldest stock exchange?	Rotterdam
The Dutch East-India Company inhabited how many cities?	six
Which city did the Dutch East-India Company decide to reside in after a court decided they could legally only operate in one city?	Amsterdam
The Dutch had one of the strongest and fastest navies in the world during what time?	1590–1712
The Dutch operated a slave trade from which locations?	Africa and the Pacific
What was one of the conquests of the Dutch Navy?	breaking the Portuguese sphere of influence on the Indian Ocean and in the Orient
The Dutch Republic consisted of how many provinces?	seven
Who were the Generality Lands governed by?	the States General (Staten-Generaal in Dutch), the federal government
The States General was made up of what?	representatives of each of the seven provinces
What was the 8th province of the Dutch Republic?	the County of Drenthe
Why was the County of Drenthe denied representation by the States General?	this area was so poor it was exempt from paying federal taxes
The main executive official of the Provincial States was called what?	raadspensionaris
Who had more power during times of war than the raadspensionaris?	the stadtholder
Who commanded the army?	the stadtholder
Who appointed the stadtholders?	the states of each province
Who were always chosen as stadtholders of most of the provinces?	the princes of Orange of the House of Orange-Nassau, beginning with William the Silent
Which states had the same stadtholder as Holland?	Zeeland and usually Utrecht
What group of people supported the stadtholders, particularly the princes of Orange?	Orangists
Who wanted to replace the stadtholders with a republican structure?	Republicans
Several border territories were designated to the United Provinces after what?	the Peace of Westphalia
The border territories assigned to the United Provinces were known as what?	federally-governed Generality Lands (Generaliteitslanden)
What were the names of the border territories assigned to the United Provinces?	Staats-Brabant (present North Brabant), Staats-Vlaanderen (present Zeeuws-Vlaanderen), Staats-Limburg (around Maastricht) and Staats-Oppergelre (around Venlo, after 1715)
Who was in control of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) and the Dutch West India Company (WIC)?	The States General of the United Provinces
Some shipping expeditions were mostly initiated by which provinces?	Holland and/or Zeeland
Who was influenced by the Constitution of the Republic of the United Provinces?	The framers of the US Constitution
Who described the Dutch confederacy as exhibiting "Imbecility in the government; discord among the provinces; foreign influence and indignities; a precarious existence in peace, and peculiar calamities from war."	James Madison
The American Declaration of Independence is similar to what?	the Act of Abjuration, essentially the declaration of independence of the United Provinces
What granted Holland and Zeeland the right to accept only one religion?	the Union of Utrecht of 20 January 1579
What did the Union state that every person should be free to choose?	personal religion
Who was a strong supporter of freedom of religion and wanted to unite Protestants and Catholics in the new union?	William of Orange
What was forbidden in all provinces?	Catholic services
What did any person who wanted to hold public office need to conform to during the Republic?	the Reformed Church
The degree to which different religions were persecuted depended on what?	the time period and regional or city leaders
What was the punishment for people who opened their homes to Catholic services during 17th-century Leiden?	fined 200 guilders (a year's wage for a skilled tradesman) and banned from the city
What was one reason for the large amounts of immigration of religious refugees from other parts of Europe?	personal freedom of religion
What was the main subject of controversy that arose within the Reformed Church during the beginning of the Republic?	predestination
The controversy surrounding the subject of predestination is known as what?	the struggle between Arminianism and Gomarism, or between Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants
What led to the banning of the Remonstrant faith in 1618?	the Synod of Dort
When did the active persecution of religious services become more of a restricted tolerance?	in the 18th century
Religious services for other religions were tolerated as long as they adhered to what rule?	as long as their services took place secretly in private churches
What language does the word "symbiosis" come from?	Greek
What type of organism did Frank apply the term "symbiosis" to?	lichens
What nationality was Heinrich Anton de Bary?	German
How long did it take for scientists to stop using the narrow definition of symbiosis?	130 years
What is the type of symbiotic relationship where two organisms can't survive without each other?	obligate
What is the type of symbiotic relationship where the symbionts can live together but can also survive alone?	facultative
What is an example of an obligate relationship?	lichens
What is an example of ectosymbiosis?	mistletoe
What is it called when the organisms are not physically joined?	disjunctive symbiosis
What is it called when one symbiont lives within its partner?	endosymbiosis
What do bacterial endosymbionts give necessary nutrition to?	insects
What is the name of a bacteria inside of tree roots?	Frankia
What endosymbionts live in coral?	algae
What organisms are described as living on the surface of whales?	barnacles
Name a parasitic ectosymbiont.	lice
What is another name for ectosymbiosis?	exosymbiosis
What is another term for mutualism?	interspecies reciprocal altruism
Of what duration are symbiotic relationships?	lifelong
What type of relationship do herbivores have with the bacteria in their intestines?	mutualistic
What do coral and algae produce together?	Coral reefs
How do plants contribute to terrestrial ecosystems?	fix carbon from the air
What type of fungus draws liquid and minerals out of the earth?	mycorrhyzal
What lives with Ritteri sea anemones?	ocellaris clownfish
What prevents the clownfish from being stung?	A special mucus
What type of relationship do the clownfish and anemone have?	mutual symbiosis
What species does this shrimp have a relationship with?	the goby fish
What part of the fish is used to signal danger?	its tail
What type of symbiosis seen between bryozoans and hermit crabs?	non-obligate
When were the worms found?	the late 1980s
What does the bacteria give the worm?	nutrition
What land is near the worms' first known location?	the Galapagos Islands
What is given to the host cell?	nutrients
What does the host make that affect its genes?	specialized cells
In what manner are the described genetic alternations given to future generations?	vertical transmission
What is the main alteration in an endosymbiont when it adapts to a host?	drastic reduction in its genome size
What is the term that describes the way the endosymbiont can't go back to its original phenotype?	Muller's ratchet phenomenon
What does the article say could be the reason for the buildup of harmful mutations?	lack of selection mechanisms
What language do the roots of "commensal" come from?	Latin
What type of symbiotic relationship helps one organism and doesn't have a major affect on the other?	Commensalism
What is the term for a relationship where one organism provides a dwelling for the other?	inquilinism
What type of relationship is it when arachnids attach webs to dead plants?	metabiosis
In what type of relationship does an organism travel by means of another?	phoresy
Antagonistic or antipathetic symbiosis are alternate names for what?	A parasitic relationship
What is it called when organisms are lethal to their host?	necrotrophic
What is it called when parasites need their host to live?	biotrophic
What proportion of animals go through a parasitic stage?	as many as half
Name a biotrophic organism.	a tick
What is the name for the kind of symbiosis in which one organism is seriously harmed and there is no affect on the other?	Amensalism
What kinds of amensalism are there?	competition and antibiosis
When a large tree takes the resources a young tree needs, what type of amensalism is it?	competition
What does the black walnut give out that kills plants?	juglone
What organisms is the ibex in an amensalistic relationship with?	weevils
What does the Spanish ibex eat?	shrub
What type of relationship is it when large animals crush small plants?	Amensalism
What type of relationship harms both organisms?	Synnecrosis
What is the ultimate result of synnecrosis?	death
How common is synnecrosis in the natural world?	uncommon
Why do bees sting even though it will kill them?	to protect the hive
What far-reaching result do scientists think has come about from symbiosis with bacteria?	the evolution of all eukaryotes
What are eukaryotes?	plants, animals, fungi, and protists
What does Margulis think is the main driver of evolution?	symbiosis
Who agrees with Margulis' cooperative view of evolution?	Dorion Sagan
How big a part did symbiosis have in the development of flowering plants and their pollinators?	a major role
What did some plants produce when flowers became less simple?	nectar and large sticky pollen
What is the word for the kind of relationship in which a plant depend on a single type of insect?	dependent
What is the French name of the Canadian Armed Forces?	Forces armées canadiennes
What law constitutes the CAF?	the National Defence Act
Who are the CAF supposed to protect?	Her Majesty
What does CF stand for in this context?	Forces canadiennes
How many sub components are there?	four
What act defines the CAF?	the National Defence Act
Who currently is the Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian Armed Forces?	Queen Elizabeth II
Who represents Queen Elizabeth II?	the Governor General of Canada
Who leads the CAF?	the Chief of the Defence Staff
Who advises the Chief of the Defence?	the Armed Forces Council.
What war were the CAF involved in?	Cold War
What was the goal of the CAF during the cold war?	the security of Europe
What military thread did the CAF protect against in Europe?	the Soviet military threat
Apprimately since what year was the CAF stationed in Europe?	the early 1950s
What year did the CAF leave Europe?	the early 1990s
What Treaty is the CAF part of?	the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
What type of operation is the Canadian Military involved in?	international security operations
What country has the Canadian Military worked in the last years?	Afghanistan
What year did the Canadian Military operation in Afghanistan start?	2002
Where is the current focus of the Canadian Military set?	out of area
What is Canada's defense policy based on?	Canada First Defence Strategy
When was the Canada First Defence Strategy introduced?	2008
How many missions are carried out internally in Canada?	six core missions
What other location does the Canada First Defence Strategy Cover?	North America
What other priority do the Canadian Armed Forces also contribute too?	conduct of Canadian defence diplomacy
What is an example of another activity that the CAF performs?	deployment of Canadian Defence Attachés
What other air force does the CAF cooperate with?	the American Air Forces
What is one of the activities the CAF works on with other countries?	military training
What diplomatic effort does the CAF perform as part of it's duties?	relationship-building efforts
What year was Canada united in a confederation?	1867
The forces of what countries did people serve before the unification?	French and British forces
What is one of the threats that faced them?	European powers
What American war threatened Canada?	the American Revolutionary War
Early on, what did they defend against with the British?	invasion by the United States
Who initially had military command?	the British Crown-in-Council
Where was the commander-in-chief stationed?	Halifax
When did the British Army and Royal Navy withdraw from Halifax?	1906
The Canadian Armed Forces were initially organized under what department?	the Department of Militia and Defence
When did the unification complete of all the Canadian forces to be called the Canadian Army?	November 1940
When was the first overseas deployment of the Canadian Military?	Second Boer War
Under what command did they serve?	British command
When were Canadian Troops called upon to assist in Europe?	the First World War
What other European war were the Canadian Forces involved in?	Second World War
What Asian war were the Canadian Forces involved in?	Korean War
How many operations has the Canadian Military been part of since 1947?	more than 200 operations
How many operations have been completed by the Canadian Military Internationally?	72
What are some of the wars the Canadian Military was involved in?	Cold War, First Gulf War, Kosovo War
What peace keeping effort is the Canadian Military part of?	United Nations Peacekeeping operations
What type of military vehicle was maintained almost 15 years but never saw any action during the Cuban crisis?	an aircraft carrier
What famous World War II battle was the Canadian Military part of?	the Normandy Landings
What effort was the Canadian Military known for in Germany?	the strategic bombing of German cities
What Battle in France was the Canadian Military known for?	the Battle of Vimy Ridge
What country was the latest Canadian Military effort?	Croatia
Canada had which biggest army during the Second World War?	the largest volunteer army ever
What country fell providing with more information on Canada's army size?	the Soviet Union
Which other country had a sizable naval army?	Japanese
When did the Canadian Armed Forced become to be?	1 February 1968
What does the Canadian Armed Forces mostly consist of?	the Royal Canadian Navy, Canadian Army, and Royal Canadian Air Force
What prevented Canada from fully having their own army at the start?	the British government
When did Canada gain independence from the United Kingdom?	1931
What war aided Canadian legislative independence?	the First World War
What is the old name of the Canadian Forces?	Canadian Armed Forces
When did the Canadian Armed Forces name cease to be?	After the 1980s
When was the Canadian Armed Forces name reintroduced?	2013
What was the new name of the Canadian Armed Forces?	Canadian Forces
What forces were sent out in support of peacekeeping?	Land Forces
Until when were Canadian forces in Afghanistan?	2011
What force were the Canadians part of in Afghanistan?	ISAF
Who requested the aid of the Canadians?	the Government of Afghanistan
What type of operations were mainly done by Canadian forces?	peacekeeping
What is Today's annual cost of the Canadian Forces?	approximately $20.1 billion
How are the Canadian forces ranked in size compared to other military?	74th in size
What is the total force of the Canadian Forces?	approximately 119,000
By what date is the primary reserve personnel estimated to go up by 30,000?	2020
What is the total amount of Canadian Forces estimated to be in 2020?	around 124,000
What was the effort called to upgrade the Canadian Forces?	the Canada First Defence Strategy
How were the Canadian Forces upgraded in 2008?	through the purchase of new equipment, improved training and readiness
What major problem is the CAF trying to address currently?	loss of existing members
What equipment was acquired to aid in Afghanistan?	main battle tanks, artillery, unmanned air vehicles
What large transport plane is part of the CAF mission?	C-130 Hercules
What new type of helicopter was recently acquired?	CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift helicopters
When was the renewal and re-equipment effort started?	2006
What roles were women recruited for in the 1950s?	medicine, communication, logistics, and administration
What year did further recruitment for women open in the CAF?	1971
What non traditional tasks were women recruited for in the 1970s?	vehicle drivers and mechanics, aircraft mechanics, air-traffic controllers
Why were women eventually allowed to serve at sea in the CAF?	the Department changed its policies
What charter directly affected a women's right to serve in the CAF?	Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Name some of the jobs in the CAF off limits to women in the 1980s.	infantry, armoured corps, field artillery, air-defence artillery
On what date was a study created to research the impart of women in direct involvement?	5 February 1987
Who created an office to study these effects?	the Minister of National Defence
What was the study called?	Combat-Related Employment of Women
What year were most military occupations opened to women?	1989
What military occupation wasn't opened to women until the 2000s?	submarine service
By how much did opening these jobs to women increase the recruiting pool by?	100 percent
Which government was responsible in Canadian history for this fact?	the government of Jean Chretien
What is a requirement for equipment for the CAF?	equipment must be suitable for a mixed-gender force
What are some of the equipment used by both men and women?	Combat helmets, rucksacks, combat boots
What special entitlement are women provided as part of their service?	an annual financial entitlement for the purchase of brassiere undergarments
What is the hierarchy of the Canadian Armed Forces?	It begins at the top with the most senior-ranking personnel and works its way into lower organizations.
What determines who is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed forces?	The Canadian constitution
Who does the Commander-in-Chief authorize to make decision regarding the Armed Forces for them?	the governor general
What orders fall under the royal prerogative?	troop deployment and disposition orders
Who must sign these orders for them to be valid?	the monarch or governor general
Who's advice is the monarch supposed to follow regarding these orders?	the advice of his or her ministers in Cabinet
The armed forces has approximately how many members?	115,349
Who is the highest ranking member of the Armed Forces?	the Chief of the Defence Staff
Who appoints the Chief of the Defence?	The governor general
What location does the National Defense operate out of?	Ottawa, Ontario
What are some of the members of the Armed Forces Council?	the heads of the Royal Canadian Navy, the Canadian Army, the Royal Canadian Air Force and other key Level 1 organizations.
How many Canadian Forces bases are there in Canada?	27
Where do Canadian Forces members go for training?	Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu
What is the place called where initial training happens?	Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School
How many warships does the Royal Canadian Navy have?	33
Where are the Maritime Forces Atlantic located?	Halifax
What formation is located in Quebec?	the Naval Reserve Headquarters (NAVRESHQ)
What international exercises does the RCN partake in?	NATO exercises
Who heads the Canadian Army?	Commander of the Canadian Army
How many divisions are there in the Canadian Army?	four divisions
What are the four divisions?	the 2nd Canadian Division, the 3rd Canadian Division, the 4th Canadian Division and the 5th Canadian Division
What division is the Canadian Army Doctrine of?	the 5th Canadian Division
The Canadian Army Headquarters are located in what division?	the 5th Canadian Division
How many brigades does the Army consist of?	three
Each Brigade contains how many regiments?	one
What squadron is present but not an official part of the Brigade?	tactical helicopter squadron
What medical group is present at all Brigades but not part of it?	a field ambulance
Where is most of the major training performed?	CFB Gagetown, CFB Montreal and CFB Wainwright.
Who heads the Royal Canadian Air Force?	the Commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force
Where is the commander based out of?	Winnipeg
How many air force wings are located across Canada?	eleven
Who reports to the operational commander about the wings?	tactical commander
What are some locations of the air bases?	Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba
Where are the command facilities located?	Winnipeg and North Bay
Where is the Canadian component of the NATO located?	Geilenkirchen, Germany
What NATO force are the Canadians part of?	Airborne Early Warning Force
What location is a Canadian airforce base located whose name is also a dog breed?	Labrador
What does JTFN stand for?	Joint Task Force (North)
What it located through Canada's Northern Regions?	a chain of forward operating locations
What can each forwarding operation location provide?	fighter operations
What squadrons deploy to these locations?	CF-18 squadrons
What patrols are organized from these locations?	Arctic sovereignty patrols.
When was the Canadian Joint Operations Command established?	October 2012
What are the parts that merged into the Canadian Joint Operations Command?	Canada Command, the Canadian Expeditionary Force Command and the Canadian Operational Support Command
What specifically prompted this merger?	the 2012 federal budget
what does CANSOFCOM stand for?	The Canadian Special Operations Forces Command
What is the CANSOFCOM focussed on?	generating special operations forces
What do the special forces support?	CJOC
Where is the Canadian Joint Incident Response Unit based?	CFB Trenton
How many Special Operations Aviation Squadron are based at Petawawa?	427
What is the the Information Management Group responsible for?	electronic warfare and the protection of the Armed Forces' communications and computer networks
Where is the Information Management Group located?	CFS Leitrim in Ottawa
What is the task of the CAF Cyber Task Force?	design and build cyber warfare capabilities
When was the Directorate of Cybernetics established?	June 2011
Who heads the Directorate?	the Director General Cyber
Who does The Health Services Group serve?	the Canadian Armed Forces
Who can temporarily be assigned the Health Serviced Group?	Joint Task Force
What type of support does The Health Services Group provide?	domestic support
When can the reserve force be called upon?	in times of national emergency or threat
What troops does The reserve force consists of?	primary and supplementary
Who commands the reserves?	Chief of Reserves and Cadets
What are some of the components of the reserve force?	the Naval Reserve (NAVRES), Land Force Reserve (LFR), and Air Reserve (AIRRES)
Who conducts training of the cadets?	Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service
What age are the cadets in the Canadian Cadet Movement?	12 to 18 years
What branch are the majority of COATS members?	officers of the Cadet Instructors Cadre
Who is eligible to serve as a COATS trainer?	Reserve Force Sub-Component COATS
What do Canadian Rangers perform?	provide surveillance and patrol services
Where do the Canadian Rangers operate?	in Canada's arctic
Which force are the Rangers part of?	reserve force
What do the Canadian Rangers safekeep?	Canada's exercise of sovereignty over its northern territory
What is suitable for CAF members to wear on any occasion?	service dress
What other parts are there to a uniform?	gloves, swords, and medals
What is now the daily uniform worn by members of the CAF?	operational dress is now the daily uniform
What can be worn in cold winter weather?	Approved parkas
What is only worn for very specific occasions?	a ceremonial/regimental full dress
What are some of the authorized head dresses for the CAF?	beret, wedge cap, ballcap
Are there specific rules for wearing head dresses?	coloured according to the distinctive uniform worn
What is the most popular head dress worn?	The beret
What headdress does the Canadian Army wear?	CG634 helmet
What gives the federal government responsibility for national defense?	The Constitution of Canada
What year was an additional 12.5 Billion Canadian Dollars assigned for over five years?	2005
In 1059, who was responsible for electing the pope?	the principal clergy of Rome and the bishops of the seven suburbicarian sees.
What were the cardinals assigned?	a church in Rome as his titular church or linked with one of the suburbicarian dioceses
At one time, Priest permanently were assigned to a church were referred to as?	cardinal
How early was this term used?	ninth century
The Church of England uses what term that is held by two senior members of the College of Minor Canons of St. Pauls Catherdral?	tituli
What Latin word does "cardinal" come from?	cardo
Which church still holds on to the original meaning of "cardinal" from the above Latin word?	The Church of England
Who were the first people to be called cardinals in Rome?	the deacons of the seven regions of the city
When were the Roman cardinals perceived as a privleged class among the Roman clergy?	8th century
What year did the ruling "only a cardinal was eligible to become pope" come in effect?	769
Who gave cardinals the right to elect the pope under the Papal Bull In nomine Domini?	Nicholas II
What was it that gave cardinals the right to elect the pope?	the Papal Bull In nomine Domini
In what year did the pope allow cardinals to wear the red hats?	1244
Who was the pope who gave cardinals the right to wear the hats?	Pope Innocent IV
What term was given to certain church men of honor?	cardinal
When is the earliest date of using the term cardinal as honorable church men used?	747
When was the title of cardinal reserved for the cardinals of Rome by Pius V?	1567
In regards to the word "cardinal" being used in cities other than Rome, who sent a letter to Pippin III?	Pope Zacharias
In what year was the letter sent?	747
Which pope declared that cardinals would be from Rome?	Pius V.
In what year did the pope make the declaration?	1567
In what year did Pope Pius IV wrote abou tthe selecting of cardinals?	1563
Who was in charge of the Ecumenical Council of Trent?	Pope Pius IV
In what year did the Ecumenical Council of Trent write in regards to the selection of Cardinals?	1563
Who was the pope who headed the Ecumencial Council of Trent in that year?	Pope Pius IV
Who were generally temporal rulers?	French kings
In what roles did cardinals have important roles?	secular affairs.
What Caridinal had powers so great that he basically ran France?	Cardinal Richelieu
Which cardinal acted a the leader of France due to his amount of power?	Cardinal Richelieu
Who is the only person to ever become a cardinal king?	Henry, King of Portugal
Pope Sixtus V limited the number of cardinals to?	70
What did the composition of the cardinals consist of?	comprising six cardinal bishops, 50 cardinal priests, and 14 cardinal deacons.
During who's term did the ruling exceed?	Pope John XXIII
Pope Paul VI increse the number of cardinal electors to?	120
What is the maximum age for electors?	80
Pope Paul VI raised the cap on cardinal electors from 70 to what?	120
Pope Paul VI had no cap on what?	the number of cardinals generally
Where do the cardinals work?	a church in the city of Rome or one of the suburbicarian sees
Who receives the hishopric of Ostia?	The Dean of the College of Cardinals
What other title does the Dean of Collge of Cardinals receive upon appointment?	titular bishopric of Ostia
In was year was the title decreed Eminence?	1630
Who decreed this?	Pope Urban VIII
What rank did the Eminece decree assigned?	Prince
Who held more power then the cardinal?	the Pope and crowned monarchs
Which pope decided that being pope was equal to being a prince?	Pope Urban VIII
The Archdiocese of Milwaukee says that the correct way to address a cardinal in English is?	"Cardinal [First name] [Surname]"
What is the proper way to address a cardinal according to the Archdiocese of Milwaukee?	Cardinal [First name] [Surname]
How do cardinals sign traditionally?	by placing the title "Cardinal" (abbreviated Card.) after their personal name and before their surname
How do Oriental Patriarchs sign?	Sanctae Ecclesiae Cardinalis
Why do Oriental Patriarchs sign this way?	because they do not belong to the Roman clergy
What way is used to announce the election of a new pope in Latin?	[First name] Cardinal [Surname]
What should the new pople have been before becoming a pope?	Cardinal
When was the most recent election of a non-cardinal?	1378
When is the last time a non cardinal was elected as pope?	1378
Do any sees carry the right to the cardinalate?	no
Despite some traditions and rights, no see has the right to what?	the cardinalate
Who are among the most senior members of the Catholic Church?	Cardinal bishops
What is a cardinal bishop?	cardinals of the episcopal order
Some cardinals are bishop in name only, what are they called?	Cardinal bishops
In early times, who was generally electied to cardinal?	a Roman priest
Why did the ceromony of consecrating a bishop have to be preformed by someone who was already a bishop?	To preserve apostolic succession
What is the rule if the peson elected is not a bishop?	he is consecrated by the Dean of the College of Cardinals, the Cardinal Bishop of Ostia.
What happens if a Pope is elected who is not a bishop?	he is consecrated by the Dean of the College of Cardinals, the Cardinal Bishop of Ostia.
How many suburbicarian sees?	seven
When were the two sees combined?	1150 until 1914
Who separated them?	Pope Pius X
What are the seven sees?	Ostia, Albano, Porto and Santa Rufina, Palestrina, Sabina and Mentana, Frascati and Velletri
Cardinal bishops do not have any powers of governnace over the suburibicarian see since when?	1962
Which see doesn't have its own bishop?	Ostia
Who is in charge of Ostia?	Cardinal Vicar of the see of Rome is apostolic administrator.
In what year was it decided that cardinal bishops had no power over the seven sees?	1962
What see is the one exception to this rule?	Ostia
Who has power over the exception?	the Cardinal Vicar of the see of Rome
The entire group of cardinals is known as what?	College of Cardinals
Who is the only person who can judge a Cardinal in regards to laws of the church?	the pope
What does the pope give to a new Cardinal?	a gold ring
Who decides on the design of the item given to new Cardinals?	the pope
What is the name of the hat that the pope used to wear when naming a new Cardinal?	a galero.
In what year did the practice of donning this item stop?	1969
What does the pope now wear when naming a new Cardinal?	scarlet biretta
Which Cardinals still wear traditional clothing?	Eastern Catholic cardinals
What does the color red symbolize in the clothing worn by Cardinals?	willingness to die for his faith
Which item of clothing worn by cardinals is always white?	rochet
The Cardinal bird was named as such because of what in relation to Cardinals of the church?	the scarlet color of cardinals' vesture
When did Cardinals stop wearing purple or blue capes?	1460s
What happens if a Cardinal is named in pectore, and the pope dies?	the cardinalate expires
Which pope began using creati et reservati in pectore?	Pope Martin V
What was a "lay cardinal" allowed to do that is not considered a normal status of a Cardinal?	marry
In what year did Pope Benedict XV revise the Code of Canon Law?	1917
What did the Code of Canon Law state in regards to Cardinals?	only those who are already priests or bishops may be appointed cardinals
A cardinal who does not hold the title of "bishop" may not do what?	perform the functions reserved solely to bishops, such as ordination
Cardinals who were not bishops have been promoted to Cardinal around the age of 80 since what year?	1962
In what year did the practice of allowing non priests to become Cardinals stop?	1917
In what year was it declared that Cardinals had to be bishops?	1962
In the time between electing new popes, what is the duty of the cardinal?	collate information about the financial situation of all administrations dependent on the Holy See and present the results to the College of Cardinals
Who announces the election of a new pope?	The cardinal protodeacon
Where does this person announce the election of the new pope?	from the central balcony at the Basilica of Saint Peter in Vatican City State
Who was the first pope who chose not to be crowned?	Pope John Paul I
What color is the hat?	white
How many cardinal deacons were there in 2005?	30
How many years before a cardinal deacon can choose the order of the cardinal priests?	10 years
In 1939, how many Cardinals were Italian?	about half
In 1994, how many Cardinals were Italian?	third
What is the name of one of the deaconries in which Cardinals come from?	seven deacons in the Papal Household
Which cardinals are ranked lowest?	cardinal deacons
Who can become the cardinal protopriest?	The cardinal who is the longest-serving member of the order of cardinal priests
Who is the cardinal protopriest at this time?	Paulo Evaristo Arns of Brazil
In the College of Cardinals, the elected Dean needs the approval of who?	the Pope
Patriarch cardinals are not given what title?	a suburbicarian see
Who are the lowest ranking cardinals in the Catholic church?	cardinal deacons
Who are the highest ranking cardinals in the Catholic Church?	cardinal bishops
Which rank has the most cardinals?	Cardinal priests
What was the original definition of a cardinal priest?	priests chosen by the pope
Each cardinal priest has what?	a titular church in Rome
In what year did Pope Sixtus V put a cap on the number of cardinals in the College of Cardinals?	1587
What was the maximum number allowed per Pope Sixtus V?	70
Who removed the cap on cardinals in the College of the Cardinals?	Pope John XXIII
What is another term meaning Iranian languages?	Iranic languages
What are the Iranic languages a subgroup of?	Indo-Iranian languages
What are Indo-Iranian languages a subset of?	Indo-European language family
When did the change from Old Iranian to Middle Iranian occur?	400 BCE
What is an example of a Sassanid language?	Middle Persian
How many different Iranian languages exist?	86
Iranian languages are all said to be derived from which predecessor?	Proto-Iranian
From what languages does the word Aryao come?	Persian and Sanskrit
When was the phrase Iranian language family first used?	1836
Who first used the term Iranian language?	Christian Lassen
Who first used the term Irano-Aryan?	Robert Needham Cust
When was the phrase Irano-Aryan first used?	1878
From where did Iranian languages originate?	Proto-Iranian
What part of the world is it theorized that Indo-Iranian languages came from?	Central Asia
What society is a strong contender for the common culture speaking Indo-Iranian?	Andronovo
When did the Andronovo culture exist?	2000 BC
What language family did Thracian and Balto-Slavic belong to?	Indo-European
Where did early Iranian people establish societies?	southeastern Europe, the Iranian plateau, and Central Asia
What characteristic of Middle Iranian civilization is shown by the number of different languages and their speakers?	linguistic diversity
How many of the Middlie Iranian tongues have remained in existence since ancient time?	two
In which historical record does Old Persian appear in exemplary form?	the Behistun inscription
When was the Behistun inscription written?	520 BC
During what century was the change from Old to Middle Persian well underway?	4th century BC
What ancient religious document exists in two versions and includes Old Iranian language?	Avestan
What is the contemporary name of the religion which Avesta was part of?	Zoroastrianism
What language shows a level of maturity corresponding to Old Avestan?	Rigvedic Sanskrit
What language shows the same level of development as Younger Avestan?	Old Persian
What language is Carduchi thought to have become?	Kurdish
What language did Herodotus invent a name for?	Scythian
What are the two main divisions of Iranian tongues?	western and eastern
Which language is associated with the western branch of Iranian?	Old Persian
Which language is associated with the eastern branch of Iranian?	Avestan
What elements of Proto-Indo-Iranian did not diverge according to the ensuing split between eastern and western variants?	*ć and *dź
What type of letters are *ć and *dź?	first-series palatal consonants
What languages share a similar situation?	Nuristani languages
What other elements of early Iranian languages problematize the east-west division?	*ćw and *dźw
What is the linguistic categorization of *ćw and *dźw?	consonant clusters
What may have also been in use at the time?	other distinct dialect groups
Precursors of what subset of Scythian are theorized to have existed?	Alanian/Scytho-Sarmatian
What possible predecessor of Pathian is thought to have existed?	Old Parthian
When did the age of Middle Iranian come to a close?	9th century
What are the two main divisions of Middle Iranian?	Western and Eastern
Bactrian, Sogdian, and Saka are examples of what type of Iranian language?	Eastern
Which language bears a resemblance to the diversity of eastern Iranian languages?	Avestan
Where did the the alphabets used by eastern languages come from?	Aramaic
What did the Bactrian language use for writing?	Greek script
What is another term for Middle Persian?	Pahlavi
When did Middle Persian start being u sed?	3rd century CE
What are three languages employed by the Manichaeans?	Middle Persian, Parthian and Sogdian
What was the writing of Manichaean documents similar to?	Syriac script
The proliferation of which religion had a profound effect on the development of Iranian languages?	Islam
What language displaced Middle Iranian as the court's official tongue?	Dari
What was the first dynasty to use Dari?	Saffarid
When did the Saffarid dynasty begin using Dari?	875 CE
What area was the name Dari connected to by medieval Iranian thinkers?	Khorasan
What was the new form of writing introduced by the spread of Islam?	Arabic script
When did usage of Middle Persian script fall off?	second half of the 8th century
What script was converted to Latin in the 1920s?	Tajik script
When was Tajik script converted to Cyrillic?	the 1930s
Who catalyzed the conversion of Tajik script into Cyrillic?	the Soviet government
What is another term for Western Iran?	Khuzestan
What are two languages that were forced out by the spread of Arabic?	Sogdian and Bactrian
By what century had the area inhabited by Sarmatians been absorbed by pre-Slavic people?	6th century AD
Where can the remnants of Yaghnobi be found?	Zarafshan valley
Ossetic is a version of which Scythian language?	Saka
What is used a main source of light for a building during the day?	Daylighting
What kind of effects can natural illumination have on a persons psychological?	positive
Using natural illumination instead of artificial light sources help with what?	energy consumption
Lamps and light fixtures are a form of what?	artificial light sources
The use of light to achieve an aesthetic effect is know as?	Lighting or illumination
What can be used a main source of light for a building during the day?	Daylighting
Lamps and light fixtures  are a form of what?	Lighting
What kind of effects can proper lighting have on a persons psychologically?	positive
What does using natural illumination instead of artificial lighting help with?	energy consumption
What is the used to achieve a practical effect?	Lighting or illumination
What type of fixtures do you use for indoor lighting?	light fixtures
What is considered a key part of interior design?	Indoor lighting
What can be a intrinsic component of landscaping?	lighting
What type of fixtures are used typically used for indoor lighting?	light fixtures
What can be used as a intrinsic component of landscape projects?	lighting
When was fluorescent lighting first available?	1939
What type of lighting can be mounted in the ceiling to appear flush?	Recessed lighting
Peking man kindled fire as early as?	400,000 BCE
Which type of oily animals where also used as lamps after being threaded with wick?	birds and fish
What is considered the earliest form of artificial lighting?	campfires or torches
The hollow worked stones lamps found in Lascaux caves date back how far?	15,000 years
What type of lighting was powered by electricity?	incandescent light
When did gas powered street lights became economically available.	early 1800s
Street lights help reduce?	urban crime.
What can come in a wide variety of styles for various functions?	Lighting fixtures
Functioning as holder a light fixture can provide directed light and avoid?	visual glare
Luminous efficacy is measure in what unit?	lumen per watt
How many Kelvins is daylight measured at?	6400
What has a color temperature around 2800 to 3000 Kelvin?	incandescent bulb
It can be said that lights with a high color temperature have more energy in what color spectrum?	blue-white
A lamp with more energy in the yellow and red spectrum are known to be?	Lower color temperature
A light is classified by intended purpose, what mainly changes its classification?	light produced by the fixture.
Who invented track lighting?	Lightolier
What feeds all the fixtures in low voltage tracks instead of each light having a line-to-low voltage transformer.	master transformer
What  type of lighting uses lights that are hung or clipped to bare metal cables?	cable lighting
How many volts does a track lighting system usually use?	12 or 24 volts
What is a uplight used for ambient lighting?	torchiere
What is one type of fixture commonly found in offices?	table lamp
Magnifier lamps are considered what type of lighting?	task lighting
When would neon lighting be considered general lighting?	dark nightclub
What uses diffuser panels below fluorescent lights?	illuminated ceiling
Normally neon lighting is considered what type of lighting?	accent lighting
What do steps in move theater aisles have for safety markings?	small lights
What are the low wattage lamps being replaced with in movie theaters?	LED based versions
What kind of tube are the movie theaters lights enclosed in?	translucent tube
What is used to light walkways at night?	Street Lights
What kind of lights are being designed for energy efficiency?	photovoltaic luminaires
What kind of light is used to illuminate outdoor playing fields at night?	Floodlights
Extremely bright lights used to deter crime are called?	security lighting
What type of light would be used illuminate the entrance to a property?	Entry lights
What color are tail lights?	red
What color are headlamps on a vehicle?	white or selective yellow
When did automakers start using electroluminescent technology to backlight gauges?	late 1950s
What color are reversing indicator lamps?	White
What indicates that a driver is intending to change position?	turn signals
What is the removable and replaceable part of a light fixture?	light bulbs
What does a light bulb convert into electromagnetic radiation?	electrical energy
Huge much light does a 13 W compact fluorescent lamp produce equivalent to a incandescent light bulb.	60 w
How many lemuns does a 15 watt fluorescent lamp produce?	800 lumens
What is designing as it applies to built environments?	architectural lighting design
Would you consider aesthetic elements alone in architectural lighting design?	kno
What is the name of the software sometimes used to help calculate lighting needs in a built environment?	Radiance
Hand-calculations are based off of what type of data?	tabular
What type of factor calculation can be used to find out how much daylight is received in a internal space.	Daylight factor calculation.
What type of paint tends to absorb light?	dark paint
What kind of paint makes a room a room look larger and brighter?	light paint
What type of study is used to simulate lighting designs?	Photometric studies
What is prepared prior to the performance for the lighting operator?	lighting cues
Motion pictures employee the similar lighting techniques as which other form of lighting?	stage lighting
What is the basic SI unit of measurement?	candela (cd)
What is the SI unit for lumiance?	cd/m2
What is the CGS unit of lumiance?	stilb
What is the amount of useful light emitted from a luminous flux measured in?	lumen (lm)
What is a standardized model of human visual brightness?	luminosity function
What is the SI unit of illuminace and luminous emittance?	Lux
What does UGR stand for?	Unified Glare Rating
What does CCT stand for?	correlated color temperature
What does CRI stand for?	color rendering index
What metric indicates a lights ability to make object appear natural?	CRI
What metric indicates "warmth" or "coolness"?	CCT
What does GAI stand for?	gamut area index
The relative separating of object colors illuminated by a light source is known as?	GAI
Would a lower GAI mean higher apparent saturation or vividness of object colors?	ano
What is typically used to measure light?	light dosimeters
What measures the amount of light entering the eye?	Daysimeter
A Daysimeter what type of personal meter?	circadian light meter
How many days can the Daysimeter gather for analysis?	30
What type of light stimulates the circadian system?	short-wavelength light
What is a basic concept of deciding how much illumination is required for a given task?	Specification of illumination requirements
What can help reduce energy and usage cost by providing light only when or where it is needed?	Lighting control
What type of standard do newer control systems use?	wireless mesh open standards
What is the name of one type of control system used?	ZigBee
Does a wireless mesh open standard make installation harder?	no
What sensor controls light with motion sensors?	Occupancy sensors
What does a passive infrared sensor react to?	changes in heat
What type of sensor transmits sound above the range of human hearing?	Ultrasonic sensors
Would you want to use passive infrared sensor in a area requiring 360-degree coverage?	no
What is the oldest method of interior lighting?	Daylighting
Daylighting has been proven to have negative effects on people?	not
What is a form of solid state lighting?	LEDs
What is the best way to control light emissions of LEDs?	nonimaging optics
What can cause health effects such headache frequency?	higher lighting levels
Maximizing the right amount of light at the appropriate time for elderly may help systems of what?	Alzheimer's Disease
The human circadian system is entrained to how many hours light-dark pattern?	24
What happens to the natural carcidan cycle when light-dark patterns are disrupted?	disrupt the natural circadian cycle
Who documented 23 surgical patients assigned rooms looking out on a natural scene?	Robert Ulrich
Did the patients with natural scenes have longer postoperative hospital stays?	no
Did patients that have natural scenes require more potent analgesics?	no
What University was Alision Jing Xu the assistant professor of management at?	University of Toronto Scarborough
What Univerity was Aparna Labroo associated with?	Northwestern University
What devised a method where kerosene could be distilled from petroleum?	Dr. Abraham Gesner
What year was it discovered that petroleum could be distilled into kerosene?	1849
What method of lighting have been used since 1820s?	coal-gas methods
What does CFL stand for?	Compact fluorescent lamps
Are all CFLs suitable for dimming?	not
How much more power does a standard incandescent bulb use compared to LED?	10%
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?	50,000
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?	50,000 hours
How much power does a halogen lamp save compared to a standard blub?	70%
What is known as artificial light that is excessive or intrusive?	Light pollution
What causes sharp shadows around buildings?	glare
In a battlefield does not have natural light what could you use instead?	searchlights and flares
The use of what may disclose your own hidden position on a battlefield?	light
Modern warfare has seen the increased use of what?	infrared cameras
What can be used by military for targeting?	Flares
What has eliminated the need for flares on a battlefield?	laser-guided and GPS weapons
What does the CIE stand for?	International Commission on Illumination
What does the IESNA stand for?	The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
Who else publishes along with IESNA?	ANSI and ASHRAE
What defines photo metric data?	distribution of light released
What does IALD stand for?	The International Association of Lighting Designers
What does PLDA stand for?	The Professional Lighting Designers Association
What was the PLDA formerly known as?	ELDA
Who offers the Lighting Certification Examination?	NCQLP
What does NCQLP stand for?	The National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Professions
Which abbreviation can you append to your name after becoming Lighting Certified?	LC
What other national examinations are available?	CLEP and CLMC
What does PLASA stand for?	The Professional Lighting And Sound Association
Where is PLASA based?	UK
How many individuals does PLASA represent?	500+
What does RoHS stand for?	Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive
Which political practice did Montesquieu originate?	Separation of powers
How many divisions of the government did Montesquieu call for?	three
What document was greatly informed by the idea of separation of powers?	United States Constitution
What kind of oversight does the separation of powers help to promote?	checks and balances
What was the doctrine called that allowed the three branches of government to check the powers of each other?	separation of powers
Which Enlightenment thinker supported the idea of separation of powers?	John Locke
Which Enlightenment thinker was against the separation of powers?	Thomas Hobbes
Who was a leading advocate of dividing government into different branches?	Montesquieu
Whose thoughts were impacted by Montesquieu's philosophy?	the framers of the United States Constitution
Who was an advocate of separation of powers?	John Locke
Who was an opponent of separation of powers?	Thomas Hobbes
Who's writing were very influential on the design of the United States Constitution?	Montesquieu
What country's government, on which the US government was modeled, did not formally implement separation of powers?	UK
What were the two main principles informing the government of the UK?	parliamentary sovereignty and responsible government
What term describes the status of the different branches of government in Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina and Georgia?	separate and distinct
What country's government served as a model for the United States Government?	United Kingdom
In the 18th century what function, besides President, did the Delaware President serve?	a member of the Court of Appeals
What is the only branch of U.S. government imbued with lawmaking abilities?	Congress
Which court case upheld the rule of nondelegation?	Clinton v. City of New York
When was Clinton v. City of New York decided by the Supreme Court?	1998
In the US who has the sole power to pass legislation?	Congress
What is the doctrine called that does not allow congress to pass on their power to pass laws to any other agency?	nondelegation doctrine
What was the court case that struck down the line item veto?	Clinton v. City of New York
What year was Clinton v. City of New York decided by the supreme court?	1998
What was one of the first times the Supreme Court tried a case regarding nondelegation?	Wayman v. Southard
In what year was Wayman v. Southard tried by the U.S. Supreme Court?	1825
Who was Chief Justice of the Supreme Court when Wayman v. Southard reached the Supreme Court?	John Marshall
In Wayman v. Southard, what branch was accused of being given lawmaking abilities by Congress?	the judiciary
What is the name of the 1825 case where the supreme court held that congress could delegate their responsibilities to the court?	Wayman v. Southard
Who was chief justice of the supreme court under the Wayman v. Southard ruling?	John Marshall
When was the first time that a Congressional attempt at delegating lawmaking responsibility was found to be in violation of the Constitution?	the 1930s
The establishment of what body was the subject of A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States?	National Recovery Administration
In what year was A.L.A. Schechter v. United States tried before the Supreme Court?	1935
In what year did the supreme court determine that delegating powers by congress was unconstitutional?	1935
What was the supreme court case that was determined that congress could not allow the President to determine fair competition?	Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States
Which branches of the national military does the U.S. president command?	Army and Navy
Whose approval is required for the president's appointees to take office?	Senate
What is a Congressional means of removing presidential appointees?	impeachment
What term can characterize the status of bodies like the War Claims Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission?	quasi-judicial
Which of the three branches has the duty of Commander and Chief?	Executive
Who has the authority to make treaties?	the President
What is it called when congress terminates an appointment of the President?	impeachment
Who has over-sight of the Federal Trade Commission?	Congress
To what does congress attempt to limit executive officials?	the performance of their duties
What court case affirmed the mandates of the first and seventh sections of Article I of the Constitution?	INS v. Chadha
When was INS v Chadha tried before the Supreme Court?	1983
By what margin can congress over ride a Presidential veto?	two-thirds
In what branch is the ability to try legal cases placed?	Judicial
Who nominates justices for the U.S. Supreme Court?	president
Who must approve presidential appointees to the Supreme Court?	Senate
What is the term for judicial institutions exercising their power?	constitutional courts
What is the power given to the supreme court and lower courts called?	Judicial power
Who appoints a judge?	the president
Who gives the President advice and consent for a judge appointment?	the Senate
What kind of courts did congress establish?	legislative courts
What power are legislative courts not allowed to exercise?	judicial power of the United States
Who can determine a date of adjournment if congress cannot agree?	President
Who can call congress into emergency session?	The president
Who serves as president of the Senate?	The Vice President
Who has the power to issue a pardon?	The president
Who has the power to issue a reprieve?	The president
Who is the commander and chief of the Army?	The president
Who has the power to declare ware?	Congress
Who has the responsibility to confirm Generals and Admirals?	the Senate
Who is responsible for judicial review?	Courts
What is the court case that established judicial review?	Marbury v. Madison
Which courts decisions are binding across the entire United States?	the Supreme Court
Who can limit judicial review of a law?	Congress
Who's judicial power does congress have the right to limit?	the Supreme Court
Who presides over an impeachment trial?	The Chief Justice
Who wrote that the legislative branch was the predominate branch of government?	James Madison
In which Federalist paper did James Madison state that the legislative branch of government was predominate?	Federalist 51
Immediately following the civil war which branch of government was seen to have the greater amount of power?	Congress
How many bills did George Washington veto?	two
How many bills did James Monroe veto?	one
How many bills did Andrew Jackson veto	twelve
Who was the seventh President of the United States?	Andrew Jackson
How many of Andrew Johnson's veto's were over turned by Congress	fifteen
What act did congress pass that gave the senate the right to approve the dismissal of a cabinet official?	Tenure of Office Act
Who was the first president to veto over 400 bills?	Grover Cleveland
Under which President was the Tenure of Office Act repealed?	Grover Cleveland
Which President attempted to pack the supreme court?	Franklin Roosevelt
Who had granted Franklin Roosevelt sweeping authority during the great depression?	Congress
Under what basis did Richard Nixon assert an expansion of the power of the President?	national security
What term is used when one branch of government must get approval from at least one other branch of government?	checks and balances
Who has congress delegated the responsibility of establishing the rules of conduct for the courts to?	the Supreme Court
Who may license and regulate attorneys in Florida?	the Florida Supreme Court
Who sets the procedures to be followed in the Florida court system?	the Florida Supreme Court
What is the latin word for architecture?	Architectural
What is the Latin word for architecture?	architectura
What do you call the planning and building of buildings?	Architecture
What structures can be viewed as both works of art and symbols of certain cultures?	Architectural works
Civilizations from the past cane often be identified by what surviving structures?	architectural achievements
In what language does the word "architecture" have its origins?	Greek
What two words is "architecture" a combination of?	ἀρχι- "chief" and τέκτων "builder"
Architecture involves the creation of what?	buildings and other physical structures
Aside from symbolizing cultures, what else are architectural works thought of as?	as works of art
What can extant architectural works be used to identify?	Historical civilizations
What is the oldest architecture plans that has survived?	De architectura
Who created the oldest surviving architecture plans?	Roman architect Vitruvius
When did Vitruvius create these plans?	1st century AD.
What are the three principles every plan should consider?	firmness, commodity and delight.
What is the first known extant writing about architecture called?	De architectura
Who was the author of  De architectura?	Vitruvius
What was Vitruvius' profession?	architect
What were Vitruvius' three principles for a well made building?	firmitas, utilitas, venustas
What is the commonly seen English translation of the three principles?	firmness, commodity and delight
When were the styles of arts created?	16th century
Who wrote Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects?	Vasari
By the 18th century which languages was Vasaris book translated in?	Italian, French, Spanish and English
In Vitruvius's mind, whose responsibility was it to see the principles carried out?	architect
Who wrote De Re Aedificatoria?	Leon Battista Alberti
What did Leon Battista Alberti consider most important for beauty?	proportion
What ideal proportion did Alberti promote?	the Golden mean
In what century did "style" as an artistic concept arise?	16th
Who wrote the book Contrasts?	Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin
What year was Contrasts written in?	1836
What was the name of Pugin's book?	Contrasts
In what year was Contrasts written?	1836
What world did Pugin dislike?	modern, industrial world
What type of architecture did Pugin consider truly Christian?	Gothic
Who wrote Seven Lamps of Architecture?	John Ruskin
Who was the author of Seven Lamps of Architecture?	John Ruskin
What was Ruskin's career?	art critic
When was  Seven Lamps of Architecture published?	1849
What, according to Ruskin, should looking at architecture contribute to its viewer?	to his mental health, power, and pleasure
Does Ruskin believe all buildings are works of architecture?	not
What was most significant in architecture according to Ruskin?	the aesthetic
To be true architecture in Ruskin's opinion what should be done to a structure?	it is in some way "adorned"
What features at minimum did Ruskin insist on for a building to be considered functional?	string courses or rustication
What century was the architect Le Corbusier in?	20th-century
Who wrote on the topic of architectural ideals contrasted with simple construction?	Le Corbusier
What was Le Corbusier 's profession?	Architect
When did Le Corbusier live and write?	20th-century
What part of him did Le Corbusier say proper architecture touched?	heart
What state of emotion did Le Corbusier say architecture put him in?	I am happy
What term replaced Vitruvius' term "utility"?	Function
In addition to being practically useful what other aspects did a building need in order to be considered functional?	aesthetic, psychological and cultural
Whose concept of utility did the more modern concept of function replace?	Vitruvius
What aspects of a building were considered part of the larger concept of function?	all criteria of the use, perception and enjoyment of a building
What were the reactions to the idea that function should come before other concerns?	both popularity and skepticism
What are some philosophies that modern architects use?	rationalism, empiricism, structuralism, poststructuralism, and phenomenology.
Rationalism and empiricism are examples of what?	philosophies
Aside from the architects what did the philosophies influence?	their approach to building design
Which philosophy followed structuralism?	poststructuralism
When was the conecept, Sustainable architecture used?	late 20th century
What novel concept was introduced at the end of the 20th century?	sustainability
To what should a building be friendly?	environment
What sort of power sources should a building not overuse if the building is to be considered environmentally friendly?	non-sustainable power sources
What dynamic needs were the reason for building to be done?	shelter, security, worship
Oral traditions allowed what to become formalized in human cultures?	knowledge
What was building considered?	a craft
What was the most valued type of building craft called?	architecture
Aside from skills, what is required in order to have the means for building?	building materials
What type of buildings are are built mostly through out the world?	vernacular buildings
Why did the economy begin to expand?	a surplus in production
Through what process is it thought that the first architectural achievements were made?	trial and error
What is a popular type of architecture that still exists around the planet?	vernacular
In what environment were many of the first human settlements?	rural
What sort of an effect did a growing economy have on human settlements?	urbanization
At what speed did urban settlements sometimes expand?	rapidly
What civilizations used the divine and supernatural in their architecture?	Egypt and Mesopotamia
What are two examples of past civilizations?	Egypt and Mesopotamia
To what did these civilizations have ties that to were shown off by their architecture?	the divine and the supernatural
What does architectural monumentality often represent?	political power
Name one Asian architectural writer.	Kao Gong Ji
What country produced the Kao Gong Ji?	China
When was the Kao Gong Ji written?	7th–5th centuries BCE
What architectural writing came from Sri Lanka?	Manjusri Vasthu Vidya Sastra
India produced which early architectural text?	Shilpa Shastras
What religion led to architectural changes in many Asian countries?	pantheistic religion
Which cultures architecture showed a lot of diversity?	Buddhist architecture
When did Hindu temple architecture begin being produced?	3rd century BCE
What does Hindu temple architecture try to express?	the macrocosm and the microcosm
What is the source of the concepts in Hindu temple architecture?	the Shastras
What type of architectural is especially known for its regional differences	Buddhist
What kind of religious theology affected landscape related architecture in Asia?	pantheistic religion
What cultures architecture inspired Islamic architecture to use pointed arch's?	European architecture
When was Islamic architecture first seen?	7th century CE
In addition to forms from the ancient Middle East, what other place's forms had an effect on Islamic architecture?	Byzantium
What other parts of the society's needs did architecture fill?	religious and social needs
What kind of arch design from Islamic architecture affected European architects?	pointed arch
What type of buildings were took the most effort to build?	abbeys and cathedrals.
What were the most important buildings of the time?	abbeys and cathedrals
What two groups spread knowledge of architecture in Europe?	clerics and tradesmen
What style is Gothic?	pan-European
What is another pan-European style?	Romanesque
When did the clerics and tradesmen start spreading architectural information?	900 CE onwards
When was Renaissance Humanism developed?	1400
When did the Classical learning revival begin?	1400 onwards
What continent did this revival take place on?	Europe
What was the name for the time period?	Renaissance
What did Renaissance Humanism emphasize?	role of the individual
What three vocations were not really considered separate from each other at that time?	artist, architect and engineer
What sort of considerations does architectural design take into account?	functional, technical, social, environmental and aesthetic
In architecture what aspects are planned and designed?	form, space and ambience
Aside from planning and design what other types of aspects does architecture involve?	pragmatic aspects
Who said that architecture was able extend beyond function?	Nunzia Rondanini
In what way did Nunzia Rondanini believe architecture moved past mere functionality?	Through its aesthetic dimension
What could, in Rondanini's opinion, architecture "stimulate and influence"?	social life
What shouldn't architecture be assumed to promote, according to Rondanini?	social development
What does architecture share with other sciences?	functional aspects
What is a reactionary thing to limit formalism's meaning to?	art for art's sake
What sort of quest lacks purpose?	quest for perfection or originality
What ends up being reduced in quality by this quest?	form
From what ideals did Classical architecture emerge?	civic ideals
These civic ideas allowed what to come into being?	new building types
What ideals were Greek and Roman Classical architecture not based on?	religious or empirical ones
What owes its development to the Classical orders?	Architectural "style"
When were architectural writings first made?	ancient time
Aside from general advice what did the texts contain?	specific formal prescriptions
What is another term for specific formal prescriptions?	canons
When did Vitruvius write his canons?	1st-century BCE
What is a significant early architectural canonical type?	religious
What organizations were created by Medieval craftsmen?	guilds
What records of the guilds are still in existence?	written contracts
What was the main thing the contracts were had to do with?	ecclesiastical buildings
What is another term for master mason?	Magister lathomorum
What aspects of buildings did science and engineering have an effect on?	proportions and structure
Who still could handle the structural calculations for designing at that time?	generalist
What two fields began to grow apart?	architecture and engineering
What did architects often neglect in their pursuit of aesthetics?	technical aspects of building design
What was a term for an architect who catered to the wealthy?	"gentleman architect"
What did 19th century formal architectural training neglect?	context and feasibility
Where did most architects learn their trade?	in the offices of other architects
What started with the Industrial Revolution?	mass production and consumption
What became cheap enough for the middle class to buy?	ornamented products
As products came within their financial reach what concept began to interest the middle class?	Aesthetics
What kind of books did housebuilders use?	pattern books and architectural journals
What type of design did these texts allow the builders to incorporate?	current architectural design
At what century's start did revivalist fall into disfavor?	20th
What new type of architecture was starting to come into being at this time?	Modern Architecture
When did the Deutscher Werkbund get its start?	1907
What was the point of the Deutscher Werkbund?	to produce better quality machine made objects
In 1919 what school opened in Weimar, Germany?	the Bauhaus school
What kind of movement was modern architecture in the beginning?	avant-garde movement
Who was the new movement meant to suit the needs of?	the middle and working classes
Whose needs were no longer relevant to the new style?	the rapidly declining aristocratic order
What sort of details did the Modernists' want in their buildings?	functionalist
What details did Modernists' do away with?	historical references and ornament
Who was instrumental in creating Organic architecture?	Frank Lloyd Wright
What are two of Wright's designs?	Robie House and Fallingwater
What was Wright's intention regarding humans and nature?	to promote harmony
What made it possible to design architecture through new means and methods?	the Industrial Revolution
What new type of construction allowed the making of skyscrapers?	steel-frame construction
What style came after Modernism?	International Style
What is an example of International Style?	Twin Towers
Who designed the Twin Towers?	Minoru Yamasaki
What aspect of historical styles did a lot of architects find lacking in modernist styles?	decorative richness
Who were three architects who influenced Brutalism?	Paul Rudolph, Marcel Breuer, and Eero Saarinen
What material was used in Brutalist structures?	unfinished concrete
Who disagreed with the aesthetic of Brutalism?	postwar generation
What school was a response to Brutalism?	the school of metaphoric architecture
What are two examples of metaphoric architecture?	biomorphism and zoomorphic architecture
What are biomorphism and zoomorphic architecture based after design wise?	nature
What type of architecture do some consider metaphoric architecture to be a development of?	expressionist architecture
When was the start of the  architectural phenomenology movement?	the late 1950s and 1960s
What was  architectural phenomenology reacting to?	modernism
What were the architectural phenomenologists hoping to expand?	human experience
Who called postmodern architecture a "decorated shed"?	Robert Venturi
What term did Venturi use for brutalist and mondernist buildings?	"ducks"
About when did architecture begin specializing?	Since the 1980s
Who can no longer design a large structure?	one person
What two architectural movements have come under criticism for their focus on individuality?	Modernism and Postmodernism
What issue has moved to the forefront in recent years?	Environmental sustainability
What do architecture schools look at more and more nowadays?	the environment
Who was the first to design architecture environmentally?	Frank Lloyd Wright
Who was known for focusing on the environment in the 1960s?	Buckminster Fuller
What organization's rating system promotes sustainability?	The U.S. Green Building Council
What are three new movements that have a focus on sustainability?	New Urbanism, Metaphoric architecture and New Classical Architecture
What kinds of buildings and building developments are the new movements not in favor of?	solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl.
What are three things the new movements try to achieve?	smart growth, architectural tradition and classical design
What older architectural movements do the newer movements not go along with?	modernist and globally uniform architecture
Which three statistics does the HDI compile?	life expectancy, education, and income per capita
Does a high ranking on the HDI indicate shorter or longer life expectancy?	longer
Who developed the HDI?	Mahbub ul Haq
What entity publishes the HDI?	United Nations Development Programme
Does a high ranking on the HDI indicate shorter or longer life expectancy at birth?	longer
In what year did the Human Development Report introduce the IHDI?	2010
What does IHDI stand for?	Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index
Which measures the potential development, the HDI or the IHDI?	the IHDI
Which measures the potential development, the HDI or the IHDI?	the HDI
In what year did Mahbub ul Haq devise and launch the HDI?	1990
Who was initially opposed to the idea of creating the HDI?	Amartya Sen
Mahbub ul Haq was hoping to shift the focus of development economics to what type of policies?	people-centered policies
Which year was used for estimates in the 2011 report?	1990
What does LE stand for?	Life expectancy at birth
What does MYS stand for?	Mean years of schooling
What does EYS stand for?	Expected years of schooling
What does GNIpc stand for?	Gross national income at purchasing power parity per capita
What entity makes the defining formula for the HDI well-known?	the United Nations Development Programme
On what date was the 2015 Human Development Report released?	December 14, 2015
Which year was used for estimates in the 2015 report?	2014
On what date was the 2014 Human Development Report released?	July 24, 2014
Which year was used for estimates in the 2014 report?	2013
What does the IHDI specifically take into account?	Inequality
Does the IHDI measure the "average" or the "potential" level of human development?	the average level
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Cuba
Is the top quartile of HDI considered "high" or "very high" human development?	very high
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2014 report?	lack of necessary data
Which East Asian dictatorship was excluded from the 2014 report?	North Korea
On what date was the 2013 Human Development Report released?	March 14, 2013
Which year was used for estimates in the 2013 report?	2012
Does the IHDI measure the "average" or the "potential" level of human development?	the average level
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Barbados
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Barbados
Which year was used for estimates in the 2011 report?	2011
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Barbados
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Barbados
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2011 report?	unavailability of certain crucial data
Which East Asian dictatorship was excluded from the 2011 report?	North Korea
On what date was the 2010 Human Development Report released?	November 4, 2010
Which year was used for estimates in the 2010 report?	2010
In the IHDI, inequality is factored into what three human development dimensions?	income, life expectancy, and education
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?	Barbados
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2010 report?	unavailability of certain crucial data
Which Caribbean nation protested its exclusion from the 2010 report?	Cuba
What ranking has Cuba been given since the situation with the missing data was addressed?	High Human Development country
On what date was the 2009 Human Development Report released?	October 5, 2009
What period is covered by the 2009 Human Development Report?	period up to 2007
What was another title for the 2009 Human Development Report?	Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
What new category was added in the 2009 Human Development Report?	very high human development
How does the 2009 Human Development Report refer to countries that rank "very high"?	developed countries
What three reasons were mentioned for countries being excluded?	being a non-UN member or unable or unwilling to provide the necessary data at the time of publication
What type of update was released on December 18, 2008?	statistical update
What was the index published on December 18, 2008 lacking?	an accompanying Human Development Report
What period was covered by the statistical update index released in December of 2008?	up to 2006
On what date was the 2007/2008 Human Development Report released?	November 27, 2007
What was the focus of the 2007/2008 Human Development Report?	Fighting climate change: Human solidarity in a divided world
What is the most recent year that was included in the 2007/2008 Human Development Report?	2005
The HDI in the 2007/2008 Human Development Report is for what year?	2005
Where was the 2007/2008 Human Development Report launched?	Brasília, Brazil
Which countries experienced a decrease in HDI?	high income countries
Under what number does a country need to fall in order to be considered a "low development" country?	0.5
On which continent are all 22 of the low development countries located?	Africa
What is Gabon's ranking?	119th
What is South Africa's ranking?	121st
What are the two highest ranking Sub-Saharan countries?	Gabon and South Africa
What number indicates the minimum score for a country to be considered a "high development" country?	0.8
Which South American country was included among the seven promoted countries?	Brazil
What is the largest country that was included among the seven promoted countries?	Russia
If there is a decrease in a country's ranking, which indicator will be present?	red arrows
If there is an increase in a country's ranking, which indicator will be present?	green arrows
If a country's ranking does not change, which indicator will be present?	Blue dash
Which country has been ranked highest the most number of times?	Norway
Which country has received the top rank twice?	Iceland
The HDI has been criticized for focusing exclusively on what?	national performance and ranking
Has the HDI been criticized for being biased towards Western or towards Eastern models of development?	Western
The HDI has been criticized for lack of what type of perspective on development?	global
Critics of the HDI cite its focus on which: egalitarianism or authoritarianism?	egalitarianism
How many economists were cited as pointing out data errors in the HDI?	three
In what year did the UNDP respond to the criticism of its report?	2010
Which magazine publication carried a statement from the Human Development Report Office in January, 2011?	The Economist
How many countries were included in the 2009 HDI?	182
How many countries were included in the 2010 HDI?	169
What is another term for southern Europe	Mediterranean Europe
What is the name for the stretch of land on which Spain and Portugal are located?	Iberian peninsula
What nations are sometimes included in the scope of southern Europe?	Balkan countries
What area of France is considered a part of Mediterranean Europe?	southern France
What are three characteristics that can be employed to characterize southern Europe?	political, economic, and cultural attributes
What are three aspects of the environment of southern Europe that can be used to distinguish the region?	geography, climate, and flora
What kind of climate is exemplary of southern Europe?	The Mediterranean climate
Which parts of Turkey are characterized by a Mediterranean climate?	Western and Southern coastal regions
What are two broad categories of similarity among countries which have a Mediterranean climate?	vegetations and landscapes
Where do colder areas occur within southern Europe?	mountain ranges of Spain and Italy
Where are more moist areas found in southern Europe?	north coast of Spain
What term can be used to describe the wet area of North Spain?	Atlantic climate
What is a word that can be used to describe the plant life of southern Europe?	phytochoria
Who coined the term phytochoria?	Armen Takhtajan
What era started when Ancient Greek cities became self-governing entities?	classical antiquity
What was the name of the different governments forming in Ancient Greece?	city-states
Who was responsible for the bringing Greek culture as far as Asia?	Alexander the Great
Where was the headquarters of the Western Roman Empire?	Rome
Where was the headquarters of the Eastern Roman Empire?	Constantinople
Which tribes brought down the Western Roman Empire?	Germanic
What year is considered the transition between the classical period and the Middle Ages?	AD 476
By what year was the Roman Empire split into two sections?	300 AD
What is the Eastern Roman Empire in the Middle Ages called by contemporary scholars?	the Byzantine Empire
Who took over the remains of the Western Roman Empire?	Germanic peoples
What did Germanic people create in place of the Western Roman Empire?	kingdoms and empires of their own
What is the name of the period of armed incursions undertaken in the name of Christianity?	the Crusades
When did Crusaders invade Constantinople?	1204
Which two cities benefited greatly from the activities of Crusaders?	Genoa and Venice
What was the name of another activity like the Crusades occuring on the Iberian peninsula?	The Reconquista
What empire was destroyed by the Sack of Constantinople?	the Byzantine Empire
What era was characterized by turmoil in Europe?	The Late Middle Ages
What disease plagued Europe during the Late Middle Ages?	the Black Death
Which new regime appeared in the Balkan region during the Late Middle Ages?	the Ottoman Empire
When did the Ottoman Empire conquer Constantinople?	1453
When was the start of the period known as the Renaissance?	14th century
In what city did the Renaissance begin?	Florence
What areas of knowledge were subject to much debate during the Renaissance?	science and theology
The encounter with Arabic knowledge put Renaissance thinkers back in touch with the teachings of which ancient civilizations?	Greek and Roman
Which countries initiated the Age of Exploration following the Reconquista?	Portugal and Spain
When did religious conflict end in Europe?	1648
Between which two nations was the Treaty of the Pyrenees signed?	Spain and France
Which scientist developed a means of viewing space?	Galileo Galilei
Who was responsible for creating the first radio?	Guglielmo Marconi
What resulted from Europe's exploration of the New World?	the rise of colonial empires
What institution of mercantilism was established with New World colonies?	the Columbian Exchange
What replaced agriculture as the focus of European economy with the establishment of overseas colonies?	manufacturing
Aside from the activities of colonies, what other event fostered the transition from agriculture to manufacturing?	the Industrial Revolution of Great Britain
When were there many struggles for independence or overthrowing prevailing governments?	between 1815 and 1871
From whom did Balkan states start retaking their independence?	the Ottoman Empire
In what year was Rome conquered?	1870
What phrase is used to describe the period marked by competition for extant lands?	The Age of Empire
In what year did World War I begin?	1914
When did a victor emerge in World War I?	1918
At what event did the major Allied powers assert their conditions at the end of the war?	the Paris Peace Conference
Which group took control in 1933?	The Nazi regime
Who led the Nazis?	Adolf Hitler
Which country did Hitler align Germany with?	Italy
Who was the leader of Italy when World War II started?	Mussolini
What was the military partnership between countries aligned with the Soviet Union called?	the Warsaw Pact
What does EU stand for?	European Union
What was the European Union tasked with managing?	market rules, competition, legal standards and environmentalism
When did communism fall in allies of the Soviet Union?	1989
When did the USSR dissolve?	1991
In what year was Croatia admitted to the European Union?	2013
What is the most common group of languages spoken in Mediterranean Europe?	Romance languages
What are the three main areas of southern Europe where Italian speakers can be found?	Italy, San Marino, and the Vatican
Where can people who speak Catalan be found?	eastern Spain
What language is spoken in northwest Spain?	Galician
How many people in Spain and Gibraltar are Spanish speakers?	over 40 million
What is another term for Greek?	Hellenic
Outside of Greece itself, in what other nation is Greek a major language?	Cyprus
What language is used in Macedonia?	Macedonian
What do people speak in Bulgaria?	Bulgarian
Slovene is a major language in what country?	Slovenia
What is considered a de facto second language in Mediterranean Europe?	English
Besides English, what other language is spoken in Gibraltar?	Spanish
Besides English, what other language is spoken in Malta?	Maltese
What language can be found used in Kosovo and Albania?	Albanian
What type of language is Maltese?	Semitic
Where is Basque Country located?	northern Spain and southwestern France
What is the main faith practiced in southern Europe?	Christianity
When did the Romans make Christianity their official religion?	380 AD
What denomination of Christianity is common in the western part of southern Europe?	Roman Catholic
Which denomination of Christianity is more common in the eastern part of Mediterranean Europe?	Greek Orthodox
What term is used by the UNO to divide groups of nations?	regions
What is the reason for the UNO's division into regions?	statistical convenience
What smaller unit makes up the southern Europe region?	sub-regions
What does TDM stand for?	Tourism Decision Metrics
Which group uses TDM as a metric?	European Travel Commission
What is the acronym for British Broadcasting Corporation?	BBC
Under what auspices does the BBC exist?	Royal charter
When did the BBC start creating its own programming?	1932
On what date did the BBC being its regular TV broadcasts?	2 November 1936
In what country is the BBC headquartered?	United Kingdom
What percentage of viewership across the UK is constituted by the BBC?	30%
As a result of shows that the BBC itself creates, it is one of the biggest what?	television production companies
On what date was the first TV show seen in the UK?	30 September 1929
From where was the first TV show in the UK broadcasted?	Long Acre, London
How many lines made up the picture on Britain's earliest TV broadcasts?	30
When did Baird cease showing its programs on BBC?	June 1932
When were both audio and video first broadcasted at the same time?	30 March 1930
Where was the BBC's first studio located?	Broadcasting House, London
What was the medium that brought the BBC's signal to the transmitter?	telephone line
What term characterizes the type of broadcast made by the BBC prior to late 1935?	electromechanical
Where was the BBC's second studio located?	16 Portland Place, London
When did the BBC first change studios?	February 1934
Where did the BBC continue broadcasting from in October of 1936?	Alexandra Palace
What frequency band was used by the BBC starting in 1936?	VHF
How many lines did the Baird transmission contain?	240
How many lines did the Marconi-EMI transmission contain?	405
On what days did the BBC provide regular broadcasts?	Monday to Saturday
For how long did the BBC alternate different broadcasting systems?	six months
What kind of camera was used to broadcast live shows under the Baird system?	Farnsworth image dissector
When was the Baird system officially abandoned?	13 February 1937
How far from its studio could the BBC's broadcast originally reach?	40 kilometres
In what year were BBC broadcasts seen in the United States?	1938
What company did the U.S. engineers who saw the BBC broadcast work for?	RCA
What did the RCA employees use in order to receive the BBC signal?	a British television set
Where was the BBC's transmitter located in 1930?	Brookmans Park
When did the BBC start broadcasting under the name BBC One?	2 August 1932
What was the title of the first show seen on the BBC?	Opening of the BBC Television Service
Which members of British royalty were seen on the BBC in May of 1937?	King George VI and Queen Elizabeth
When did the BBC cease broadcasts due to World War II?	September 1939
What did the British fear could provide guidance to the German air force?	VHF transmissions
What part of the military did many people working for the BBC end up serving in?	the radar programme
What was the final thing shown on the BBC before it was shut down for the war?	Mickey's Gala Premier
When did most people mistakenly remember the last broadcast as having ended?	before the end of the cartoon
How many TVs were made between 1936 and the start of the war in 1939?	18,999
Who was the first person to speak on BBC when it was turned back on following World War II?	Jasmine Bligh
On what date did BBC return to the air after World War II?	7 June 1946
In the decade following the war, where did a large portion of the BBC move to?	Lime Grove Studios
What character was featured in the cartoon aired the day BBC broadcasting was restored?	Mickey Mouse
What city received BBC signals starting in 1949?	Birmingham
Which facility brought the BBC's transmissions to Birmingham?	Sutton Coldfield transmitting station
What kind of image was broadcasted by the BBC by the mid-'50s?	405-line interlaced image
On what frequency band was the BBC broadcasting in thie 1950s?	VHF
What was the name of the BBC changed to in 1960?	BBC tv
What was the BBC's main competitor?	ITV
What program debuted on November 23, 1963?	Doctor Who
Where did the BBC broadcast from following World War II?	Alexandra Palace
What was the first station launched after the original BBC?	ITV
What was the third network started in the UK?	BBC2
What prevented BBC2 from broadcasting on its scheduled launch date?	massive power failure
Where was the cause of the power outage?	Battersea Power Station
Who served as MC for the first BBC2 broadcast?	Denis Tuohy
What was the first station to show programs in color?	BBC Two
When did the other two major British stations start color programming?	15 November 1969
What types of programs were not shown on BBC Two?	soap opera or standard news programming
Who was the first controller of BBC2?	Sir David Attenborough
What kinds of programs did Attenborough favor?	documentaries
When was the first broadcast of Tom and Jerry on BBC One?	1967
When was the final broadcast of Tom and Jerry?	2000
How many episodes of Tom and Jerry were shown in the evenings?	2
On what channel was Tom and Jerry sometimes shown in the mornings?	CBBC
Which group did David Attenborough join while on sabbatical?	BBC Natural History Unit
When did the BBC Natural History Unit come into existence?	the 1950s
What are some shows that Attenborough created with the BBC Natural History Unit?	Life on Earth, The Private Life of Plants, The Blue Planet, The Life of Mammals, Planet Earth and Frozen Planet
How many different areas does BBC One accommodate with customized broadcasting?	fifteen
Which parts of the UK have more control over their BBC broadcasts?	Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland
Who hosts shows on BBC broadcasts outside of England?	local announcers
What kind of coverage might take precedence over standard BBC programming?	major local events
What is the name of a political show shown on BBC in Northern Ireland?	Give My Head Peace
What is the name of a Scottish soap opera?	River City
What language does BBC Scotland provide programming for?	Gaelic
What is a well-known Gaelic program?	Eòrpa and Dè a-nis?
What is the name of a show from Northern Ireland broadcast all over the United Kingdom?	Patrick Kielty Almost Live
How much of its programming must the BBC obtain from other content producers?	25%
What is a popular American show that was shown on the BBC?	The Simpsons
What is a television show from Australia that was shown on the BBC?	Neighbours
What kind of service was Ceefax?	teletext
When was Ceefax launched?	1974
What is the modern replacement for Ceefax?	BBCi
When did the BBC say it would start using a satellite to transit its signal?	May 2003
What was the name of the satellite from which the BBC's signal was sent?	Astra 2D satellite
Due to delays, when was the actual date of the BBC's move to satellite broadcasts?	14 July
How much money was the move to satellite worth to the station over the following half decade?	£85 million
With the right tools, what area could get free BBC broadcasts from Astra 2D?	Western Europe
What are some entities that have taken issue with the possibility that BBC programming was being viewed for free?	Hollywood studios and sporting organisations
On what service were some shows removed as a result of issues over rights?	Sky Digital
What are two specific broadcasts suspended on Sky Digital?	Scottish Premier League and Scottish Cup football
When was the 50th anniversary of BBC news broadcasts?	5 July 2004
On what form of media was a retrospective of the BBC's news broadcasts released to commemorate its 50th anniversary?	DVD
In what format were the BBC's first new bulletins shown?	Newsreel
What reality series was awarded a BAFTA in 2005?	Little Angels
Who was the leader of BBC Television in 2006?	Jana Bennett
What did BBC Television get absorbed into?	BBC Vision
What caused the move of BBC Television into the BBC VIsion unit?	the onset of new media outlets and technology
When did the BBC start exploring the use of internet streaming?	2008
When was full coverage of the BBC's standard programming launched in online stream format?	November 2008
As of early 2016, what BBC show has been sold outside of the country the most times?	Keeping Up Appearances
How many sales of Keeping Up Appearances have been made to non-British buyers?	nearly 1000
Who announced the status of Keeping Up Appearances as the most exported BBC show?	BBC Worldwide
How often are people required to remit the TV license fee?	annually
How do the BBC's non-domestic channels generate revenue?	advertisements and subscription
When did BBC Vision change back to BBC Television?	2013
Who is the current head of BBC Television?	Danny Cohen
What are the four responsibilities of BBC Television?	commissioning, producing, scheduling and broadcasting
When did BBC Japan begin broadcasting?	December 2004
When did BBC Japan shut down?	April 2006
What was the genre of BBC Japan?	general entertainment
What's Arnold Schwarzenegger's birth date?	July 30, 1947
What's Arnold Schwarzenegger's middle name?	Alois
How many terms did Schwarzenegger serve as California's governor?	two
How old was Schwarzenegger when he started bodybuilding?	15
How many times was Schwarzenegger awarded the Mr. Olympia title?	seven
For which film from 1982 did Schwarzenegger first gain fame?	Conan the Barbarian
How old was Schwarzenegger when he won Mr. Universe?	20
What nickname did Schwarzenegger's co-stars call him by during his acting career?	Arnie
What year marked the end of Schwarzenegger's second term in the governor's office?	2011
What political party did Schwarzenegger belong to?	Republican
What governor did Schwarzenegger replace?	Gray Davis
What date marked the start of Schwarzenegger's second gubernatorial term?	January 5, 2007
What country was Schwarzenegger born in?	Austria
What was Schwarzenegger's mother's maiden name?	Jadrny
What was Schwarzenegger's father's first name?	Gustav
What was Schwarzenegger's dad's job in their town?	chief of police
What was Schwarzenegger's older brother's name?	Meinhard
What appliance did Schwarzenegger's family buy that he called a highlight of his youth?	refrigerator
What sport Schwarzenegger played led to a trip to the gym that sparked his love of weightlifting?	soccer
Who starred in the first movie Schwarzenegger remembers seeing?	John Wayne
What job did Schwarzenegger's father want him to pursue?	police officer
Which of Schwarzenegger's bodybuilding idols died in 2000?	Steve Reeves
What year did Schwarzenegger's brother die?	1971
What is Meinhard's son named?	Patrick
What caused Schwarzenegger's father Gustav's death?	stroke
Who was the first woman Schwarzenegger was serious about?	Barbara Baker
What magazine revealed the details of Schwarzenegger's childhood punishments in 2004?	Fortune
Which bodybuilding title did Schwarzenegger call his "ticket to America"?	Mr. Universe
Which competition did Schwarzenegger go AWOL to participate in?	Junior Mr. Europe
When did Schwarzenegger take an airplane for the first time ever?	1966
In what city was the 1966 NABBA Mr. Universe competition held?	London
Which of the bodybuilders Schwarzenegger idolized as a kid did he meet in 1966?	Reg Park
Which part of his body did Schwarzenegger work to develop with Coach Bennett?	legs
How many total times has Schwarzenegger won the Mr. Universe title?	four
Who owned the gym Schwarzenegger worked in during the late sixties?	Rolf Putziger
How old was Schwarzenegger when he started hoping he'd move to America?	10
How old was Schwarzenegger when he moved to the U.S.?	21
In what state did Schwarzenegger claim his first Mr. Olympia title?	New York
What's the name of the professional wrestler who designed the first logo for Gold's Gym?	Ric Drasin
What magazine called Schwarzenegger America's most famous immigrant?	LA Weekly
What's the title of Schwarzenegger's 1977 book?	Arnold: The Education of a Bodybuilder
At what college did Schwarzenegger study but not receive his degree?	Santa Monica College
What does TM stand for?	Transcendental Meditation
What psychological problem did Schwarzenegger say he struggled with?	anxiety
What bodybuilding competition is named after Schwarzenegger?	the Arnold Classic
How frequently did Schwarzenegger write a column for Muscle & Fitness and Flex?	monthly
How much did the magazines Schwarzenegger wrote for pledge to contribute to physical fitness initiatives each year when he was Governor?	$250,000
What position did Schwarzenegger briefly hold at Muscle & Fitness and Flex?	executive editor
What bodybuilding title did Schwarzenegger win in 1965?	Junior Mr. Europe
How many times did Schwarzenegger win the Mr. Olympia title?	seven
In 2011, how much time each day did Schwarzenegger say he lifted weights?	half an hour
In what competition did Schwarzenegger have to lift over 500 pounds while balancing on foot rests?	Munich stone-lifting contest
What year did Schwarzenegger first try to win the Mr. Olympia title?	1969
Who won Mr. Olympia 1969?	Sergio Oliva
At which year's Mr. Olympia contest did Schwarzenegger become the youngest person to win the title?	1970
How old was Schwarzenegger when he won Mr. Olympia in 1970?	23
Who did Schwarzenegger beat to win his sixth Mr. Olympia in a row?	Franco Columbu
What year did Schwarzenegger quit competing as a professional bodybuilder?	1975
What was Schwarzenegger's last competition before retirement?	Mr. Olympia
What was the name of the bodybuilding film Schwarzenegger starred in?	Pumping Iron
How much time did Schwarzenegger have to train for the 1975 Mr. Olympia competition?	three months
Who co-starred with Schwarzenegger in the film Stay Hungry?	Jeff Bridges
For what Hollywood role was Schwarzenegger training in 1980?	Conan
How many weeks did Schwarzenegger spend getting ready for the 1980 Mr. Olympia contest?	seven
How many times did Schwarzenegger win Mr. Olympia before retiring for good?	seven
In what year did Schwarzenegger write that he used anabolic steroid because they were "helpful"?	1977
What German doctor was sued by Schwarzenegger?	Dr. Willi Heepe
How much did the court award Schwarzenegger in the case against Heepe?	$10,000
Which U.S. tabloid settled out of court with Schwarzenegger in 1999?	The Globe
What was Schwarzenegger's first film role?	Hercules
What last name was Schwarzenegger going by when he starred in Hercules in New York?	Strong
In 1973, who directed Schwarzenegger as a hit-man in The Long Goodbye?	Robert Altman
Schwarzenegger's role in Stay Hungry led to a Golden Globe win in what category?	New Male Star of the Year
What adjective did Schwarzenegger say agents used to describe his body?	weird
When did Schwarzenegger purchase the rights to the film Pumping Iron?	1991
In what year did Schwarzenegger play Jayne Mansfield's husband in a film?	1980
What role did Schwarzenegger miss out on because of his height?	The Incredible Hulk
What 1979 comedy film featured Schwarzenegger, Kirk Douglas, and Ann-Margret?	The Villain
What was the title of the sequel to Conan the Barbarian?	Conan the Destroyer
What year was the first Terminator movie released?	1984
Who directed The Terminator?	James Cameron
What other action star was an international hit in the 1980s?	Sylvester Stallone
What year was Schwarzenegger's film The Running Man released?	1987
What's the title of the comedy movie Schwarzenegger starred in with Danny DeVito in 1988?	Twins
How much did Schwarzenegger make from the film Total Recall, on top of 15% of gross?	$10 million
What 1992 TV movie did Schwarzenegger direct?	Christmas in Connecticut
An episode of what well-known TV series was Schwarzenegger's directorial debut?	Tales from the Crypt
What Schwarzenegger film was 1991's highest-grossing movie?	Terminator 2: Judgment Day
What organization named Schwarzenegger the "International Star of the Decade" in 1993?	the National Association of Theatre Owners
What 1994 film brought Schwarzenegger back together with director James Cameron?	True Lies
What was Schwarzenegger's second film with co-star Danny DeVito?	Junior
How much did the third Terminator movie make domestically alone?	$150 million
How many feet tall was the proposed statue of Schwarzenegger?	82
What was the name of the cultural association that wanted to build a Terminator statue?	Forum Stadtpark
Which 2005 movie featured Schwarzenegger as himself?	The Kid & I
What's the name of the comic book character modeled on Schwarzenegger?	the Governator
What famous comic book writer did Schwarzenegger work with on the Governator?	Stan Lee
Schwarzenegger said he was reading scripts that included the one for what WWII film based on a true story?	With Wings as Eagles
Who wrote the screenplay for With Wings as Eagles?	Randall Wallace
On what date in 2011 was the hold on Schwarzenegger's movie projects announced?	May 20
2013's The Last Stand marked Schwarzenegger's first starring role in how long?	10 years
What was the first film Schwarzenegger co-starred in with Sylvester Stallone?	Escape Plan
What's the title of the fifth film in the Terminator franchise?	Terminator Genisys
What year did Terminator Genisys debut?	2015
In what year did Schwarzenegger speak at the Republican National Convention?	2004
What was the title of the anti-drug music video Schwarzenegger appeared in under the Reagan administration's sponsorship?	"Stop the Madness"
In what presidential election year did Schwarzenegger make a name for himself as a prominent Republican?	1988
Which candidate did Schwarzenegger appear with at a presidential campaign rally?	George H.W. Bush
What nickname did George H.W. Bush give to Schwarzenegger?	Conan the Republican
What year did Schwarzenegger's interview with Talk magazine take place?	1999
Which media source said Schwarzenegger was trying to deal with rumors that he might run for governor of California?	The Hollywood Reporter
The episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno where Schwarzenegger announced his candidacy for Governor aired on what date?	August 6, 2003
How many debates did Schwarzenegger participate in before the 2003 California recall election?	one
What percentage of the October 2003 vote was in favor of a recall?	55.4%
Who was Schwarzenegger's closest rival in the gubernatorial race of 2003?	Cruz Bustamante
By about what number of votes did Schwarzenegger win the 2003 recall election in California?	1.3 million
What percentage of the vote did Schwarzenegger's opponent Bustamante receive?	31%
Who was the first governor of California who had been born in a foreign country?	John G. Downey
What politician threatened to start working to recall Schwarzenegger right after he was elected?	Willie Brown
What Saturday Night Live sketch was Schwarzenegger referencing when he called opposing politicians "girlie men"?	Hans and Franz
In what month of 2005 did Schwarzenegger hold a special election?	November
How many of Schwarzenegger's ballot initiatives were defeated in the special election of 2005?	four
Who did Schwarzenegger choose as Chief of Staff?	Susan Kennedy
In the 2006 gubernatorial election, who did Schwarzenegger run against?	Phil Angelides
Which city was Gavin Newsom mayor of when he said Schwarzenegger was turning Democrat?	San Francisco
What political office did people speculate Schwarzenegger might try for in 2010?	United States Senate
What author claimed Schwarzenegger is power-obsessed?	Wendy Leigh
What's Schwarzenegger's father-in-law's name?	Sargent Shriver
Schwarzenegger shows up as the President of the United States in what 2007 animated movie?	The Simpsons Movie
What year did Schwarzenegger become a naturalized citizen of the United States?	1983
In what country besides the U.S. is Schwarzenegger a citizen?	Austrian
Who did Schwarzenegger finally endorse in the 2008 Republican primary?	John McCain
Which candidate withdrew from the presidential race in January of 2008?	Rudy Giuliani
On which two major issues did McCain and Schwarzenegger publicly agree?	the environment and economy
What group awarded Schwarzenegger the title of one of the 11 "worst governors" in a 2010 report?	Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington
What was Schwarzenegger's highest approval rating during his stint as governor?	89%
What was Schwarzenegger's approval rating on the day his time in office ended?	23%
What was the controversy around Schwarzenegger's first gubernatorial campaign nicknamed?	Gropegate
How many women spoke out publicly about misconduct on Schwarzenegger's part?	six
Which newspaper broke the story about Schwarzenegger's alleged sexual misconduct?	Los Angeles Times
One woman accused Schwarzenegger of trying to remove what item of clothing?	bathing suit
What magazine published an interview quoting Schwarzenegger calling marijuana a "leaf"?	GQ
What drug does the documentary Pumping Iron show Schwarzenegger using?	marijuana
Who sued Schwarzenegger and two of his employees for libel, settling in 2006?	Anna Richardson
What movie was Schwarzenegger promoting when the alleged incident took place?	The 6th Day
What paper did Richardson claim was used by Schwarzenegger's publicist and aide to discredit her?	Los Angeles Times
What year did Austria outlaw the death penalty?	1968
Which member of Austrian parliament wanted Schwarzenegger to lose his Austrian citizenship?	Peter Pilz
What date marked the first law restricting greenhouse gas emissions?	September 27, 2006
The regulations pertain to emissions from utilities, manufacturing plants, and what other entity?	refineries
What year has Schwarzenegger set as the deadline for California to show a 25% reduction in emissions?	2020
What region of the U.S. has California partnered with on the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative?	the Northeast
What green technology did Schwarzenegger have installed at home to reduce his carbon footprint?	solar panels
What year did the Greenhouse Gas Initiative go into effect?	2009
What particular pollutant was Schwarzenegger addressing with his 2006 executive order?	carbon dioxide emissions
In what city was the SAE World Congress held in 2009?	Detroit
What article, section, and clause of the Constitution requires U.S. presidents to be natural-born citizens?	Article II, Section I, Clause V
In 2013, what newspaper claimed Schwarzenegger was considering a presidential campaign?	the New York Post
Michael Dorf is a law professor at what school?	Columbia University
Where would Schwarzenegger write down his goals?	index cards
Schwarzenegger became a millionaire by what age?	30
With which of his friends did Schwarzenegger start a bricklaying company?	Franco Columbu
What natural disaster in 1971 contributed to the success of Schwarzenegger's business?	San Fernando earthquake
How much did Schwarzenegger pay for the first apartment building he bought?	$10,000
What restaurant chain did Schwarzenegger invest in?	Planet Hollywood
When did Schwarzenegger withdraw from involvement with Planet Hollywood?	2000
What other successful theme restaurant chain was Planet Hollywood modeled on?	the Hard Rock Cafe
What investment firm does Schwarzenegger maintain partial ownership of?	Dimensional Fund Advisors
What city hosts Arnold's Sports Festival each year?	Columbus, Ohio
What's the name of Schwarzenegger's film production company?	Oak Productions, Inc.
What renowned publishing company partners with Schwarzenegger in Fitness Publications?	Simon & Schuster
What's the name of the restaurant Schwarzenegger opened with his wife?	Schatzi On Main
Where is the Schwarzenegger restaurant located?	Santa Monica
What is the literal translation of the word "schatzi"?	little treasure
What year did Schwarzenegger sell Schatzi on Main?	1998
In what year did Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver separate?	2011
What was the price tag for the private jet Schwarzenegger bought in 1997?	$38 million
In what year did Schwarzenegger's former girlfriend Barbara Outland Baker publish her memoir?	2006
What did Baker say Schwarzenegger didn't understand when she first met him?	polite society
What historical event did Baker and Schwarzenegger watch on TV together on their first date?	the first Apollo Moon landing
What was the name of the hairdresser's assistant Schwarzenegger fell for in July of 1977?	Sue Moray
Where did Schwarzenegger first meet Maria Shriver?	the Robert F. Kennedy Tennis Tournament
What month and year did Moray make Schwarzenegger choose between her and Shriver?	August 1978
What is Maria Shriver's relation to President John F. Kennedy	niece
What Massachusetts town was the setting for the wedding between Shriver and Schwarzenegger?	Hyannis
How many children did Schwarzenegger and Shriver have together?	four
Who did Schwarzenegger reportedly begin dating shortly after his separation?	Heather Milligan
How long were Schwarzenegger and Shriver married?	25 years
What newspaper broke the story about Schwarzenegger's child with another woman?	the Los Angeles Times
Baena worked for the Schwarzenegger/Shriver family for how many years?	20
What's the first name of Schwarzenegger's son with Baena?	Joseph
Schwarzenegger bought Baena and their son a four-bedroom house in what year?	2010
Which attorney did Schwarzenegger consult to handle his divorce?	Bob Kaufman
Which of the two kept their family home in Brentwood?	Schwarzenegger
Schwarzenegger's initial divorce petition failed to provide for attorney's fee reimbursement and what other condition of divorce?	spousal support
What actress claimed she also carried on an affair with Schwarzenegger while he was with Shriver?	Brigitte Nielsen
What word describes an aortic valve with two rather than three leaflets?	bicuspid
Schwarzenegger underwent heart valve replacement in what year?	1997
Which of Schwarzenegger's sons was with him when he had a motorcycle accident in 2006?	Patrick
What bone did Schwarzenegger break while on a ski trip in 2006?	right femur
Where was Schwarzenegger vacationing when he broke his leg?	Sun Valley, Idaho
At what airport was Schwarzenegger's jet forced to make an emergency landing in 2009?	Van Nuys Airport
How tall does Schwarzenegger claim to be?	6'2"
What Assemblyman playfully tried to measure Schwarzenegger's height?	Herb Wesson
How tall did Men's Health magazine report Schwarzenegger to be in a 1999 issue?	5'10"
What's the title of Schwarzenegger's autobiography?	Total Recall
What did Schwarzenegger name the chapter of the book that addresses his extramarital affair?	"The Secret"
When was Schwarzenegger's autobiography released?	October 2012
In what year did AM General grant Schwarzenegger's wish for a street-legal Humvee?	1992
In addition to the Humvee, what other vehicle manufactured by AM General was Schwarzenegger first to own?	Hummers
What color is the exterior of Schwarzenegger's Bugatti Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse?	silver
How many pounds does one of Schwarzenegger's Hummers weigh?	6,300
How much did Schwarzenegger spend to convert a Hummer to run on hydrogen?	$21,000
What did Schwarzenegger name his plan to build hydrogen refueling stations throughout California?	California Hydrogen Highway Network
What governmental department contributed a grant to Schwarzenegger's hydrogen fuel project?	U.S. Department of Energy
What nonprofit did Schwarzenegger found in 1995?	the Inner City Games Foundation
Schwarzenegger was the spokesperson for the Special Olympic games held in what city in China?	Shanghai
About how many schools across the country is ICG active in?	400
What school within the University of Southern California does the Schwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy belong to?	the USC Sol Price School of Public Policy
In what year was the Schwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy founded?	2012
What position does Schwarzenegger hold with the Institute?	chairman
In kilometers, what is the distance from Plymouth to Exeter?	60
How many miles away from London is Plymouth?	190
What river borders Plymouth on the west?	Tamar
In what county is Plymouth located?	Devon
In what body of water do the rivers Tamar and Plym converge?	Plymouth Sound
What was the location of the earliest settlement near Plymouth?	Mount Batten
What was Plymouth's original name?	Sutton
In what year did the Pilgrim Fathers sail from Plymouth?	1620
When did the siege of Plymouth end during the English Civil War?	1646
What was the name of the colony founded by the Pilgrim Fathers in the New World?	Plymouth Colony
What nearby settlement built ships for the Royal Navy?	Devonport
In what year did Plymouth become a city?	1928
What is the term used to describe the attacks on Plymouth during the Second World War?	Plymouth Blitz
In what year was Plymstock incorporated?	1967
Along with Plymouth and Devonport, what location was merged into a county borough in 1914?	East Stonehouse
As of 2014, what was the population of Plymouth?	261,546
Where does Plymouth rank in population among the cities of the UK?	30th
How many members of Parliament represent Plymouth?	three
In what city does Plymouth's ferry to Spain terminate?	Santander
What institution of higher education is based in Plymouth?	Plymouth University
What is the name of the location cited by Ptolemy that is believed to have been located near modern Plymouth?	TAMARI OSTIA
Where have Middle Iron Age remnants been found?	Mount Batten
What does 'TAMARI OSTIA' mean?	mouth/estuaries of the Tamar
In what century were sailors obligated to relocate from Plympton due to silting?	11th
What did Sutton mean in the Old English language?	south town
In what year was the first written reference to Plymouth made?	1211
During whose reign was the former town of Sutton referred to as Plymouth?	King Henry VI
What did 'Plym Mouth' mean?	mouth of the River Plym
In what year during the Hundred Years' War did the French assault Plymouth?	1340
Who set fire to Plymouth in 1403?	Breton raiders
In what year was the fortification later known as Drake's Fort constructed?	1596
Before Plymouth dockyard was built, where was the fleet located?	Sutton Pool
In what year did Parliament pass a notable law that led to the building of fortifications in Plymouth?	1512
What notable slave trader was based out of Plymouth?	Sir John Hawkins
Who served as Plymouth's mayor in 1593?	Sir Francis Drake
In what year did Drake battle the Spanish Armada?	1588
When did the Pilgrim Fathers depart Plymouth?	1620
What was the name of the settlement founded by the Pilgrim Fathers?	Plymouth Colony
Which faction did Plymouth support during the English Civil War?	Parliamentarians
For how many years was Plymouth under siege during the English Civil War?	four
Where did the last battle for Plymouth during the English Civil War end?	Freedom Fields Park
In what year did Charles II ascend to the throne?	1660
What locale was used to house imprisoned Parliamentarians after the restoration of Charles II?	Drake's Island
During what century was Plymouth involved with the Atlantic slave trade?	18th
In what century did Plymouth cease to be a vital trading port?	17th
In what year was HMNB Davenport established?	1690
What river was adjacent to HMNB Davenport?	River Tamar
How many male workers were present in Plymouth Dock circa 1712?	318
What was the 1733 population of Plymouth Dock?	3,000
In what parish was HMNB Davenport located?	Stoke Damerel
Along with coal and grain, what was the most important import in 18th century Plymouth?	timber
What was the new name given to Plymouth Dock in 1824?	Devonport
Along with Plymouth and Devonport, what settlement comprised the Three Towns?	Stonehouse
What architect was noted for his neoclassical designs in Plymouth?	John Foulston
On what street did many of the buildings designed by John Foulston reside?	Union Street
Who founded Plymouth Porcelain?	William Cookworthy
In what year was Plymouth Porcelain founded?	1768
What was William Cookworthy's profession?	chemist
What was the name of the engineer involved in the construction of the Eddystone Lighthouse?	John Smeaton
In kilometers, how long was the Plymouth Sound Breakwater?	2
Who was the designer of the Plymouth Sound Breakwater?	John Rennie
In what year did construction finish on the Plymouth Sound Breakwater?	1841
When did construction commence on Plymouth Sound Breakwater?	1812
Near which settlement were Palmerston forts built in the 1860s?	Devonport
What animal byproduct was imported to Plymouth in the 19th century?	guano
In what settlement were the dockyards located?	Devonport
What was the primary base of the Royal navy during World War I?	Scapa Flow
What sorts of ships were based in Davenport?	escort vessels
What location provided a base for flying boats?	Mount Batten
What force used Sunderland flying boats out of Devonport?	Royal Australian Air Force
What military organization was based in Devonport until 1941?	Western Approaches Command
How many attacks comprised the Plymouth Blitz?	59
How many civilian deaths occurred as a result of the Plymouth Blitz?	more than 1,000
How many homes were totally destroyed in the Plymouth Blitz?	over 3,700
Who was the author of the 1943 Plan for Plymouth?	Sir Patrick Abercrombie
In the period 1951-1957, how many new houses were constructed yearly in Plymouth?	over 1000
In the postwar period to 1964, how many houses were built in Plymouth?	over 20,000
When was the Civic Centre built?	1962
What English Heritage status does the Civic Centre possess?	grade II
What aircraft carrier received maintenance at Devonport Dockyard?	Ark Royal
By what year was the greater part of the army presence in Plymouth gone?	1971
What military unit is based in Plymouth?	42 Commando of the Royal Marines
In what text was the presence of a settlement in the Plymouth area first recorded?	Domesday Book
In what year was the Domesday Book compiled?	1086
What was the name of the Plymouth-area settlement recorded in the Domesday Book?	Sudtone
In what year was Plymouth recognized as a town?	1254
In what year did Parliament bestow a Charter on Plymouth?	1439
Who was the first woman MP to take her seat in the British Parliament?	Nancy Astor
For what constituency was Nancy Astor elected?	Plymouth Sutton
On what date did Plymouth become a city?	18 October 1928
In what year did Plymouth receive its first Lord Mayor?	1935
What parish was incorporated into Plymouth in 1967?	Plymstock
What constituency did MP Michael Foot represent?	Plymouth Devonport
What position was Michael Foot noted to occupy in government?	Secretary of State for Education
What notable piece of legislation did Michael Foot contribute to?	1974 Health and Safety at Work Act
What party did Michael Foot become a leader of?	Labour
In what town was Michael Foot born?	Plymouth
What was the population of Plymouth in 1971?	250,000
What document suggested that county boroughs be eliminated?	1971 Local Government White Paper
What county did Plymouth unsuccessfully attempt to see created?	Tamarside
On what date did Plymouth's county status end?	1 April 1974
What body proposed that Plymouth become a unitary council?	the Banham Commission
What European Parliamentary constitutency is Plymouth a part of?	South West England
Who was elected for the Sutton and Devonport constitutency in 2015?	Gary Streeter
As of 2015, what political party did all of Plymouth's MPs belong to?	Conservative
What parliamentary constitutency was represented by Johnny Mercer?	Moor View
How many wards in Plymouth elect two councillors?	three
How many members are on the Plymouth council?	57
What fraction of the Plymouth council is elected each year?	a third
With what French city is Plymouth twinned?	Brest
In what year did Plymouth twin with Plymouth in the United States?	2001
What monarch bestowed the first Lord Mayor on Plymouth?	King George V
How many councillors choose the Lord Mayor?	six
What officeholder selects the Deputy Lord Mayor?	the Lord Mayor
Who is the current Lord Mayor of Plymouth?	Dr John Mahony
At what street address is the Lord Mayor's residence located?	3 Elliot Terrace
Who gave the Lord Mayor's official residence to Plymouth?	Lady Astor
On what street is the Civic Centre office building located?	Armada Way
In what month and year did the Civic Centre municipal office building become a listed building?	June 2007
What did Plymouth council estimate the cost to refurbish the Civic Centre municipal office building to be?	£40m
What river is to the west of Plymouth?	River Tamar
To the east of Plymouth lies which river?	River Plym
The River Tamar is the boundary between Devon and what other county?	Cornwall
In what body of water do the rivers Plym and Tamar meet?	Plymouth Sound
When did Plymstock join the unitary authority of Plymouth?	1967
What estuary east of Plymouth is part of the River Plym?	Cattewater
When did the Plymouth Breakwater open?	1814
What island is present in Plymouth Sound?	Drake's Island
How large is the Unitary Authority of Plymouth in square miles?	30.83
In meters, what is the highest point in the Plymouth Unitary Authority?	155
What special designation does Plymouth Sound, Shores and Cliffs possess?	Site of Special Scientific Interest
What stones form the headlands near Plymouth Sound?	Lower Devonian slates
Along with Devonian slate, Middle Devonian limestone and limestone, what stone provides the geologic base of Plymouth?	granite
Along with shales, what is most of the city built on?	Upper Devonian slates
For what reason is Plymouth Sound a Site of Special Scientific Interest?	its geology
Middle Devonian limestone exists between Plymstock and what location?	Cremyll
What location north of the city possesses granite?	Dartmoor
What river was used to ferry granite from Dartmoor to Plymouth?	Tamar
Along with West Hoe and Radford, where was Middle Devonian limestone quarried in the region?	Cattedown
What local stone was used in the construction of many Plymouth buildings?	limestone
On what date was the publication of the Plan for Plymouth?	27 April 1944
Who wrote the Plan for Plymouth?	Sir Patrick Abercrombie
What street was intended to connect Plymouth Hoe to the railroad station?	Armada Way
Who headed the team that created the 'Vision for Plymouth'?	David MacKay
How many parks exist in Plymouth?	28
What Köppen climate classification does Plymouth possess?	temperate oceanic
In degrees Fahrenheit, what is Plymouth's annual mean temperature?	52
What month in Plymouth has the lowest temperatures?	February
Up to how many centimeters of snow fell on Plymouth between 17 and 19 December 2010?	20
Along with August, what is typically the hottest month in Plymouth?	July
Along with convection, what provokes rain in the Plymouth area?	Atlantic depressions
Along with winter, in what season are Atlantic depressions most prevalent?	autumn
About how many inches of rain fall on Plymouth every year?	39
Along with March, what month has the fastest winds on average?	November
From what direction do most of the winds blow on Plymouth?	south-west
How many hours of sunshine does the South West England region get each year?	over 1,600
What region of England benefits from the extension of the Azores High pressure area?	South West England
In degrees Fahrenheit, what was the highest temperature achieved in Plymouth between 1971 and 2000?	89
In what month and year did Plymouth see its highest temperature between 1971 and 2000?	June 1976
About how many days a year in Plymouth are over 77 °F?	4.25
In degrees Celsius, what was the coldest temperature recorded at Plymouth between 1971 and 2000?	−8.8 °C
In what month and year did Plymouth see its lowest temperature between 1971 and 2000?	January 1979
How many students are studying at the University of Plymouth?	25,895
Where does the University of Plymouth rank among British institutions of higher education in terms of number of enrolled students?	22nd
How many staff members work for the University of Plymouth?	3,000
About how much are the staff of the University of Plymouth paid yearly in total?	£160 million
In what year was the University of Plymouth established?	1992
What institution of higher  education is colloquially known as Marjons?	The University of St Mark & St John
What is the academic specialty of the University of St Mark & St John?	teacher training
Along with City College Plymouth, what college calls Plymouth home?	Plymouth College of Art
About how many students are enrolled at City College Plymouth?	26,000
How many years ago was Plymouth College of Art founded?	153
How many independent art colleges exist in the United Kingdom?	four
How many large colleges exist in Plymouth?	two
How many state primary schools are in Plymouth?	71
Plymouth has how many state secondary schools?	13
How many state grammar schools are based in Plymouth?	three
What is the name of the independent school in Plymouth?	Plymouth College
Aside from Plymouth High School for Girls and Devonport High School for Boys, what state grammar school is present in Plymouth?	Devonport High School for Girls
What maritime institution of higher education existed in Plymouth as of 1880?	the Royal Naval Engineering College
When did the Royal Naval Engineering College shut its doors in Plymouth?	1910
What was the Royal Naval Engineering College renamed in 1959?	Dockyard Technical College
In what year did the Dockyard Technical College close?	1994
After the Dockyard Technical College closed, where were classes relocated to?	University of Southampton
What organization known as the MBA is based in Plymouth?	Marine Biological Association
What Plymouth organization is named for Sir Alister Hardy?	Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Sciences
What marine facility is attached to the University of Plymouth?	Marine Institute
What group are many of Plymouth's marine organizations a part of?	Plymouth Marine Sciences Partnership
What is the name of the aquarium present in Plymouth?	National Marine Aquarium
What was the population of Plymouth unitary authority circa 2011?	256,384
What was the population of Plymouth unitary authority circa 2001?	240,720
How many people did the Plymouth unitary authority gain between 2001 and 2011?	15,664
What was the average number of people in a Plymouth household?	2.3
What percentage of Plymouth residents in 2011 were of Chinese ancestry?	0.5
What percentage of Devon's GVA does Plymouth comprise in 2013?	25%
What was Plymouth's 2013 GVA in millions of British Pounds?	5,169
What was Plymouth' per capita GVA in 2013?	£19,943
What was the United Kingdom's average per capita GVA in 2013?	£23,755
What percentage of Plymouth residents were unemployed in 2014?	7.0%
What percentage of Plymouth residents were suffering from poverty and deprivation in 2014?	26.2%
As of 2014, what was the life expectancy of male Plymouth residents?	78.3 years
As of 2014, what was the life expectancy of female Plymouth residents?	82.1
Where did Plymouth's life expectancy rank out of the regions of South West England?	lowest
How many Plymouth residents are employed in defense?	12,000
About how many Plymouth residents are serving in the military?	7,500
When was Plymouth Gin first distilled?	1793
What company produces Plymouth Gin?	Plymouth Gin Distillery
During what decade was Plymouth Gin the most widely consumed in the world?	the 1930s
About what percentage of Plymouth's income comes from the Dockyard?	10%
What Royal Navy base is present in Plymouth?	Devonport Dockyard
How many maritime businesses operate in Plymouth?	270
How many people work in Tamar Science Park?	500
What is a notable company based in Plymouth?	Hemsley Fraser
What notable shop is located in a grade II listed building?	Pannier Market
In what year was Pannier Market finished?	1959
What is Plymouth's national rank in retail floorspace?	29th
What notable location was named a grade II listed building in 1998?	Tinside Pool
What was the cost to restore Tinside Pool?	£3.4 million
What is the name of Plymouth Council's urban redevelopment project?	"Vision for Plymouth"
What architect is in charge of the ""Vision for Plymouth"?	David Mackay
Along with Plymouth Council, what body supports the "Vision for Plymouth"?	the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce
What is the population goal of the "Vision for Plymouth"?	300,000
How many residences does the "Vision for Plymouth" seek to build?	33,000
When was the Charles Cross car park removed?	2004
In what month and year was the grand opening of Drake Circus Shopping Centre?	October 2006
Where was TR2 built?	Cattedown
What prize did TR2 almost win?	the RIBA Stirling Prize for Architecture in 2003
Who spoke disparagingly about the Drake Circus Shopping Centre?	David Mackay
What location is proposed for the future home of the Plymouth City Council headquarters?	the Bretonside bus station
To connect Millbay to the city centre, what would need to be destroyed?	the Plymouth Pavilions entertainment arena
What city region is located near a ferry terminal?	Millbay
What is the A38 called inside the city of Plymouth?	The Parkway
In miles, about how far away from Plymouth does the A38 connect to the M5?	40
What bridge connects Cornwall to Plymouth via the A38?	Tamar Bridge
What park and ride service is located at George Junction?	Plymouth City Airport
Who operates Milehouse park and ride?	First South West
Who operates the ferry to Spain?	Brittany Ferries
Where does the ferry to France terminate?	Roscoff
Along with MV Bretagne and MV Pont-Aven, what ferry operates between Plymouth and the continent?	MV Armorique
A passenger ferry operates between Cremyll and what location?	Stonehouse
When did the Cremyll-Stonehouse ferry first operate?	1204
What local airport closed in 2011?	Plymouth City Airport
In kilometers, how far away from the Plymouth city center was Plymouth City Airport?	6
By what year is the city airport planned to reopen?	2018
Who intends to reopen the Plymouth City Airport?	FlyPlymouth
When did Plymouth's railroad station open for service?	1877
Who runs Plymouth's railroad station?	Great Western Railway
Along with the Tamar Valley Line, what local train service operates in Plymouth?	Cornish Main Line
How many regional MPs have argued for the importance of Plymouth's train service?	three
Trains from what network sometimes operate out of Plymouth's railroad station?	CrossCountry
On what date was the Dawlish sea wall damaged?	4 February 2014
In feet, how much of the Dawlish sea wall was destroyed?	130
After the Dawlish sea wall was damaged, on what date did the line reopen?	4 April 2014
In what month and year did storms affect the coastal line near Dawlish?	February 2014
How many churches are present in Plymouth?	150
In what year was Plymouth's Catholic cathedral built?	1858
What is the name of the oldest church in Plymouth?	St Andrew's
What denomination does the oldest church in Plymouth belong to?	Anglican
How many Methodist houses of worship exist in Plymouth?	over twenty
What Plymouth Jew was mentioned by Sir Francis Drake?	Moses
In what year was Plymouth Synagogue constructed?	1762
What is Plymouth Synagogue's listed grade?	Grade II*
What community of Jews was Plymouth Synagogue built by?	Ashkenazi
What percentage of Plymouth's population call themselves Christian?	58.1%
What percentage of Plymouth residents follow Islam?	0.8%
What percentage of Plymouth consists of non-religious people?	32.9%
What percentage of people in the United Kingdom describe themselves as non-religious?	24.7%
What was the percentage decline in Jewish residents of Plymouth between 2001 and 2011?	7%
In what year was Union Street constructed?	1815
Who performed at the New Palace Theatre in the 1930s?	Charlie Chaplin
How many pubs existed on Union Street in the 1930s?	30s
What group famously enjoyed themselves on Union Street?	sailors from the Royal Navy
What notable event occurs each August?	British Firework Championships
In what month and year was the world record for simultaneous fireworks broken?	August 2006
Who broke the world record for simultaneous fireworks?	Roy Lowry
What institution did Roy Lowry work for?	University of Plymouth
In what year did the Music of the Night begin?	1992
How many people can fit in the Theatre Royal?	1,315
What is the capacity of Drum Theatre?	200
What is the cost of admission to the Plymouth City Museum and Art Gallery?	free
How many galleries are present in the Plymouth City Museum and Art Gallery?	six
When did the theater in the Plymouth Athenaeum close?	2009
What television station has its regional headquarters in Plymouth?	BBC South West
What regional ITV station serves Plymouth?	ITV West Country
On what date did ITV Westcountry cease to operate?	16 February 2009
With what channel did ITV Westcountry merge?	ITV West
What BBC radio station operates in Plymouth?	BBC Radio Devon
What football league team is located in Plymouth?	Plymouth Argyle F.C.
What level of the football league does Plymouth Argyle F.C. operate in?	Football League Two
What is the home field of Plymouth Argyle F.C.?	Home Park
What is the nickname of Plymouth Argyle F.C.?	The Pilgrims
What team plays its home games at Weston Mill?	Vospers Oak Villa F.C.
What rugby union team is based in Plymouth?	Plymouth Albion R.F.C.
What British Basketball League team calls Plymouth home?	Plymouth Raiders
When was Plymouth Albion R.F.C. founded?	1875
Where do the Plymouth Raiders play their home games?	Plymouth Pavilions
When were the Plymouth Raiders inaugurated?	1983
When was the first Port of Plymouth Regatta?	1823
In what month and year did Plymouth play host to the America's Cup World Series?	September 2011
For how many days did the America's Cup World Series take place in Plymouth?	nine
When did Plymouth begin receiving water from South West Water?	1973
Who provided Plymouth's water prior to 1973?	Plymouth County Borough Corporation
When did Drake's Leat open?	24 April 1591
From where did Drake's Leat draw water?	River Meavy
When did construction finish on Devonport Leat?	1801
What body handles waste management in Plymouth?	Plymouth City Council
Who oversees Plymouth's sewers?	South West Water
Who distributes electricity in Plymouth?	Western Power Distribution
In what year did Langage Power Station come on line?	2009
What settlement is Langage Power Station located near?	Plympton
When did the Plymouth Borough Police begin operation?	1836
Where is the police divisional headquarters located?	Crownhill
How many fire stations are present in Plymouth?	five
Where in Plymouth is the Royal National Lifeboat Institution based?	Millbay Docks
What organization is the Plymouth Borough Police a part of?	Devon and Cornwall Constabulary
What is Plymouth's National Health Service hospital?	Derriford Hospital
In kilometers, how far is Derriford Hospital from the Plymouth city center?	6
What notable clinic is present in Derriford Hospital?	Royal Eye Infirmary
What organization provides ambulance transport for Plymouth?	South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust
Where is South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust headquartered?	Exeter
When did Ford Park Cemetery reopen?	2007
Along with Efford, where else does the Plymouth City Council operate a cemetery?	Weston Mill
What is the name of the private cemetery in Plymouth?	Drake Memorial Park
In lieu of headstones, what grave markers are used at Drake Memorial Park?	a brass plaque
When did Ford Park Cemetery first operate?	mid-19th century
In what year was the Royal Citadel constructed?	1666
In the wake of what conflict was the Royal Citadel built?	English Civil War
When was Smeaton's Tower first constructed?	1759
In kilometers, how far off the coast was Smeaton's Tower originally built?	23
What memorial commemorates the naval victory over the Spanish Armada?	Armada Memorial
What was the name of the port once situated on the land occupied by present day Plymouth?	Sutton
When did the Pilgrim Fathers depart Plymouth for the Americas?	1620
What monument commemorates the departure of the Pilgrim Fathers?	Mayflower Steps
How many marine species are present at the National Marine Aquarium?	400
How many listed buildings are present in the Barbican area?	100
What structure was referred to as a "Palmerston's Folly"?	Crownhill Fort
In what cardinal direction is Crownhill Fort located outside the city?	north
Who runs Crownhill Fort?	the Landmark Trust
In what cardinal direction outside Plymouth is Devonport located?	west
How many waymarkers are present on the Devonport Heritage Trail?	over 70
Visitors to what region's beaches often stop at Plymouth?	south-east Cornwall
Along with Whitsand Bay and Cawsand, what Plymouth-area beaches are popular with tourists?	Kingsand
Visitors to what local valley often stop over in Plymouth?	Tamar Valley
Who designed the Roland Levinsky building?	Henning Larsen
When did the Roland Levinsky building open?	2008
Of what university is the Roland Levinsky building a part?	University of Plymouth
What academic discipline at the university is based in the Roland Levinsky building?	Arts
What part of Plymouth is the Roland Levinsky building situated in?	the city's central quarter
What are Plymouth residents commonly called?	Plymothians
What colloquial term is used for Plymouth residents?	Janners
After what figure are Janners named?	Cousin Jan
In Devon, Jan is another way of saying what common English name?	John
What was the birthplace of Sir Francis Drake?	Tavistock
What did the Spanish nickname Sir Francis Drake?	El Draco
In what year did Sir Francis Drake die?	1596
What was Sir Francis Drake's cause of death?	dysentery
What notable artist and Royal Academician was born in Plympton?	Sir Joshua Reynolds
What artist died in Plymouth in 2002?	Robert Lenkiewicz
Where did the creator of Mr Benn and King Rollo study?	Plymouth College of Art
What genre of music does John Surman play?	Jazz
What local figure played in the bands AMM and MIMEO?	Keith Rowe
Where do the family of Michael Foot live?	Trematon Castle
What is the occupation of Trevor Francis?	footballer
What is the current nationality of former Plymouth resident Chris Axworthy?	Canadian
What United States vice president did Donald Moffat play?	Lyndon B. Johnson
In what film did Donald Moffat play President Bennett?	Clear and Present Danger
What is Dawn French's job?	comedian
What is heresy mainly at odds with?	established beliefs or customs
What is a person called is practicing heresy?	A heretic
What religions and idea of thought is heresy cited as being used frequently in?	Christianity, Judaism, Islam and Marxism
What cultures are listed as examples of discipline for being a heretic?	Christian, Islamic and Jewish
What language does the term heresy find its roots in?	Greek
What is the relationship between the context heresy is used in for Christian, Jewish, or Islamic cultures?	slightly different
What is the head person of a heretical movement called?	heresiarch
What is the study of heresy?	Heresiology
What is the original meaning of heresy when translated directly from its root word?	"choice" or "thing chosen"
How many times is it suggested that you should warn people you are in disagreement with before parting ways?	two times
What term is used to describe an individual in the early Church that introduced discord?	divisive person
What word is used when speaking of correct teachings in contrast to a false teacher?	sound
What culture and religion did Fathers of the Church correlate with heresy?	Jews and Judaism
What religion were these Fathers of the Church?	Orthodox Christianity
Who suggested that it were the Jews that brought dissension into Christianity?	Tertullian
Who gave more exposure to the term heresy when attempting to descredit opponents during the early centuries of Christianity?	Irenaeus
What term did Irenaeus use to describe the Christian community's ideologies?	orthodox
What concept did Irenaeus cite to help support his arguments?	apostolic succession
Who was the first Roman Emporor that was baptized?	Constantine the Great
What did Constantine the Great and Licinius pass to introduce toleration of Christianity in the Roman Empire?	Edict of Milan
What was the high priest in the College of Pontiffs called?	Pontifex Maximus
What were the meetings called that were hosted by Constantine that helped enforce orthodoxy by Imperial authority?	the ecumenical councils
In what year was the first usage of the term heresy in a legal context?	AD 380
Who intitiated Christianity to be a state church of the Roman Empire?	Thessalonica of Theodosius I
What was the church lacking before the edict that would allow them to legally counter heresy?	state-sponsored support
What did church authorities gain as a result of this edict?	state powers of legal enforcement
What punishment is cited as church authorities being able to exact on individuals perceived as heretics?	death sentence
Who was the first Christian individual to be sentenced to death by the church for heresy in Rome?	Priscillian
What happened to the people that sentenced Priscillian to death?	excommunicated
What religion is an example of Protestants killing for conviction of heresy after the Reformation?	Catholics
Who was the last known person to be sentenced to death for the crime of heresy by the Roman Catholic Church?	Cayetano Ripoll
From what passage is cited as being one of the first known examples of using the word heresy?	Nag Hammadi's Apocalypse of Peter
What is thought of to spiritually cut one off from the Church even before excommunication?	obstinate and willful manifest heresy
What book gives the definition of a heretic as anyone that does not follow the Catholic Church or the orthodox holy faith?	The Codex Justinianus
What groups are cited as being considered heretical by the Church before the 11th century?	Arianism, Pelagianism, Donatism, Marcionism and Montanism
What group moved westward to give rise to the famous 11th and 12th century heresy in western Europe?	Paulicians
What groups began to appear in northern Italy and southern France during the 11th century?	Patarini, the Dulcinians, the Waldensians and the Cathars
In what country did the Cathars grow to represent a popular movement?	France
What was started by the Roman Catholic Church to dispense of the Cathars in Languedoc?	The Cathar Crusade
What was a major reason and justification for the Europian wars of religion?	Heresy
Who was brought before the Inquisition for heresy but renounced his beliefs and thus remained under house arrest for life?	Galileo Galilei
What belief did Galileo have at the time that appeared to be extremely heretical to the church?	the Sun lies motionless at the centre of the universe
Who denounced Jewish People in many of his writings?	Pope St. Gregory
What were the Jews described as enemies of?	Christ
According to Pope St. Gregory what religion must you be in order to be a heretic?	Jewish
In what culture of law were Jews and heretics often lumped together?	Roman-Christian law
What area of Christianity commonly cited the first seven Ecumenical Councils in regards to heresy?	Eastern Christianity
After what two events did various Christian churches also begin using the first seven Ecumenical Councils to identify heresy?	Great Schism and the Protestant Reformation
What beginning Christian heresies did the Orthodox Church also reject during this time?	Arianism, Gnosticism, Origenism, Montanism, Judaizers, Marcionism, Docetism, Adoptionism, Nestorianism, Monophysitism, Monothelitism and Iconoclasm
What is the work called that Martin Luther created regarding Jews and heresy?	"On the Jews and Their Lies"
What term does Luther assign to the practice of Jewish Prayer?	blasphemous
What is said to be a special spiritual problem?	Jewish circumcision
What event in England during the 16th century had an outcome of many deaths for heresy?	European Reformation
During what king's reign did 60 Protestants die for heresy?	Henry VIII
What two notable figures are cited to have perished for refusing to give up the Church in England?	Sir Thomas More and Cardinal John Fisher
Under which king were the heresy laws repealed in 1547?	Edward VI
In what year was the last known person sentenced to death in England for heresy?	1612
During which years did the execution of the Boston martyrs take place?	1659, 1660, and 1661
Which group was responsible for the deaths of the Boston martyrs?	Anglican Puritans
What goal is cited as the reason these killings took place?	purer absolute theocracy
What rival group did the Anglican Puritans want purged from their area?	Quaker sect
Which two groups viewed the Puritans themselves as nothing more than heresy?	Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox
What year did the deaths of heretics under Christianity come to an end?	1826
Who was the last heretic put to death under the Catholic Inquisition?	Cayetano Ripoll
Under which religion do charges of heresy still occur in modern times?	Christian
Which religion is cited as having problems with modern biblical criticism?	Protestant
What belief of the Catholic Church criticizes writings without using the word heresy?	Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
What event is stated as a reason why the word heretic is used less often in modern times?	Spanish inquisition
Who was the author of the short story "The Theologians"?	Jorge Luis Borges
What subject does the question of who has a monopoly on spiritual truth regard?	Christian heresy
What group did Sultan Selim the Grim label as heretics?	Shia Qizilbash
What number of Christians did Selim the Grim equate to the killing of one Shiite?	70
What type of law is still in practice in which heresy results in execution?	Sharia law
What author was declared a heretic and had a bounty placed on his head by the government of Iran?	Salman Rushdie
What does Orthodox Judaism regard Jews who depart from traditional practices as?	heretical
What alignment within Orthodox Judaism view individuals as heretics that reject Maimonides's 13 principles of Jewish faith?	right-wing groups
Which wing of Orthodox Judaism is stated as having a more tolerant view of Conservative Judaism?	The liberal wing
What term is used for the act of using Church of Scientology techniques in contrast to what Hubbard envisioned?	squirreling
What institution has prosecuted groups that practice outside the official Church without permission?	The Religious Technology Center
What must be welcomed in areas for the term do be perceived as complimentary?	innovation
What did Isaac Asimov consider heresy as?	an abstraction
Which type of heresy is the scientific community well equipped to defend itself against?	endoheretics
What has heresy within the scientific community repeatedly become?	orthodoxy
What is the title of the book published by Robert T. Bakker regarding mainstream opinion of dinosaurs?	The Dinosaur Heresies
What criticism did Robert T. Bakker share about the paleontologist community regarding the last fifty years?	the field hasn't tested dinosaur orthodoxy severely enough
What film did Robert T. Bakker's book reportedly influence?	Jurassic Park
What type of poses did the book's illustrations portray dinosaurs as?	active poses
What label is associated with Robert T. Bakker as a result of his work?	endoheretic
What label is associated with Immanuel Velikovsky due to his works outside the accepted discipline?	exoheretic
What medium did Immanuel Velikovsky not publish his works in that is accepted practice?	scientific journals
What two examples of ideas from Immanuel Velikovsky are stated as to have gained some acceptance?	extinction event and punctuated equilibrium
By definition, what contrast does heresy depend on?	an established orthodoxy
What figure of speech is the word heresy commonly used as in present day scenarios?	metaphors
In which year was the Warsaw Pact established?	1955
Which nation formed the nucleus of the Warsaw Pact?	Soviet Union
Which conflict was the impetus for the formation of the Pact?	the Cold War
How many Soviet allied countries were members of the Warsaw Pact?	seven
The acceptance of which country into NATO prompted the formation of the Warsaw Pact?	West Germany
Which organization was in direct competition with the Warsaw Pact?	NATO
Which nation saw the most significant Warsaw Pact military deployment?	Czechoslovakia
What was the name of the Polish revolutionary movement which the Warsaw Pact failed to suppress?	Solidarity
Which country saw the largest Warsaw Pact deployment?	Czechoslovakia
In which year did the Warsaw Pact cease to function effectively?	1989
What was the name of the Polish labor movement which successfully defied the Warsaw Pact?	Solidarity
In which country did the Warsaw Pact dissolution meeting take place?	Hungary
Who was the president of Czechoslovakia during the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact?	Václav Havel
Despite being headquartered in Poland, the top-ranking operatives of the Warsaw Pact were from which country?	the USSR
Which nation was in effective control of both political and military functions of the Warsaw Pact?	the USSR
Which ideologies did the Soviet Union aspire to lead around the globe?	socialism and communism
Which Soviet leader formed doctrine aimed at keeping socialist satellite nations in line?	Brezhnev
The Soviet Union feared invasion from which potential enemy?	Western Europe
The formation of the Warsaw Pact was driven by fears of which country rearming itself?	West Germany
Which country sought NATO admission in response to the fear of German rearmament?	the USSR
Who was the Soviet minister who proposed German reunification?	Molotov
When was reunification first proposed as an idea?	1952
The omission of which nation from involvement in the proposed security system led to its NATO opposition?	the USA
Who was the general who spoke out against the USSR joining NATO?	Hastings Ismay
To what did the British general compare the USSR in his opposition to their joining NATO?	burglar
In what year did Konrad Adenauer first visit the United States?	1954
Which NATO country feared a unified and rearmed Germany?	France
In which year was West Germany admitted to NATO?	1954
Halvard Lange was a minister of which NATO member?	Norway
In which month of 1955 was this pact declared?	May
Which nation was permitted rearmament by the foundation of the Warsaw Pact?	East Germany
What was the name of the East German armed forces?	the National People's Army
How many countries formed the initial Warsaw Pact membership?	eight
In which year did Mongolia seek entry in the Warsaw Pact?	1963
In which year were Soviet forces scheduled to leave Mongolia?	1966
What was the focus of both alliances' policies towards the other in lieu of direct fighting?	containment
Which continent was considered to be at the center of NATO/Warsaw Pact intrigues?	Europe
In which year did Hungary attempt to leave the Warsaw Pact?	1956
Who was the head of the Hungarian government at the time of the revolt?	Imre Nagy
In which year was the Warsaw Pact activated in a joint action?	1968
Which country did the Pact conquer?	Czechoslovakia
In which country did Warsaw Pact officials meet to dissolve the alliance?	Hungary
In which year did Romania overthrow its communist government?	1989
For how many years did the Warsaw Pact formally exist?	36
Which former Eastern Bloc country was the latest to join NATO?	Albania
In which year did Poland join NATO?	1999
In which year did Slovakia join NATO?	2004
In which year did Poland declassify most of its Warsaw Pact-era archives?	2005
How many documents remain classified?	70
What was the name of the Warsaw Pact's planned counteroffensive to a NATO first strike?	Seven Days to the River Rhine
How many nuclear weapons were eventually housed in Poland?	250
In which year was the counteroffensive strategy first conceived?	1979
What is materialism?	a form of philosophical monism
In nature, this is an essential substance?	matter
What are some examples of philosophical physicalism?	spacetime, physical energies and forces, dark matter
Some people consider physicalism to be synonymous with what?	Materialism
What class does materialism belong to?	monist ontology
What is the first question to ask in order to define the two classes?	"what does reality consist of?"
What is the second question to ask in order to define the two classes?	"how does it originate?"
An idealist considers what as the most important?	spirit or mind or the objects of mind (ideas)
A materialist considers what as the most important?	matter
Was René Descartes an idealist or a materialist?	materialist
Materialism does not define what?	how material substance should be characterized.
What type of materialism defined the Marxist philosophy?	dialectical materialism
Who coined the Axial Age?	Karl Jaspers
In what part of the world did materialism develop during the Axial Age?	Eurasia
Around what time did materialism become part of Ancient Indian philosophy?	600 BC
At that time, who helped develop materialism?	Ajita Kesakambali, Payasi, Kanada, and the proponents of the Cārvāka school of philosophy
What school advanced atomism?	Nyaya–Vaisesika school
Between what years did the school advance atomism?	600 BC - 100 BC
Materialism is linked to what?	reductionism
De Rerum Natura is a poem by who?	Lucretius
What kinf of explanation does De Rerum Natura provide for phenomena?	mechanistic explanations
Name the title of the work by Jayaraashi Bhatta.	Tattvopaplavasimha ("The upsetting of all principles")
Which type of philosphy did not continue after 1400?	materialistic Cārvāka philosophy
What is Sarva-darśana-samgraha?	a digest of all philosophies
Who wrote the Sarva-darśana-samgraha?	Madhavacharya
What is the name of the novel written by Ibn Tufail?	Hayy ibn Yaqdhan (Philosophus Autodidactus)
Pierre Gassendi lived from what year to what year?	1592-1665
René Descartes lived from what year to what year?	1596-1650
abbé Jean Meslier lived from what year to what year?	1664-1729
Denis Diderot lived from what year to what year?	1713-1784
William Wordsworth lived from what year to what year?	1770-1850
Arthur Schopenhauer lived from what year to what year?	1788-1860
What did he say that the brain would decide?	how material objects will be experienced or perceived
Who wrote "The Essence of Christianity"?	Ludwig Feuerbach
In what year was "The Essence of Christianity" written?	1841
What did the author of "The Essence of Christianity" consider religion to be?	the outward projection of man's inward nature
The author's ideas would later influence what well known philosopher?	Karl Marx
In regards to the mind, what are 3 theories that modern day philosophers try to harmonize?	functionalism, anomalous monism, identity theory
What is hyle?	matter
Relativity illustrates that what is interchangeable?	matter and energy
Ontological theory suggests that what is the main substance?	energy
Quantum field theory suggest what is the main substance?	fields
Which model suggests that matter is 5% of the universe?	Lambda-CDM model
What type of matter does the model consider it to be?	dark matter
Werner Heisenberg suggested that atoms are not what?	things
What are some of the findings that support their argument?	quantum mechanics and chaos theory.
What is the name of the 1991 book by Paul Davies and John Gribbins?	The Matter Myth
Digital physicists consider what to be more important than matter?	information
Based on the above definition, materialism is not consistent with what?	religions
Neoplatonism describes divinity as what?	simple, immaterial, formless, substance/essence (ousia) that transcended all that was physical
Which religious group strongly opposed the idea of Neoplatonism?	Christians
If you believe in idealism, you are disbeliving in what?	materialism
What 3 types of philosophies attempt to correct the problem with matter and energy without removing every belief about materialism?	Emergence, holism, and process philosophy
Instead of faith, John Polkinghorne relies on what when it comes to the theory of materialism?	dual-aspect monism
Whose technology enabled the Space Race between the Soviet Union and the united States?	German rocket technology
Who was able to launch the first orbiting satellite?	the Soviet Union
Who was the first human in space?	Yuri Gagarin
When did Apollo 11 land on the moon?	July 20, 1969
On what date did the Space Race begin?	August 2, 1955
Sputnik 1 started orbiting on what date?	October 4, 1957
Who was the first person in space?	Yuri Gagarin
What was the date that the first human reached space?	April 12, 1961
Where were the actual origin of the Space Race?	Germany
What were German aerospace engineers experimenting with in the 1930's?	liquid-fueled rockets
What engineer was recruited by Becker and Dornberger to join their secret program?	Wernher von Braun
Which war in history did the Space Race begin to take root?	World War II
A secretive army installation began in Kummersdorf-West in what year?	1932
What was von Braun's role in the army's rocket program during during World War II?	technical director of the ballistic missile program
What was the name of the first vehicle to reach outer space?	the Aggregate-4
During WWII, who was in charge of the German army's rocket program?	General Dornberger
What was the first object to enter space?	Aggregate-4 (A-4) rocket
When did the Aggregate-4 (A-4) rocket reach space?	1942 and 1943
After World War II what did the American, English and Soviet allies want to capture?	Germany's rocket engineers
What military operation allowed the US to recruit the German engineer, Von Braun?	Operation Paperclip
The US had captured what type of missiles during Operation Paperclip?	V2 rockets
Who led the Soviet rocket engineers	Sergei Korolev
Where was Sergei Korolev imprisoned for six years?	Siberia
What was his "secret" title after World War II?	the Chief Designer
The German rocket center was located in what city?	Peenemünde
Who was in charge of the Soviet rocket engineer team that went into Germany?	Sergei Korolev
What year was Sergei Korolev arrested?	1938
Sergei Korolev died in what year?	1966
After the war, Sergei Korolev was known under what title?	USSR's chief rocket and spacecraft engineer
What year was the R1 rocket born?	1948
What professor began working on solid-fuel rockets since 1914?	Robert H. Goddard
Liquid-fueled rockets were developed in what year?	1921
The  United States Army's White Sands Proving Ground is located where?	New Mexico
Von Braun and his associates were sent to  United States Army's White Sands Proving Ground in what year?	1945
The first two-stage rocket was developed in what year?	1949
The Army's new Redstone Arsenal is located in what city and state?	Huntsville, Alabama
What year was the German rocket team moved to Alabama?	1950
What year did the US lose its monopoly to the atomic bomb?	1949
What type of bomb was first developed during the Cold War?	the hydrogen bomb
ICBMs is an abbreviation for what?	intercontinental strategic bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles
The SAC is an abbreviation for what US force?	Strategic Air Command
During what decade, did a fear of communism oversweep the US?	1950s
How many casualties did the Soviet Union have during WWII?	27 million
The Soviet Union was first invaded by Nazi controlled Germany in what year?	1941
Until what year, was the US the sole possessor of the atomic bomb?	1949
In what year did Stalin order the development of ICBMs?	1947
What type of military force did the US possess a much larger fleet than the Soviet Union?	air force
Who began developing the  R-7 Semyorka rocket?	Korolev
 R-7 Semyorka rocket resembled closely to what other missile?	German G-4
When was the R-7 Semyorka rocket tested successfully?	August 21, 1957
The first satellite launched into space used what rocket?	R-7 Semyorka rocket
The US Air Force began research of ICBMs in what year?	1945
What type of rocket was first researched by the Air Force?	MX-774
The MX-774 was tested in what year?	1947
The Air Force PGM-11 Redstone rocket family was tested where?	Cape Canaveral
The Atlas-A first launched on what date?	June 11, 1957
Who was president Dwight D. Eisenhower's press secretary?	James C. Hagerty
The starting date for the Space Race was which date?	August 30, 1955
A Jupiter-C was launched by Von Braum on what date?	September 20, 1956
The civilian rocket and satellite project in the US was called what?	Vanguard
Project Vanguard launch failed on what date?	December 6, 195
Cape Canaveral Air Force Station is located in what state?	Florida
in response to Project Vanguard's failed launch, what was the rocket the Soviet Union launched?	Jupiter-C rocket
The first US satellite to launch without failure was on what date?	January 31, 1958
The Explorer gathered what 3 measurements?	cosmic ray and radiation levels, the temperature in the spacecraft, and the frequency of collisions with micrometeorites
Who was the Senate's Majority Leader in 1958?	Lyndon B. Johnson
The National Aeronautics and Space Act was established in what year?	1958
What was NASA called before it became NASA?	National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics
The first US satellite was launched on what date?	April 2, 1958
The Redstone Arsenal became the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center when?	July 1, 1960
Who was the first director in charge of the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center?	von Braun
How many attempts to the Moon did Luna E-1-class probes fail before successfully launching?	4
The first probe to land on the Moon was in what year?	1959
Which Luna probe successfully photographed the back side of the Moon?	Luna 3
The Ranger program from 1959 was managed by what organization?	NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory
The first spacecraft to make it to the Moon was what?	Ranger 4
The first Ranger mission that didn't fail was which one?	Block III Ranger 7
The Block III Ranger 7 mission successfully reached the moon on what date?	July 31, 1964
What program led to the establishment of the Ranger program?	Luna
Which country succesfully launched the first person into space in 1961?	the USSR
The first ship to carry a human through space was called what?	Vostok 1
How long did Yuri Gagarin orbit the earth in the spacecraft?	108 minutes
April 12, in the USSR, is what special day?	Cosmonautics Day
What year was established as the International Day of Human Space Flight by the United Nations?	2011
Man in Space Soonest was a program by which organization?	US Air Force
Man in Space Soonest was reestablished as what in November 26, 1958?	Project Mercury
The first American to travel into space was whom?	Alan Shepard
When did Alan Shepard first arrive in space?	May 5, 1961
The spaceship that carried Alan Shepard was named what?	Freedom 7
The first person to have control over driving their spacecraft was whom?	Alan Shepard
Which president awarded Alan Shepard the NASA Distinguished Service Medal?	John F. Kennedy
President Kennedy sent a letter on April 20, 1961 to who about the US's space program?	Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson
The speech by Kennedy, "Special Message on Urgent National Needs" was delivered on what date?	May 25
"We choose to go to the Moon" speech was given at what location in Texas?	Rice University Stadium
The first American to orbit around the planet was whom?	John Glenn
When did John Glenn orbit the Earth?	February 20, 1962
Where did John Glenn land on Earth after coming back from orbit?	Atlantic Ocean
John Glenn's spaceship was named what when he orbited the Earth?	Friendship 7
How many more Mercury missions were there after John Glenn's?	3
What first person from the USSR controlled their own spacecraft?	Gherman Titov
Gherman Titov from the USSR drove his own spacecraft on what date?	August 6, 1961
Radio communication was possible between which two spacecrafts in August 11 and 12, 1962?	Vostok 3 and Vostok 4
The first woman that went into space was whom?	Valentina Tereshkova
What spacecraft carried  Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman in space?	Vostok 6
The first woman to launch into space was on what date?	June 16, 1963
The first woman to go into space was from which country?	The USSR
At what event was the Vostok spaceship first displayed to the public ?	July 1961 Tushino air show
When did US President John F. Kennedy, in a speech, propose to join forces to reach the moon with the USSR?	September 20, 1963
President Kennedy was killed when?	November 22, 1963
How did US President Kennedy die?	assassination
What two locations in Florida were renamed after Kennedy by President Johnson?	Cape Canaveral and Apollo launch facilities
Which two space programs were heavily worked on by President Johnson?	Gemini and Apollo
What year was the Gemini project confirmed?	1962
How many people could the Gemini project carry?	2
On what date was the first successful three man astronaut crew?	October 12, 1964
The first flight in a spacecraft that allowed no suits to be worn inside was was?	Voskhod 1
The US Apollo Command Module flew without spacesuits in what year?	1968
Korolev died on what date?	January 14, 1966
The Voskhod 2 carrying two humans was launched on what date?	March 18, 1965
Who was the first person to take a spacewalk?	Alexey Leonov
Which of two Voskhod 2's occupants was almost killed?	Alexey Leonov
Project Gemini helped recruit experienced people for which upcoming lunar missions?	Apollo
Who created the circumlunar program called Zond?	Vladimir Chelomey
Which type of craft were two astronauts to fly in during Zond?	Soyuz 7K-L1
The "Lunniy Korabl" or "LK" would carry how many people?	N1
The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was established in what year?	1959
The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was created by what organization in 1959?	United Nations
A problem was resolved by whom when both the US and the USSR supported a cooperative space program?	Political Committee of the UN General Assembly
The cooperative space program was passed on what date?	December 1962
The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space was signed by three countries on what date?	January 27, 1967
Both crews were killed on which spacecraft missions in 1967?	Apollo and Soyuz
The Outer Space Treaty was signed by the US and the USSR on what date?	January 27, 1967
What was the cause of the fire that killed everyone on the first Apollo mission before launch?	electrical spark
Who were the three people who died on the first Apollo mission before launch?	Command Pilot Virgil "Gus" Grissom, Senior Pilot Edward H. White, and Pilot Roger Chaffee
Who was the person credited with the first in-flight space death?	Vladimir Komarov
When did Vladimir Komarov die on impact from his spacecraft crash?	April 24, 1967
Apollo 7 launched from Earth on what date?	October 11, 1968
Who was in charge of the Apollo 7 mission on board?	Walter Schirra
The Soyuz 3 began its mission to space on what date?	October 26, 1968
When was the first successful docking of a two man space crew?	January 1969
Which two space missions were the first to successfully dock each other?	Soyuz 4 and Soyuz 5
Where was the Zond 4 over when it was destroyed by an explosion?	Gulf of Guinea
The first successful water landing in the Indian Ocean by the Soviets was was when?	1968
What animal was carried aboard the  Zond 5?	tortoises
The first Lunar Module was delayed to what date?	March 1969
Which three people were the first to ride the Saturn V rocket into space?	Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders
What date did Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders leave Earth on the Apollo 8 mission?	December 21, 1968
During what holiday, was the Apollo 8 mission broadcast from orbit?	Christmas Eve
Which ocean did the Apolo 8 mission land in?	Pacific
How close to the ground was the Lunar Module in May 1969 during its landing test?	47,400 feet
The Lunar Module completed its first low Earth orbit on what date?	March 1969
The Soviet, N1 Rocket exploded and was destroyed on what date?	July 3, 1969
Apollo 11 mission was to land where on the Moon?	Sea of Tranquility
When did the Apollo 11 mission launch?	July 16, 1969
What state did the Saturn V rocket launch from?	Florida
When was the crew chosen to participate on the Apollo 11 mission?	January 1969
How long did the trip to the Moon last for the crew of the Apollo 11?	three days
The Lunar Module of the Apollo 11 was named after what animal?	Eagle
Who was the first human to take a step on the Moon?	Armstrong
At what time on Earth did Armstrong first step onto the Moon?	9:56 pm CDT July 20
How many people saw the first step onto the Moon?	723 million
When did they launch from the Moon to reattach to the Columbia?	The next day
When did the Apollo 11 mission land back on Earth?	July 24, 1969
Where did the Apollo 11 mission land back on Earth?	Pacific Ocean
When was the second landing on the Moon successful?	November 1969
When did the Apollo 14 mission land successfully?	February 1971
Apollo 15 landed on the Moon on what date?	July 1971
On what date was the Apollo 16 successful on landing on the Moon?	April 1972
Apollo 17 landed on the Moon on which date?	December 1972
Which year did the USSR cancel the N1 rocket program after two failures that didn't launch?	1976
The USSR launched their first space station on what date?	April 19, 1971
Who made up the crew of the Soyuz 11?	Vladislav Volkov, Georgi Dobrovolski and Viktor Patsayev
The station, Salyut 1, came back to Earth on which date?	October 11
How long did the station, Salyut 1, stay in orbit?	175 days
Why did The Durable Orbital Station-2 not reach orbit?	rocket failure
The Skylab 1 was launched on which date?	May 14, 1973
How much did the Skylab 1 weigh?	169,950 pounds
When did the Skylab 1 finally come back to Earth?	July 11, 1979
Which two world leaders had negotiations that relieved the Cold War?	Richard M. Nixon and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev
When did President Nixon and Brezhnev of the USSR end the Cold War?	May 1972
ASTP stands for what?	Apollo-Soyuz Test Project
Which Soyuz mission in December 1974 was to be used for the ASTP?	16
Soyuz 19 took off from Earth on what date?	July 15, 1975
What year did the USSR disband?	1991
Which Russian rocket carries passengers to and from the International Space Station?	R-7 rocket
The United States' National Defense Education Act was established in what year?	1958
What is a pub licensed to sell?	it is licensed to sell alcohol
In many villages what establishment could be called the focal point of the community?	the pub
What is the term 'pub' short for?	public house
Where in the United States are pubs located?	New England
What continental European country has pubs?	Denmark
Other than the United States, where in North America are pubs located?	Canada
Who said that pubs are the heart of England?	Samuel Pepys
How far back does the history of pubs go back?	to Roman taverns
What was the Anglo-Saxon pup called?	alehouse
What is a pub tied to in the 19th century?	the modern tied house system
What Roman businesses were analogous to modern day pubs?	taverns
What similar establishments existed in the Anglo-Saxon world?	alehouse
In what century did the tied house system develop?	19th century
Why were the windows of town pubs made of smoked or frosted glass traditionally?	to obscure the clientele from the street
What fares do most pubs offer?	beers, wines, spirits, and soft drinks and snacks
What are traditional pub windows made out of?	smoked or frosted glass
What are the windows of 1990s and later pubs often made of?	clear glass
Aside from beverages, what types of food do pubs typically offer?	snacks
What is the owner, tenant or manager of a pub known as?	pub landlord
What term came into use in Victorian times to designate the pub landlord?	publican
Name one way  regulars choose their Pubs?	for their proximity to home or work
What is a proper term for the licensee of the pub?	pub landlord
What was the pub landlord often called in Victorian times?	publican
What are pubs called by those who regularly visit there?	locals
Teams for what sport can be found congregating at pubs?	darts
What gaming tables can often be found in pubs?	pool or snooker
What was the off-sales counter or attached shop for the sales of beers, wines and spirits for home consumption often referred to as?	jug and bottle
In what decade did pubs tend to cease selling alcohol for off-premises drinking?	1970s
What was the name of the counter where pubs traditionally sold alcohol to drink at home?	off-sales counter
What was a colloquial term for the off-sales counter?	the jug and bottle
Along with high street chain stores and off-licenses, what stores undercut pub alcohol sales in the 1970s?	supermarkets
When did the inhabitants of the British Isles begin drinking ale?	the Bronze Age
With the Roman road network, what were the first inns called?	tabernae
How did the alewife let people know that her brew was ready?	the Anglo-Saxon alewife would put a green bush up on a pole
What did King Edgar decree in 965?	there should be no more than one alehouse per village
During what historical epoch did Britons begin drinking ale?	the Bronze Age
In what century did the Romans arrive in Britain?	the 1st Century
What was the Latin term for the Roman inns?	tabernae
In what century did the Romans leave Britain?	5th Century
What color bush did an Anglo-Saxon woman raise to indicate that her ale was done brewing?	green
In the early Middle Ages, where could a traveler obtain overnight accommodations?	in monasteries
When were the Hostellers of London were granted guild status?	1446
What name was taken by the Hostellers in 1514?	Worshipful Company of Innholders
When did the Hostellers of London become a guild?	1446
In what year did the Hostellers of London change their name to the Worshipful Company of Innholders?	1514
Where did travelers early in the Middle Ages often find lodgings?	monasteries
What religious activity was responsible for the growing demand for hostelries?	pilgrimages
Where is an inn typically located?	in the country or along a highway
In addition to providing for the needs of travelers what was another typical use for an inn?	community gathering places
How old are some of the inns in Europe?	several centuries
Aside from lodging, what amenities are often offered at inns?	food and drink
What road is an inn often located near?	highway
How many thousand years ago did the Romans build their road system?	two
About how old are the oldest inns in Europe?	several centuries
What role did inns serve other than housing travelers?	community gathering places
What amenity does an inn offer that pubs, alehouses and taverns usually do not?	accommodation
In what nation's pubs is food often served?	the UK
Along with Southwark and The Tabard, what is a notable London inn?	The George
In what country is "The Welcome Inn" frequently used as a name for pubs?	Scotland
Aside from human beings, what creature's needs were traditionally seen to at inns?	horses
What is the main service of an inn, now also attainable in motels, hotels and lodges?	lodging
What is the main provision that pubs offer?	alcohol
What are customers seeking when they visit restaurants or taverns?	food and drink
What is a noted hotel brand throughout North America?	Holiday Inn
In the United States, what are operators of lodgings sometimes called?	innkeepers
Along with the Inns of Chancery, in what inns did British lawyers historically conduct business?	Inns of Court
In what city are the Inns of Chancery located?	London
Outside England, what other country does the legal system founded around the Inns of Court operate in?	Wales
What was the one ingredient of traditional English ale?	fermented malt
What country pioneered the introduction of hops for beer production?	the Netherlands
In what century was the process of using hops to produce beer introduced to England?	15th
In what century did the first independent breweries appear in England?	17th
What businesses were the dominant brewers of beer in England by the close of the 17th century?	commercial breweries
After what political upheaval was gin introduced to England?	the Glorious Revolution
What people introduced gin to England?	the Dutch
In what year did the Glorious Revolution occur?	1688
How much more gin than beer was made in England in 1740?	six times
In 1740, what fraction of London drinking establishments were gin shops?	half
What artist created the engraving Beer Street and Gin Lane?	William Hogarth
What law imposed a high tax on gin shops and resulted in riots?	The Gin Act 1736
When were the Gin Act 1736 duties eliminated?	1742
What law placed gin shops under the control of local magistrates?	The Gin Act 1751
In what century did gin houses proliferate throughout Britain?	19th
What book by Dickens described activities in drinking establishments?	Sketches by Boz
Over what two-year period was Sketches by Boz written?	1835–1836
What was another name for gin houses early in the 19th century?	"Gin Palaces"
In what British city did gin houses first appear?	London
What law allowed the existence of beer houses?	Beer Act of 1830
In what way did small beer differ from regular beer?	low alcohol content
What alcohol was regarded as evil when compared to beer?	gin
What was the intention behind the passage of the Beer Act of 1830?	reducing public drunkenness
What is the approximate modern value of two guineas in 1830?	£168
What did the Beer Act allow a householder to sell from his home?	beer or cider
On what day were beer houses closed?	Sundays
Along with barrels, what was beer typically dispensed from?	jugs
What was forbidden from being sold in beer houses?	spirits and fortified wines
How many beer houses opened their doors in the inaugural year of the Beer Act?	400
How many beer houses existed throughout Britain eight years after the passage of the Beer Act?	46,000
In what year were additional licensing laws introduced for beer houses?	1869
What establishments did beer houses become after buying an additional license?	pubs
By the end of what century were most beer houses closed?	19th
Where are purpose-built pubs typically located?	corners or road junctions
What modern brewers often first began as beer houses?	real ale micro-brewers
Along with The Royal Oak and The Crown, what is a traditional name for a pub?	The Red Lion
What is an example of a name for a beer house?	Smith's Beer House
In addition to a license to sell spirits, what did tavern owners require a license to sell?	ale
In what century did public drinking regulations first exist in England?	17th
What party received income from the sale of public drinking house licenses?	the crown
In what century were the operating hours of drinking establishments first limited?	19th
In what decade were the restrictions on public drinking establishment licenses loosened?	1960s
What bodies controlled drinking establishment licensing administration as of 2005?	Local Authorities
What law mandated a license from the local magistrate to sell beer?	Wine and Beerhouse Act 1869
At what locations were public house licenses granted?	special Licensing Sessions courts
Retirees from what two professions often sought licenses for pubs?	ex-servicemen or ex-policemen
What were licenses called that allowed spirits to be served at temporary premises?	Occasional Licences
Where can historical licensing records be examined?	London Metropolitan Archives centre
Along with a public house's address, licensee, and the licensee's misdemeanors, what information was kept in licensing records?	owner
What law further restricted public houses?	the Defence of the Realm Act
In what month and year was the Defence of the Realm Act passed?	August 1914
Along with the period 6:30 pm–9:30 pm, what opening hours were acceptable under the Defence of the Realm Act?	12 noon–2:30 pm
What is an example of a county where provinces were closed for violating the Defence of the Realm Act?	Pembrokeshire
What body enforced pubs' closing hours under the Defence of the Realm Act?	the police
What was the mandated closing time of pubs in Kensington in the 1960s?	10:30 pm
What was the mandated closing time of pubs in Knightsbridge in the 1960s?	11 pm
What is an example of an English city where breweries were run by the government?	Carlisle
In what year did the State Management Scheme cease?	1973
On what days were Scottish and Welsh pubs often 'dry'?	Sundays
Circa 2000, what was the latest pubs in Wales could be open until on every day but Sunday?	11 pm
What was the latest legal closing time on Sundays in English pubs as of 2000?	10:30 pm
How many hours per day were pubs located near Billingsgate fish market allowed to remain open?	24
In 2000, what was the earliest Welsh and English pubs could open on Sundays?	12 noon
In 2000, what was the earliest Welsh and English pubs could open on any day but Sunday?	11 am
When were wartime licensing laws ended in Scotland?	1976
What constituent countries of the United Kingdom's licensing laws were notably flexible?	Scotland's and Northern Ireland's
When did the Licensing Act 2003 come into effect?	24 November 2005
After the Licensing Act 2003, who determined the operating hours of pubs?	the local council
Due to the traditional closing hours, when was there often violence outside of pubs?	11.30 pm
How many alcohol involved hospital admissions were there in 2006/7?	207,800
How many pubs applied to be allowed to sell alcohol 24 hours a day?	1,121
What is it called when the owner of a pub allows patrons to remain when the pub should have closed?	"lock-in"
What law allows pubs to apply to extend their closing hours after 11pm?	Licensing Act 2003
A law of what year prompted the existence of the "lock-in"?	1915
What action by a pub owner can result in his prosecution?	allowing smoking
In what month and year was smoking banned in public places in Scotland?	March 2006
When did Wales outlaw smoking in public?	April 2007
What was the month and year when England banned public smoking?	July 2007
What company took over Scottish & Newcastle's pubs?	Carlsberg and Heineken
What chain of pubs reported favorable profits in June 2009?	Wetherspoon
What street in Islington was named for a pub run by Mr Ball?	Balls Pond Road
On what street was the Grecian Saloon located?	City Road
What pub was the home of the Grecian Saloon?	The Eagle
What is rhyming slang for 'coat'?	weasel
In what century did saloons become established?	18th
Along with cabaret, striptease, bands and drama, what is a type of stage performance that can be found in pubs?	stand-up comedy
Along with karaoke, what type of prerecorded music is often found in pubs?	juke boxes
What socioeconomic class was associated with the lounge bar in the 20th century?	middle-class
What economic class was most likely to be found in the tap room?	working class
In pence, what did the cheapest beer cost in the four-ale bar?	4
What was the tap room sawdust meant to absorb spills and spit called?	spit and sawdust
What is another name for the lounge bar?	saloon
In what decades did class distinctions break down in Britain?	the 1960s and 1970s
What was a common way of removing the division between the saloon and bar?	removal of the dividing wall or partition
What is another name for the smoke room?	snug
What was the relationship between the price of beer in the smoke room versus the rest of the bar?	higher
Along with the local police, what profession is given as an example of someone who might use the snug?	the parish priest
What were the windows in the snug made out of?	frosted glass
How many pubs were part of the CAMRA survey?	50,000
According to CAMRA, how many pubs in Britain possess classic snugs?	very few
In Germany, what do servers do to serve beer in beer gardens?	bring the beer out to the table
Before the pub, where did beer establishments keep their casks of ale?	taproom
What establishments inspired pubs to set up serving bars?	gin houses
In what settlement is the pub known as The Vine located?	Brierley Hill
What do the locals call The Vine?	The Bull and Bladder
Who pioneered the circular bar?	Isambard Kingdom Brunel
At what establishment was the circular bar introduced?	Swindon station pub
What was Isambard Brunel's occuption?	engineer and railway builder
What was Isambard Brunel's nationality?	British
What is a "beer engine"?	a device for pumping beer
What is the function of a "beer engine"?	to dispense beer from a cask or container in a pub's basement or cellar
Who invented the beer pump in England?	John Lofting
In what city was the beer pump invented?	London
In what country was John Lofting born?	Netherlands
What was the death year of John Lofting?	1742
When was John Lofting born?	1659
In what newspaper did John Lofting mention his beer pump?	London Gazette
On what day was Lofting's fire engine patent published?	17 March 1691
How many barrels did Lofting promise his beer pump would deliver hourly?	20 to 30
What location did John Lofting live near?	St Thomas Apostle London
In what London borough did Nicholas Wall reside?	Islington
What was William Tillcar's profession?	Turner
What tavern did William Tillcar live adjacent to?	Sun Tavern
What is a common name for a beer pump powered by hand?	handpump
Along with electricity, what sometimes powers beer pumps that aren't operated by hand?	gas
What was the name for a pub that could sell beer from more than one brewery?	a Free house
In what century did the habit arise of pubs selling beer from only one brewery?	18th
What was the name of the private individual who rented out a pub owned by a brewery?	landlord
What is a notable brewery in Kent that owns hundreds of pubs?	Shepherd Neame
What London breweries each own many pubs?	Young's and Fuller's
What is an example of a brewer that owns pubs throughout Britain?	Greene King
What law required that a pub offer at least one beer from a brewery it wasn't tied to?	The Beer Orders
In what year were the Beer Orders passed?	1989
Along with Punch Taverns and Weatherspoons, what was an organization formed as a result of the Beer Orders?	O'Neill's
What is the name of a company that retails but does not manufacture drinks?	PubCo
Along with breweries, what type of company may run a pub chain?	PubCo
In what country was Punch Taverns established?	the UK
When a pub is bought by a new owner, what often happens to them?	renamed
What often happens to regional breweries after they sell their pubs?	closed down
What is the closest outlet for a brewery's beers called?	A brewery tap
If the brewery tap is not located in the brewery, where is it usually located?	the nearest pub
What is the term for a pub that brews and sells its own beer?	brewpub
What is another name for a rural public house?	country pub
What was a function of distant country pubs before the rise of motor vehicles?	serving travellers as coaching inns
Over what period of years has the traditional function of country pubs been changing?	the last thirty
What is a frequent modern function of country pubs?	providing seating facilities for the consumption of food
Along with community meetings, what was the traditional purpose of country pubs?	drinking
What is a blanket term for pubs that, for example, cater to sports fans?	theme pubs
What is an example of a theme pub that caters to people of a certain nationality?	Irish pubs
What is an example of a theme pub that caters to people with certain musical interests?	rock pubs
What sort of theme pub would be likely to feature strippers?	strip pubs
In what sort of theme pub could one find visitors singing with musical accompaniment?	karaoke bars
Which monarch required landlords to post a sign if they wanted to sell ale?	Richard II
In what year did the king demand ale-sellers post signage on pain of forfeiture?	1393
What was William Shakespeare's father's first name?	John
What was John Shakespeare's profession?	inspectors
If an ale-seller refused to post a sign, what punishment would he receive?	forfeit his ale
In what historical period was a large portion of the population illiterate?	the Middle Ages
From where did pubs without written names derive their names?	the illustration on the pub's sign
Inscriptions from what language were sometimes present on pub signs?	Latin
Along with The Star and The Sun, what was a typical symbol used on a pub sign?	The Cross
What graphic belonging to the local lord was sometimes incorporated on the pub sign?	the coat of arms
What plants were sometimes featured on pub signs?	hops
Local pub nicknames were often related to what profession?	farming
What was an example of a battle that might lend itself to a pub name?	Trafalgar
What town is The Crow and Gate located in?	Crowborough
What county is home to The Crow and Gate?	East Sussex
Members of what family were sometimes used as pub names?	royal
What hangs today over most British pub doors?	decorated signs
What piece of information is almost always listed on a pub sign?	the name of the pub
What purpose do stand-alone signs serve for country pubs?	directing potential customers to their door
What is an example of a memorable name for a pub chain?	Slug and Lettuce
What sort of theme is thought memorable for modern pub names?	comic
What is the purpose of a pub name?	to identify and differentiate each pub
What type of pub signs were useful to an illiterate clientele?	pictorial signs
After whom was the Marquis of Granby pub named?	John Manners, Marquess of Granby
Who was the father of John Manners, Marquess of Granby?	John Manners, 3rd Duke of Rutland
What was the military rank of the 3rd Duke of Rutland?	general
In what century did the 3rd Duke of Rutland live?	18th
What were pubs licensed in 1780 named?	the Royal George
The pub "The Bag o'Nails" was a corruption of what word?	Bacchanals
What phrase was "The Goat and Compasses" a corruption of?	God Encompasseth Us
What does Chaton Fidèle mean in English?	Faithful Kitten
What location does Boulogne Bouche refer to?	Boulogne-sur-Mer Harbour
Who won a victory at Boulogne-sur-Mer Harbour?	Henry VIII
What game played in both Britain and America has become increasingly popular in pubs?	pool
Along with Aunt Sally and ringing the bull, what is one of the obscure traditional games played in pubs?	Nine Men's Morris
Along with darts, skittles, dominoes and bar billiards, what is a well-known pub game?	cards
Along with dominoes, on what pub game can you legally bet in the United Kingdom?	cribbage
What table-based version of soccer is an increasingly popular pub game?	Table Football
Along with slot machines, what is a modern game that is increasingly present in pubs?	video games
What is a pub that plays pop and hip-hop music called?	dance bar
At what sort of pub can you watch rugby union on television?	sports bar
Along with Bat and trap, what game is popular in south London pubs?	Shove ha'penny
What is the term for pub-based football that is often played on Sundays?	Sunday League Football
What sport is played on a pub's bowling green?	Bowling
Dr. Feelgood and the Kursaal Flyers are examples of bands from what genre of music?	Pub rock
What genre of music was influenced by pub rock?	Punk music
In what decade was Pub rock popular?	the 1970s
Pork scratchings, pickled eggs and salted crisps are examples of what type of food?	bar snacks
In London, what food vendors could often be found near pubs?	mobile shellfish stalls
In what section of London can mobile shellfish stalls still be found today?	East End
What seafood can often be purchased in jars at pubs?	pickled cockles and mussels
During what decade did some British pubs provide "a pie and a pint"?	1950s
In what decade was the ploughman's lunch often consumed in pubs?	1960s
What decade saw the popularity of "chicken in a basket"?	1960s
What was "chicken in a basket" served in?	a wicker basket
Along with chicken, what food was included in "chicken in a basket"?	chips
What are foods like fish and chips and chicken wings called when they're served at a pub?	Pub grub
On what day do pubs sometimes offer free snacks?	Sunday
What culture's cuisine is ploughman's lunch a part of?	British
During what decade did food become an important aspect of a pub's business?	the 1990s
Along with dinners, what meals do modern pubs often serve?	lunches
What is a term for pubs that serve restaurant-quality food?	gastropubs
Other than the bar, in what room might patrons of a pub eat?	dining room
What two words is 'gastropub' a portanteau of?	pub and gastronomy
In what year was the term gastropub invented?	1991
Along with David Eyre, who took over the Eagle pub?	Mike Belben
In what city is the Eagle pub located?	London
In what area of London is the Eagle pub located?	Clerkenwell
How many pubs does the National Trust own?	thirty-six
In what city is the George Inn located?	London
What city is home to The Crown Liquor Saloon?	Belfast
What part of the United Kingdom is Belfast located in?	Northern Ireland
What body maintains a National Inventory of notable pubs?	CAMRA
What pub in England is the highest above sea level?	the Tan Hill Inn
In what county is the Tan Hill Inn located?	Yorkshire
How many meters above sea level is the Tan Hill Inn?	528
In what settlement is the pub known as The Old Forge located?	Inverie
In what country of the United Kingdom is the Old Forge pub located?	Scotland
What pub holds the Guinness World Record as the oldest in England?	Ye Olde Fighting Cocks
In what century was the building occupied by Ye Olde Fighting Cocks built?	11th
Where is Ye Olde Trip to Jerusalem located?	Nottingham
When does Ye Olde Trip to Jerusalem claim to have been founded?	1189
When was a pub documented as existing on the current site of the Nags Head?	1086
Where is The Old Ferryboat Inn located?	Holywell
How far back does the foundation of The Old Ferryboat Inn date?	460
When was ale first served at the site of The Old Ferryboat Inn?	560
When does The Bingley Arms claim to have been founded?	905
In what county is the Bingley Arms located?	Yorkshire
When does the building housing Ye Olde Salutation Inn date back to?	1240
Where is Ye Olde Salutation Inn located?	Nottingham
When does the building housing Ye Olde Man & Scythe date from?	1631
What town is the Q Inn located in?	Stalybridge
What county is home to The Old 13th Cheshire Rifleman Corps Inn?	Cheshire
What pub has the shortest name in the United Kingdom?	the Q Inn
What is the pub with the longest name in the UK?	The Old 13th Cheshire Rifleman Corps Inn
What county is Stalybridge in?	Cheshire
When was a smoking ban passed in the United Kingdom?	2007
In what year did the number of United Kingdom pubs generally start to decline?	1982
Competition from what new form of establishment is sometimes blamed for the decline of pubs?	gastro-pubs
What business that sells cheap alcohol has sometimes been held to have resulted in the decline of pubs?	supermarkets
How many closed pubs did The Lost Pubs Project catalog?	28,095
In what year did Parliament inquire into the frequency of pub closures?	2015
What did Parliament promise to pass as a result of increased pub closures?	legislation to improve relations between owners and tenants
Who was based out of the Swan Inn?	Dick Turpin
In what county was the Swan Inn located?	Buckinghamshire
What was the name of the innkeeper at the Spread Eagle in the 1920s?	John Fothergill
In what year was An Innkeeper's Diary published?	1931
What publishing house published An Innkeeper's Diary?	Chatto & Windus
What pub was associated with Samuel Johnson, perhaps erroneously?	Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese
Along with the Prospect of Whitby, what pub was Samuel Pepys associated with?	the Cock Tavern
What writer was known to visit both the Cheshire Cheese and the Prospect of Whitby?	Charles Dickens
Along with the Prospect of Whitby and the Cheshire Cheese, what pub did Dickens visit?	Ye Olde Cock Tavern
What is the street address of The Fitzroy Tavern?	16 Charlotte Street
In what district of London is The Fitzroy Tavern located?	Fitzrovia
In what district of London is Pillars of Hercules located?	Soho
What real-life pub provided the model for Orwell's The Moon Under Water?	The Canonbury Tavern
In what district of London is The Canonbury Tavern located?	Canonbury
Where is the Red Lion located?	Parliament Square
What notable feature of the Red Lion reflects its parliamentary connection?	a Division bell
Who owned the Punch Bowl with Guy Ritchie?	Madonna
In what district of London was the Punch Bowl located?	Mayfair
What pub was visited by Freddie Mercury?	The Coleherne
At what pub did Ronnie Kray kill someone in 1966?	The Blind Beggar
What pub is associated with some of Jack the Ripper's victims?	The Ten Bells
Outside what pub was David Blakely shot?	The Magdala
What is the present name of the former Crown and Anchor?	The Crown Tavern
In what year did Joseph Stalin visit London?	1903
At what pub did Thomas Paine write The Rights of Man?	The Angel
In what district of London is The Angel located?	Islington
What writer mentioned The Angel pub in his writings?	Charles Dickens
What is the present status of the Angel pub?	a Co-operative Bank
Prior to becoming a pub, what did the Angel serve as?	a coaching inn
Along with the Eagle and Child, at what pub did the Inklings regularly meet?	the Lamb and Flag
Where is the Eagle and Child located?	Oxford
Along with J. R. R. Tolkien, who was a noted member of the Inklings?	C. S. Lewis
Where is the Eagle pub located?	Cambridge
On what date did Francis Crick announce to an audience of pub-goers that he had discovered DNA?	28 February 1953
What pub is feature on the British soap opera Coronation Street?	The Rovers Return
What pub is featured on EastEnders?	The Queen Vic
What channel is EastEnders broadcast on?	BBC One
What channel is home to the soap opera Emmerdale?	ITV
What pub is featured on Emmerdale?	the Woolpack
What would be a more accurate classification for many "British" pubs found outside Britain?	themed bars
What continental European country has pubs that would be familiar to a Briton?	Denmark
How many British cask beers were present at the 2008 European Beer Festival?	56
In what city did the 2008 European Beer Festival take place?	Copenhagen
About how many people visited the 2008 European Beer Festival?	20,000
What is the native Irish term for a pub's atmosphere?	craic
What does teach tábhairne mean in English?	tavernhouse
What Irish term means "drinkinghouse"?	teach óil
Vis-à-vis pubs in Ireland, what feature do pubs in Northern Ireland lack?	spirit grocers
What country outside Ireland is known for having Irish pubs?	New Zealand
Traditionally, what was the popular term for a drinking establishment in English-speaking Canada?	tavern
In what decade did "bar" become the popular term for a drinking establishment in English-speaking Canada?	1970s
In the 19th century, what term was used in English-speaking Canada to describe a drinking establishment?	public house
What body often runs pubs on the campuses of Canadian universities?	the student's union
In what decade could one find an "English looking" pub trend in Canada?	1990s
What is a person who follows Christianity called?	Christian
Whose life do Christians learn from?	Jesus Christ
What Greek word is Christian derived from?	Christós
Christós is translated from what Biblical term?	mashiach
While many, the perceptions of Christianity can sometimes what?	conflict
Regardless of beliefs, Christians all agree that Jesus has a unique what?	significance
Whether one partakes in practices or beliefs, the label Christian is sometimes attached because they associate with what?	the cultural aspects of Christianity
According to one report, how many Christians were in the world in 2010?	2.2 billion
How many Christians were in the world in 1910?	600 million
If growth continues as it has, what religion will be the largest in the world by 2050?	Christianity
Of all the Christians in the world, how many are Catholic?	half
Christians are the majority in how many countries and territories in the world today?	158
What Greek word defines as "follower of Christ?"	Χριστιανός (Christianos)
Where does the Greek word Χριστιανός (Christianos) come from?	Χριστός (Christos)
What does Χριστός (Christos) mean?	anointed one
What is the French word for Christian that was derived from Greek?	Chrétien
Where is the first reference to the word Christian in the Bible?	Acts 11:26
Who made the second reference to the word Christian in the Bible?	Herod Agrippa II
When verse was the third mention?	Peter 4:16
Kenneth Samuel Wuest believes that the Biblical Christian term referenced people who did not acknowledge who?	the emperor of Rome
In what city did the term Christians start?	Antioch
When Peter endorsed the term, the term Christian was used instead of what other term?	Nazarenes
What is one of the first mentions of the term Christian in a non-religious work, referring to a tribe of Christians?	Josephus
Which non-religious piece of literature had the term Christian in it towards the end of the first century?	Tacitus
Christians were said to be the scapegoat of who?	Nero
In Acts 24, what is another word that Christians are called?	Nazarenes
What was Jesus called since he was from Nazareth?	Nazoraean
What is another Hebrew term for Nazarenes?	Notzrim
Wha still calls Christians Notzrim?	modern Israeli Hebrew
While Christianity is ultimately one belief, a wide range of what is found among the different denominations and sects?	beliefs and practices
Who states that Christian believers agree that Jesus has a unique significance?	Linda Woodhead
Who wrote The Case Against Christianity?	Michael Martin
How many historical Christian creeds did Martin write about?	three
What do Christians believe is the way to salvation?	faith in Jesus
What are the three creeds Martin studied?	the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed and the Athanasian Creed
Judaism does not believe that Jesus is the what?	Messiah
What village did Jesus come from?	Galilean village
Where was the Galilean village?	Nazareth
Where is Nazareth located?	northern Israel
What does Masīḥī mean?	followers of the Messiah
When did the term Nasara become used more in modern times?	July 2014
What happened in July 2014?	the Fall of Mosul
What was spray pained on the properties of Christians who left the area?	the first letter of Nasara
Which term is in reference to people from a Christian culture?	Nasrani
Which term is indicative of people who place their faith in Jesus?	Masihi
What description is used for Western people who do not follow the Muslim faith?	Nasrani
What is the Arabic term when referring to Christians in a political sense?	Ṣalībī
Ṣalībī comes from the word ṣalīb, which means what?	cross
What does Ṣalībī mean?	Crusader
What does Alfranj mean?	European Christian Crusaders
What is the most common Persian word for Christian?	Masīhī
What is the Syriac word for Nazarene?	Nasrānī
What does tars mean?	fear, respect
What is the Middle Persion word for Christian?	Tarsā
Which word has been connected to Saint Thomas Christians of Kerala, India?	Nasrani
What do followers of Jesus call themselves in the Indian subcontinent?	Isaai
What do the people in the Indian subcontinent call Jesus?	Isa Masih
What term did the Malays use for the Portuguese Serani?	Nasrani
What does the term refer to now?	the modern Kristang creoles of Malaysia
What is the Chinese word for Christian?	基督徒 (pinyin: jīdū tú)
What does 基督徒 (pinyin: jīdū tú) mean?	Christ follower
What was the original pronunciation of Jīdū?	Ki-To in Cantonese
What did the two characters read in Vietnamese?	Cơ đốc
What Japanese term was used in reference to Roman Catholics?	kirishitan
When was the term kirishitan used by the Japanese?	16th and 17th centuries
Who banned Roman Catholicism in Japan?	the Tokugawa shogunate
How are Christians referenced today in Japan?	Kirisuto-kyōto
What is the Korean word for Christian?	기독교도, Kidok-kyo-do
Which term referred to Jesus himself?	Sino-Korean Kidok
What is the modern term for Sino-Korean Kidok?	Kurisudo 그리스도
What was the region of Eastern Europe called in 1 AD?	Scythia
What was the first state in this region to adopt Christianity?	Armenia
When did Armenia adopt Christianity?	301 AD
When did Georgia adopt Christianity?	337 AD
What nearly was known as the original 'Christian faith'?	Pravoslav faith
How long have Christians made up nearly 1/3rd of the population?	100 years
Which Christian denomination has the most members?	Roman Catholic Church
How many people today are Roman Catholics?	1.17 billion
More people belong to what religion than any other in the Western world?	Christianity
Which religion will have the most followers by the year 2050 if trends continue?	Christianity
On average, how many children do Christians have?	2.7
How many Muslims converted to Christianity according to a 2015 poll?	10.2 million
In addition to conversion, what other reason is given for the trend in Christianity's followers?	High birth rates
What denomination of Christianity had the highest percentage of Nobel Prize winners between 1901 and 1972 in America?	Protestant
What was the first name of Sony Music Entertainment, Inc?	American Record Corporation
In what year was it renamed Columbia Recording Corporation?	1938
In what year was it known as CBS Records?	1966
In what year did it land the name, Sony Music Entertainment?	1987
What company is the only group larger than Sony Music Entertainment?	Universal Music Group.
In what year did SME merge with another company?	2004
What was the name of the other company that SME merged with?	Bertelsmann Music Group
What did the company call themselves after the  merger?	Sony BMG Music Entertainment
In what year did Sony BMG Music Entertainment go back to being called SME?	2008
In what year did ARC form?	1929
In what year did Columbia Phonography Company form?	1888
In what year did ARC take over Columbia Phonography Company?	1934
Who bought out ARC?	Columbia Broadcasting System
In what year was ARC bought?	1938
What did CBS call ARC after buying it?	Columbia Recording Corporation
Who was the head of CBS at the time?	William S. Paley
Who convinced Paley to buy ARC?	RCA Victor Records executive Ted Wallerstein
In what year was Epic Records created?	1953
What company created Epic Records?	Columbia
Who was one of the creators of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences?	Conkling
What did Conkling later go on to lead?	Warner Bros. Records
What type of music was Date Records known for?	rockabilly
In what year was Mercury Records (US) bought out?	1961
Who acquired Mercury Records (US)?	Philips Records
What is the name of CBS' Mexican record label?	Discos CBS
What 4 areas of the country did Columbia Records have manufacturers in?	Los Angeles; Terre Haute, Indiana; Bridgeport, Connecticut; and Pitman, New Jersey
What lable was bought by CBS in the UK?	Oriole Records.
CBS began thinking of a name change to their record label in what year?	1965
Date Records gave rise to the group "Peaches and Herb" in what year?	1965
Date Records released what major success in 1969?	"Time of the Season" by the Zombies
What place on the charts did Date Records' big success land on?	#2
Despite the success, in what year did Date Records cease to exist?	1970
Who ran CBS-Columbia Group starting in 1966?	Leiberson
In what year did CBS and Sony come together?	1968
In what year did CDs come to the American market?	1983
In what year was Clive Davis let go at CBS Records Group?	1972
How many people signed a petition to boycott Sony Music in 2016?	over a hundred thousand
What search engine company giant has Sony sent requests to regarding content on a website?	Google
What website does Sony have complaints against?	Wikipedia.org
In what year did Sony pull out of the Greek market?	2013
What label for the Greek market were artists on under the Sony umbrella?	Feelgood Records
In what year did Sony shut down their offices in the Philippines?	2012
What famous music producer became CEO of Epic Records?	L.A. Reid
Who joined the CEO of Epic Records in becoming the CEO of Sony Music?	Doug Morris
In what year did he become the CEO of Sony Music?	2011
Who became the CEO of RCA Records?	Peter Edge
What labels did RCA disband in 2011?	Arista, J Records and Jive Records
Name 3 artists that CBS Associated Records signed on in the 80s and 90s?	Ozzy Osbourne, the Fabulous Thunderbirds, Electric Light Orchestra, Joan Jett, and Henry Lee Summer
In what year did CBS sell CBS Songs?	1986
How much was the sale of CBS Songs?	$125 million
Who were the 3 people who bought CBS Songs?	Stephen Swid, Martin Bandier, and Charles Koppelman
In what year was CBS the only network to also have a record company?	1987
What label did ABC sell in 1979?	MCA Records
What label did NBC sell in 1986?	RCA
Who bought RCA?	Ge
In what year did SCA buy CBS Records?	1987
Who was the biggest artist that CBS had?	Michael Jackson
How much did SCA pay for CBS Records?	$2 billion
In what year did the CBS Corporation begin another CBS Records?	2006
Who distributes CBS Records material?	Sony through its RED subsidiary
In what year did CBS Records buy out Tree International Publishing?	1989
How much did CBS Records pay for Tree International Publishing?	$30 million
In what city was Tree International Publishing located?	Nashville
In what year did CEO of RCA/Jive Barry Weiss leave?	2011
What company did Barry Weiss move to?	Island Def Jam and Universal Republic
When did Barry Weiss become CEO of RCA/Jive?	2008
When did Barry Weiss become head of Jive Records?	1991
Who was promoted to Executive VP of Label Strategy in 2011?	Mel Lewinter
Who became President of Global Digital Business and US Sales in 2012?	Dennis Kooker
In what year did Sony and BMG Germany merge?	2004
In what year did Sony take BMG's half stake in the company?	2008
Name one of the final albums to ever have the Sony BMG label?	Thriller 25 by Michael Jackson, I Am... Sasha Fierce by Beyoncé, Keeps Gettin' Better: A Decade of Hits by Christina Aguilera, and Safe Trip Home by Dido
When was Sony's new logo revealed to the public?	2009
What labels strove to support indie labels and music rightsholders?	SME and IODA
In what year did they partner in order to do so?	2009
Who did Sony partner with to create the biggest deal ever?	Michael Jackson Company
How much was the partnership worth?	$250 million
In what year was the partnership initiated?	2010
Columbia Pictures has been owned by Sony since what year?	1989
Who is the CCO of Sony Music?	Clive Davis
In what year did the merger take place?	1995
In what year did the name Sony Music Entertainment become the new name of Sony's record label?	1991
In what year did CBS Associated become Epic Associated?	1991
What is the only country where Sony has no rights to the Columbia label?	Japan
Who owns the rights to the Columbia label in Japan?	Nippon Columbia
What is the capital of Oklahoma?	Oklahoma City
Which city is the largest in Oklahoma?	Oklahoma City
What was the population of Oklahoma city in 2014?	1,322,429
Which region is Oklahoma City a part of?	Great Plains region
What offices employ US transportation and Air force bases?	Tinker Air Force Base and the United States Department of Transportation's Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center
What corridor is Oklahoma City situated in?	I-35 Corridor
When was the city founded?	1889
When was the Oklahoma City bombing?	1995
What was the name of the building involved in the bombing?	Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building
What was the name of the land before being called Oklahoma City?	Unassigned Lands
Who was an early leader of the city?	James W. Maney
What year was Oklahoma city entered into the Union?	1907
What was the capital of Oklahoma before Oklahoma city?	Guthrie
What route made Oklahoma city a major stop?	Route 66
Who wrote the Jazz oldie "(Get Your Kicks on) Route 66"?	Bobby Troup
Which artist made Bobby Troup's song famous?	Nat King Cole
When was oil discovered in the city limits?	1928
What routes used Oklahoma City as a major route change?	I-35, I-40 and I-44
Who was the Oklahoma Cities  first female mayor?	Patience Latting
When was Patience Latting elected?	1971
What was the name of the redevelopment passage that was passed in 1993?	Metropolitan Area Projects
What is one thing that was added in this project?	baseball park
How much money was invested in MAPS by 2010?	$3 billion
When was the Skirvin Hotel Renovated?	2007
What is the name of the newly renovated site where the bombing occured?	Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum
What year did the memorial first opened?	2000
What was the name of the project to change the location of I-40 and make a new entrance to the city?	The "Core-to-Shore" project
What year was the Core to Shore project voted for to be part of the MAPS program?	2009
How many square miles is Oklahoma City?	620.34 square miles
Out of the 620.34 square miles, how much of it is water?	19.23 square miles
Which region is Oklahoma city located in?	Sandstone Hills region
What river flows through Oklahoma city?	North Canadian River
What is the new name for the part of the North Canadian River that resides within the city limits?	Oklahoma River
When was a dam built for the river?	1940s
What was built in the 1990's to help return water to the river near downtown?	low-water dams
What covers the remaining 377 square miles?	rural watershed areas
Which side is known for primarily being industrial?	South Oklahoma City
Which side is more urban and fashionable?	North Oklahoma City
What are two newly renovated locations in downtown Oklahoma city?	Crystal Bridge and Myriad Botanical Gardens
What type of climate does Oklahoma city?	humid subtropical climate
How much precipitation on average falls within the city?	35.9 inches
Out of the precipitation that falls, how much of it is snow?	8.6 inches
When is Oklahoma city sever weather season begin?	March
When does Oklahoma city sever weather season end?	June
Approximately How many tornadoes have reached the city limits?	150
How wide was the widest tornado ever?	2.6 miles
When was the most rainfall for Oklahoma city?	May 2015
How many people were counted in the 2010 census?	579,999
How many households were recorded in the 2010 census	230,233 households
How many families were recorded in the 2010 census?	144,120 families
What was the density of the population per square mile?	956.4
How many housing units were there for the 2010 census?	256,930
How many households were in Oklahoma city?	230,233
What demographic was the most percentage of the households in total?	married couples
What is the average size for households?	2.47
What is the average size for families?	3.11
What is the second highest demographic for households?	non-families
What was Oklahoma cities median age in 2000?	34
Which gender was prominent in that time?	females
When did the population increases begin in Oklahoma city?	late 1990s
What was the estimated population of Oklahoma city in 2014	620,602
What is Oklahoma's largest urbanized area?	Oklahoma City
What place was Oklahoma cities population ranked in the nation in 2012?	42nd
What cartel has been known to be in Oklahoma city?	Juárez Cartel
When were six employees found dead in a restaurants freezer?	1978
When was Roger Dale Stafford executed?	1995
How many substations does Oklahoma city have?	5
Who detonated the bomb in 1995?	Timothy McVeigh
How many people were killed in the bombing?	168
How many people were injured in the bombing?	680
How much money was the damage worth?	$652 million
When was Timothy McVeigh Executed?	June 11, 2001
How many universities are within the MSA region?	2
What hospital is in the MSA region	Norman Regional Hospital
How many employees work for Tinker Air Force Base?	27,000
How many employees work for Norman Regional Hospital?	2,800
How many people work in University of Oklahoma?	11,900
What was Oklahoma cities gross metropolitan product in 2009?	$61.1 billion
What year did forbes list Oklahoma city as "recession proof".	2008
When did Penn Square Bank go bankrupt?	1982
What year did the oil crash?	1985
When was the Wanda L Bass School of Music and auditorium opened?	April 2006
What was the original name of the Science Museum of Oklahoma?	Kirkpatrick Science and Air Space Museum at Omniplex
When was the International Photography Hall of Fame relocated?	2013
How many animal skeletons are in the museum of Osteology?	300
When did The American Indian Cultural Center and Museum begin construction?	2009
What is the name of Oklahoma Cities memorial?	The Oklahoma City National Memorial
What institute is located near the Oklahoma City National Memorial?	Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism
What musical instrument has it's own museum in Oklahoma City?	the banjo
How much is the collection worth in the museum?	$3.5 million
When was the Oklahoma History Center created?	2005
Who operates the Oklahoma History Center?	Oklahoma Historical Society
Where is the Oklahoma History Center located?	northeast Oklahoma City
What NBA team hails from Oklahoma City?	Thunder
What team is the affiliate to the Los Angeles Dodgers?	Oklahoma City Dodgers
What is the name of the downtown arena?	Chesapeake Energy Arena
Which team became the main tenant of the arena in 2008?	Oklahoma City Thunder
What is the name of the nearby minor league park?	Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark
What is one annual event Oklahoma City hosts?	Big 12 Baseball Tournament
What park hosts Quarter horse racing?	Remington Park
Where are equine events hosted?	state fairgrounds
What organization organizes High School football?	Oklahoma Secondary School Activities Association
Who moved the Oklahoma City Thunder to Oklahoma City?	Clayton Bennett
What is one of the Thunders nicknames?	OKC
What is the Thunders mascot?	Bison
What place were the Thunder in 2010 NBA playoffs?	8th
Who did the Thunder play in the finals of 2012?	Miami Heat
Who did the Thunder lose to in the Western Conference finals?	San Antonio Spurs
When did the Thunder start winning Northwest Division Titles?	2009
Who is the Thunders head coach?	Billy Donovan
Who is the Thunders point guard?	Russell Westbrook
Where did the Hornets play after Hurricane Katrina?	Ford Center
What team played against the Hornets in their final home game before leave Oklahoma City?	Houston Rockets
Who designed the bridge?	I. M. Pei
What is the name of the amphitheater located inside the Botanical Gardens?	Water Stage
Which place hosts racetracks and is a casino?	Remington Park
Which amusement park is western themed?	Frontier City
Which lake is the cities largest lake?	Lake Stanley Draper
What place hosts concerts and lectures?	American Banjo Museum
Where is the Lycan Conservatory located?	Will Rogers Park
Which BMX Champion had a park named after them in Oklahoma City?	Mat Hoffman
When was Mat Hoffman Action Sports Park considered one of the best by National Geographic Society?	March 2009
Who is the mayor of Oklahoma City?	Mick Cornett
When was Mick Cornett first elected?	2004
Who is the city Manager?	Jim Couch
What was the original name of Oklahoma City University?	Epworth University
When was the university founded?	September 1, 1904
Which district is OU Medicine campus located in?	Oklahoma Health Center district
Which institution houses the Level-One trauma center?	OU Medicine
Approximately how many people work in OU Health Sciences Center?	12,000
Which university is the third-largest in the state?	University of Central Oklahoma
Which private university is located near the Edmond border?	Oklahoma Christian University
Which community college is the second largest in the state?	Oklahoma City Community College
Which university is located in the Furniture district?	Oklahoma State University
Where is Southern Nazarene University located?	Bethany
Who founded the Southern Nazarene University	Church of the Nazarene
What institution is accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools?	Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center
What is Oklahoma's largest school district?	Oklahoma City Public Schools
What year did KIPP Reach College Preparatory School win the National Blue Ribbon Award?	2012
Where is The Oklahoma School of Science and Mathematics located?	Oklahoma City
What are the two largest technology education schools in Oklahoma City?	Metro Technology Center and Francis Tuttle Technology Center
What center is a nonprofit training center for disabled people?	The Dale Rogers Training Center
Which newspaper is the most produced through the state of Oklahoma?	The Oklahoman
What is the name of The Oklahoman's website?	NewsOK.com
What is Oklahoma Cities newsweekly?	Oklahoma Gazette
What is Oklahoma Cities daily business newspaper?	The Journal Record
Which side is the Black Chronicles Headquarters?	Eastside
What international newspapers is in the Asia District?	OK VIETIMES and Oklahoma Chinese Times
What is the name of the student newspaper?	The Campus
What is the name of the lifestyle magazine?	Slice Magazine
What is another magazine that is published in Oklahoma City?	Back40
What was the third Radio Station in the US?	WKY Radio
When was WKY granted a federal license?	1921
When did E.K. Gaylord's Oklahoma Publishing Compan buy WKY Radio?	1928
What is the current station called?	KFOR-TV
What rank is Oklahoma Cities television networks for Nielsen?	41st
How many counties does Oklahoma Cities Networks cover?	34
How many  people are paid to be employed by the Oklahoma City Fire department?	1015
Who is currently the Chief of the department?	G. Keith Bryant
How many firestations are there?	37
How many emergency calls are made yearly?	70,000
How many major highways cross through Oklahoma City?	3
What is one Major expressway that travels through Oklahoma City?	Lake Hefner Parkway
What boulevard turns into E.K Gaylord Boulevard?	Shields Boulevard
Which airport is the busiest?	Will Rogers World Airport
How many people travel through Will Rogers World Airport each year?	3.6 million
What is the name of the largest military base in the nation?	Tinker Air Force Base
What is Oklahoma Cities transit company?	METRO Transit
What is the name of the plan that is being made to enhance the bus system?	Fixed Guideway Study
When was MAPS 3 passed?	December 2009
How much will MAPS 3 cost?	$777 million
What year should the streetcar become operable?	2017
What is the states oldest and largest Hospital?	St. Anthony Hospital and Physicians Medical Center
Where is the Children's hospital located?	Oklahoma Health Center district
Name a hospital owned by INTEGRIS Health?	INTEGRIS Baptist Medical Center
When was INTEGRIS Baptist Medical Center part of U.S News and World Reports best Hospitals list?	2012
Where is the Midwest Regional Medical Center?	Midwest City
How many doctors are there per 100,000 people?	347
What ranking was Oklahoma City in for the American College of Sports Medicine in 2010?	last place
What kind of human lives by collecting wild flora and fauna?	hunter-gatherer
What type of society relies on domestication for producing food?	agricultural
What type of plants and animals do agricultural groups harvest?	domesticated species
What has been humans' best adaptation in food production?	Hunting and gathering
What was the first way humans used to find food?	Hunting and gathering
What stopped the widespread use of hunting and gathering?	invention of agriculture
What are the basic types of agricultural groups?	farming or pastoralist groups
How many groups of modern hunter-gatherers are there?	Only a few
What do modern hunter-gatherers use to produce food in addition to gathering?	horticulture and/or keeping animals
Who uses agriculture and animal domestication to supplement their food?	hunter-gatherers
Besides  agriculture, how do gatherers add to their food supply?	keeping animals
In addition to domesticated animals, how do gatherers supplement their food?	horticulture
How did early humans locate meat without hunting ?	scavenging
In addition to finding already dead animals, what other cause of death were their animal finds?	natural causes
Where did hunter-gatherer peoples live?	sparsely wooded areas
What type of area did early humans avoid?	dense forest
What is long-distance running as a food hunting-gathering technique?	persistence hunting
What theory says that long-distance running drove the evolution of some human traits?	endurance running hypothesis
Who still practices persistence hunting?	some hunter-gatherer groups
Besides the endurance running hypothesis, what other theory of food collection is there?	scavenging hypothesis
What food gathering techniques could have been used by early man at the same time?	both subsistence strategies
When did human populations begin using hunting-gathering?	1.8 million years ago
What phase of human used subsistence strategies to find food?	Homo erectus
When did Homo sapiens begin using subsistence gathering?	0.2 million years ago
When did hunting-gathering begin to fade from use?	10,000 years ago
What began replacing hunting-gathering at the end of the Mesolithic period?	Neolithic Revolution
During what period did hunter-gatherers begin to focus food collection on a more limited range?	Middle to Upper Paleolithic
How many years ago did hunting-gatherers start specializing in their collection practices?	80,000 to 70,000 years ago
What was the change in gathering?	a smaller selection
When did the use of agriculture begin it's spread?	12,000 years ago
In what kind of area did forest gardening start?	jungle-clad river banks
In what other types of areas did forest gardening show up?	foothills of monsoon regions
What kind of plant did these early gardeners seek out?	tree and vine species
What use did forest gardeners put to tree and vines to?	identified, protected and improved
What did these gardeners do about unwanted species?	eliminated
Where do many modern day hunter-gatherers live?	in the developing world
In what type of climate do hunter-gatherers live?	arid regions or tropical forests
What kind of human life-style is pushing hunter-gatherers out of their environment?	settlements of agriculturalists
What has Jared Diamond blamed the decline of gatherers on?	availability of wild foods
What type of food animal went extict by the end of the Pleistocene era?	large mammal species
Who expanded into the territory of hunter-gathers?	agricultural societies
What did the increase in agricultural areas produce?	first forms of government
What were the Fertile Crescent and Ancient India ?	agricultural centers
What type of expansion was it in places like the Fertile Crescent?	agriculture-driven
Why did agricultural societies push into hunter-gatherer areas?	agricultural societies increased
What type of areas do modern hunter-gathers live in?	unsuitable for agricultural use
How many modern hunter-gatherer cultures are there?	few
What do people basically rely on now?	agriculture
Who lives in areas not usable for agriculture?	hunter-gatherer cultures
What kind of food production is worldwide now?	reliance upon agriculture
What is the lifestyle of hunter-gatherers?	nomadic or semi-nomadic
What is the permanence of hunter-gatherer settlements?	temporary
What kind of building materials do they use?	impermanent
What kind of natural structure do hunter-gatherers use?	rock shelters
What is the movement ability of hunter-gathers?	Mobile communities
What kind of area allowed a more permanent settlement?	rich environments
What is the life style of the indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest?	hunter-gatherer
What does a lush environment allow hunter-gatherers to be?	sedentary or semi-sedentary
What kind of environment is the Pacific Northwest?	rich environments
What are the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest?	hunter-gatherer cultures
What is the social style of hunter-gather societies?	egalitarian
 Where do people who are an exception to egalitarianism live?	Northwest Coast of North America
what group of hunter-gatherers are nearly all egalitarian?	African
How is it interesting to view hunter-gatherers' egalitarianism?	in an evolutionary context
What do chimpanzees act like as pertains to being egalitarianism?	anything but egalitarian
How do chimpanzees arrange themselves in a group setting?	into hierarchies
What is the dominate one in a chimpanzee group?	alpha male
What permanent group representative do hunter-gatherers not have?	permanent leaders
Initiative within the group depends upon what factor?	task being performed
What group arrangement is usual in family authority?	matrilocal
What is the kinship and decent system among hunter-gatherers?	matrilineal
What value system do Western scholars tend to use in analyzing societies?	Western values
Who does most of the gathering in a hunter-gatherer society?	women
What group members are the big game hunters?	men
What does the argument over women as gathers said to produce ?	arrangement oppresses women
How is childcare viewed in a hunter-gatherer society?	childcare is collective
How is labor often divided in these groups?	sexual division
What percentage of Aeta women hunt?	85%
What is the success rate of Aeta female hunters?	31%
What is the success rate for male Aeta hunters?	17%
At what conference did Richard Borshay speak?	Man the Hunter
When was the Man the Hunter conference?	1966
Why is there a lessening of material possessions in hunting and gathering groups?	mobility
What can decreased material possessions produce in a hunter-gatherer society?	egalitarianism
What other characteristic is variable for these groups?	territorial boundaries
Who called hunter-gathers the original affluent society?	Marshall Sahlins
When did Ross Sackett study time and energy for hunter-gartherer groups?	1996
How long a day do people in other societies work?	8.8 hours a day
What other characteristic of group behavior is needed in a hunter-gatherer society?	sharing
What is the basis of a hunting an gathering economy?	gift economy
What is the only important factor in hunter-gatherer tool choices?	temperature
What does climate produce in hunter-gatherer societies?	variability
What is the threat that extreme temperature causes in environment?	significant
What does temperature impact on tool kits?	increased variability of tools
What is Torrence's 1989 theory about that ties into tool kit variability ?	risk of failure
What  does the immediate return system mean?	egalitarian
To what kind of group does the delayed return system belong?	nonegalitarian
Which group eats their acquired food in a day or two?	immediate return
How do modern hunters and gathers differ from early ones?	contact with modern civilization
What type of conditions are not present in modern societies?	pristine
Where do you find groups that represent pristine conditions?	in uncontacted peoples
What do modern hunter-gatherers not reflect?	Paleolithic societies
What is hunting and gathering argued to be?	adaptive strategy
What situation can cause food stresses that make hunting-gathering necessary?	environmental change
What change from hunting and gathering to agriculture is not easy to mark?	transition
Besides the use of agriculture, what other factor clouds the issue of the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture?	cultural diffusion
How long has this cultural diffusion been happening?	last 10,000 years
If they're not purely hunter-gatherers, then what do they have a history of being?	agriculturalists
What caused these one-time agriculturalists to become foragers??	pushed into marginal areas
What kind of upset could force agriculturalists into being foragers?	migrations
Besides economic troubles, what else could push a people into foraging?	violent conflict
What can be learned from the study of modern hunter-gatherers?	nothing meaningful
Who thinks that it is useless to study modern foragers since the real ones are gone?	theorists
What type of hunter-gatherer has disappeared ?	pure hunter-gatherer
Who has rejected Wilmsen's arguments?	Lee and Guenther
Whose lifestyle does Shultziner think we can learn about?	prehistoric hunter-gatherers
What is it about prehistoric hunter-gatherers that impresses Shultziner?	egalitarianism
Who has offered arguments that Lee and Guenther disliked?	Wilmsen
What do hunter-gathers intentionally manipulate?	the landscape
How do they manage the landscape?	cutting or burning undesirable plants
What technique do they use to make animal habitats?	slash-and-burn
What is the manipulation of the landscape associated with?	agriculture
What do modern hunter-gatherers depend on at least somewhat?	domesticated food
What do some agriculturalists often do?	hunt and gather
What do they sometimes do for entertainment?	go hunting
Why would they leave agricultural lifestyle?	to escape colonial control
Besides avoiding government controls, what other reason could they have?	agriculture became difficult
What is the name of the Spinifex people?	Pila Nguru
Where do the Pila Nguru people live?	Western Australia
Who refuses contact with outsiders on Sentinel Island?	Sentinelese
Where are the Sentinelese and the Andaman Islands?	Indian Ocean
These ancient hunter-gathers followed what path in pursuit of game?	ice-free corridors
Between what ice sheets were the corridors located?	Laurentide and Cordilleran
What other way could they have crossed on to this continent?	primitive boats
Where did the North American hunter-gathers mostly live?	Great Plains
What basic trait do all hunter-gatherers share?	stone tool production
What is it about the tool styles that is remarkable?	common style
Where have early Paleo -Indian tools been found?	across the Americas
How many members did the mobile tool-making hunters often have?	25 to 50 members
What kind of climate occurred in the Americas?	warmer more arid
What disappeared during the Archaic period?	megafauna
What became the norm for the mobile bands?	regional adaptations
What did they rely less and less on?	hunting and gathering
What was there a pattern of in this period?	increasing regional generalization
What is the current name of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities?	United Nations Population Fund
UNFPA's work concerns what general area?	reproductive health
One of UNFPA's goals is to make all pregnancies what?	wanted
Another of UNFPA's goals is to make all childbirths what?	safe
What, in addition to its work against obstetric fistula, is UNFPA campaigning against?	female genital mutilation
In how many geographic regions does UNFPA operate?	four
About what fraction of UNFPA's staff do field work?	three quarters
UNFPA is part of what larger U.N. group?	United Nations Development Group
UNFPA groups what area in the same geographic region as the Arab States?	Europe
When did UNFPA begin its work?	1969
What was UNFPA's original name?	United Nations Fund for Population Activities
When did the organization change its name?	1987
UNFPA was originally administered by what U.N. body?	United Nations Development Fund
When was UNFPA moved to being under the authority of the United Nations General Assembly?	1971
When did the U.N. vote to adopt the Sustainable Development Goals?	2015
How many countries adopted the Sustainable Development Goals?	193
How many Sustainable Development Goals are there?	17
The Sustainable Development Goals are intended to change the world over what time period?	15 years
Are the Sustainable Development Goals considered ambitious or modest in scope?	ambitious
The third of the goals concerns what?	health
What does the fourth goal focus on improving?	education
What is the topic of the fifth goal?	gender equality
Who was Executive Director or Under-Secretary General from 1969 to 1987?	Rafael M. Salas
Dr Babatunde Osotimehin hailed from what country?	Nigeria
Who was Executive Director or Under-Secretary General from 2000 to 2010?	Thoraya Ahmed Obaid
Which doctor from Pakistan served until 2000?	Dr Nafis Sadik
UNFPA is the largest worldwide funder of what type of programs?	population and reproductive health programs
In how many countries does UNFPA operate?	150
In addition to working directly with governments, with whom does UNFPA work?	non-governmental organizations
What supports UNFPA's work?	the international community
The Fund's programs support women, men, and who else?	young people
UNFPA lists elements that promote what human right?	reproductive health
These elements concern health related to reproduction and what else?	the reproductive system
What is the third element?	social health
Where does The Fund work to raise awareness and provide support?	developing countries
To what does The Fund advocate that close attention be paid?	population concerns
What two things does The Fund help developing nations formulate to support sustainable development?	policies and strategies
Who took up leadership of The Fund in January 2011?	Dr. Osotimehin
The Fund is represented by a Patron and who else?	Goodwill Ambassadors
UNFPA's mission is to promote the rights and health of whom?	women and young people
With whom does UNFPA work in partnership?	governments
With what sort of agencies does UNFPA work?	United Nations agencies
In addition to mobilizing support and resources, what does UNFPA do with its partners?	raise awareness
Who does UNFPA work with in addition to government and U.N. agencies?	communities, NGOs, foundations and the private sector
UNFPA has  been accused of supporting what type of abortion?	forced-abortions
UNFPA has been accused of supporting programs that coerce what?	sterilizations
What groups have made these accusations against UNFPA?	anti-family planning groups
Controversy regarding these accusations has caused conflict with how many presidential administrations?	three
Who contributes to UNFPA?	governments and the private sector
Contributions exceeded how much in 2014?	$1 billion
How much of its funding was earmarked?	$529 million
What was the amount of funding for UNFPA's core resources?	$477 million
During what period did UNFPA aid Peru's reproductive health program?	the mid-to-late '90s
Peru was found to have been coercing what?	sterilizations
UNFPA responded to Peruvian abuses by calling for what?	reforms and protocols
UNFPA's goal in Peru was to protect whose rights?	women seeking assistance
After the scandal became public, what did UNFPA work to reform in Peru?	laws and practices
Which 21st century administration denied funding to UNFPA?	the Bush Administration
During what period did the administration deny funding?	From 2002 through 2008
Who allocates UNFPA funding in the U.S.?	the US Congress
What in the Chinese program caused trouble for UNFPA?	forced abortions and coercive sterilizations
What amendment did the administration believe the UNFPA funding violated?	the Kemp-Kasten Amendment
Which country was administering forced abortions?	China
How many people were on the U.S. fact-finding team?	three
Which U.S. department investigated the allegations?	the State Department
What policies did a State Department official accuse UNFPA of helping China carry out?	population control policies
What was this official's position at the time?	Secretary of State
Who was the official that accused UNFPA?	Colin Powell
What was UNFPA accused of contributing to the Chinese program?	vehicles and computers
What papers reported on this incident?	the Washington Post and the Washington Times
Which representative criticized the the State Department investigation?	Christopher H. Smith
The representative said that inspectors had been show what sort of villages?	Potemkin Villages
Which former director defended UNFPA?	Dr. Nafis Sadik
Which NGO investigated the Chinese program in 2005?	Amnesty International
What sort of techniques did the State Department conclude were still being employed by China?	coercive techniques
What organization found no evidence that UNFPA had supported Chinese coercion?	Amnesty International
In 2001, what organization accused UNFPA of sharing office space with Chinese family planning officials?	Population Research Institute
In January 2006, who approved UNFPA's new country programme?	United Nations Members
How many members does the “Group of 77” have?	130
Who, speaking for the European democracies, also defended UNFPA?	the United Kingdom
Which government official blocked funding to the UNFPA?	President
What was the name of the official who blocked UNFPA funding?	Bush
How much funding was blocked?	$244 million
Which branch of government denied the UNFPA funding?	the Executive Branch
How had the UNFPA funding been initially approved?	Congressionally
Which European government contributed the most to the UNFPA in 2008?	the Netherlands
Which European government contributed the least to the UNFPA in 2008?	Luxembourg
Which non-European donor was most important to the UNFPA in 2008?	Japan
In 2008, over how many countries contributed to the UNFPA?	180
What is one country in which nonprofit organizations try to make up for the loss of United States funding for the UNFPA?	America
What kind of organization is Friends of UNFPA?	nonprofit
What was Friends of UNFPA's previous name?	Americans for UNFPA
What type of United States funding does Friends of UNFPA try to replace?	federal funding
Through what sort of donations does Friends of UNFPA raise money?	private donations
Which president began funding UNFPA again?	Barack Obama
In what year did U.S. funding of UNFPA resume?	2009
In what month did U.S. funding of UNFPA resume?	January
The president said the U.S. would be joining how many donor nations?	180
The president said funding the U.N. Population Fund would help in how many countries?	154
Which ocean is along eastern Russia?	the Pacific Ocean
Which union did Russia belong to after 1922?	the Soviet Union
When did the RSFSR cease to be a part of the Soviet Union?	91
How many autonomous republics make up the RSFSR?	sixteen
The RSFSR contains how many oblasts?	forty
How many autonomous oblasts were part of the RSFSR?	five
How many krais were present in the RSFSR?	six
Which group originally created the Soviet state?	the Bolsheviks
Who led the group which created the Soviet state?	Vladimir Lenin
Which government was overthrown during the October Revolution?	the Russian Provisional Government
How long did the new Russian Soviet state go unrecognized by other countries?	five months
What name did people opposed to the Bolsheviks use for the Soviet state?	Sovdepia
Who was the leader of the Bolsheviks in 1917?	Vladimir Lenin
What body was overthrown by the October Revolution?	Russian Provisional Government
For how long did the Soviet Union go unrecognized?	five months
What derisive label was given to the USSR by the enemies of the Bolsheviks?	Sovdepia
When was the Soviet Union created?	December 30, 1922
How many republics were in the USSR?	six
What name for Russia was listed in the Soviet Constitution?	the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
When did the Soviet Union include the final Russian name for its republic in the Constitution?	1936
In which war was Russia involved in 1700?	the Great Northern War
On what date was the Soviet Union created?	December 30, 1922
How many republics made up the USSR by the end of 1922?	six
In what year was the name Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic adopted?	1936
What document renamed the country the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic?	Soviet Constitution of 1936
In what year was the Great Northern War fought?	1700
When did the Soviet Union break up?	December 25, 1991
Which name did Russia take after the fall of the Soviet Union?	the Russian Federation
What is the current official name of Russia?	the Russian Federation
When was the current name for Russia added to the Russian constitution?	April 21, 1992
When was Russia renamed the Russian Federation?	December 25, 1991
What event led to Russia being renamed the Russian Federation?	the collapse of the Soviet Union
When was Russia made an official state name of the Russian Federation?	April 21, 1992
What 1993 document confirmed Russia as an official state name of the Russian Federation?	1993 Constitution of Russia
Which country did the RSFSR border on the west?	Poland
Which countries did the RSFSR border on the northwest?	Norway and Finland
Which countries did the RSFSR border on the southeast?	Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Mongolian People's Republic, and the People's Republic of China
Which Soviet countries did the RSFSR border on the south?	Azerbaijan, Georgian and Kazakh SSRs
Which Soviet countries did the RSFSR border on the west?	the Ukrainian, Belarusian, Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian SSRs
What country borders Russia on the west?	Poland
Along with Norway, what country borders the RSFSR on the northwest?	Finland
In the USSR, what SSR did the RSFSR border along with the Kazakh SSR?	Georgian
Along with the Mongolian People's Republic and the People's Republic of China, what country did the RSFSR border to its southeast?	Democratic People's Republic of Korea
When did the Soviet regime first become powerful?	November 7, 1917
Which government was in power before the Soviet regime?	the Russian Provisional Government
Which revolution led to the Soviet regime's rise to power?	the October Revolution
How long was the state of the Soviet regime unrecognized by other countries?	five months
What was the name of the republic the Russian Provisional Goverment ruled?	the Russian Republic
When did the Soviet government assume power?	November 7, 1917
What event led to the assumption of power by the Soviet government?	the October Revolution
What body governed Russia prior to the Soviet government?	the Russian Provisional Government
In months, for how long was the new Soviet state unrecognized?	five
Which official name was Russia given at the start of 1918?	the Soviet Russian Republic
To which country did Russia give land during World War I?	Germany
Which treaty did Russia sign in order to give land and gain peace during World War I?	the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
What war resulted in Russia shrinking further during 1918?	the Russian Civil War
What numbered meeting of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets occurred on January 25, 1918?	third
On January 25, 1918, what was the official name given to the Soviet state?	the Soviet Russian Republic
What did Russia receive in return for signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk?	peace in World War I
On what date was the country renamed the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic?	July 10, 1918
During what 1918 conflict did states secede from Russia?	the Russian Civil War
Which oblast was broken up in 1943?	Karachay Autonomous Oblast
Where were the Karachays sent after their oblast was broken up?	Central Asia
Which SSR received the land of the Karachays' oblast?	the Georgian SSR
Who broke up the Karachays' oblast?	Joseph Stalin
Who eliminated the Karachay Autonomous Oblast?	Joseph Stalin
When was the Karachay Autonomous Oblast ended?	1943
To where were the Karachays exiled?	Central Asia
Why were the Karachays exiled?	alleged collaboration with the Germans
What republic was the territory of the Karachay Autonomous Oblast transferred to?	Georgian SSR
On what date was the RSFSR established?	November 7, 1917
What event led to the establishment of the RSFSR?	October Revolution
In what year was the Constitution adopted?	1918
The Treaty on the Creation of the USSR was signed in what year?	1922
How much of the USSR's electricity was produced in the RSFSR?	two-thirds
What two countries produced more petroleum than Russia in 1961?	the United States and Saudi Arabia
How many students were in institutions of higher education in Russia in 1974?	23,941,000
How many institutions of higher education did Russia possess in 1974?	475
In how many languages were students in institutions of higher education being educated in 1974?	47
On what date was the Declaration of State Sovereignty adopted?	June 12, 1990
Who became president on June 12, 1991?	Boris Yeltsin
On what date were the Belavezha Accords signed?	December 8, 1991
When did the Russian Parliament ratify the Belavezha Accords?	December 12
What agreement did the Belavezha Accords supersede?	1922 Treaty on the Creation of the USSR
What was the new name given to the RSFSR on December 25, 1991?	Russian Federation
On what date was the USSR dissolved?	December 26, 1991
What body was responsible for the dissolution of the USSR?	Soviet of Nationalities
What house of the Supreme Soviet was not functioning as of December 26, 1991?	Soviet of the Union
What was one right of the Soviet government that the government of Russia assumed?	UN membership
On what date was the state named the Soviet Russian Republic?	January 25, 1918
What body renamed the state the Soviet Russian Republic?	All-Russian Congress of Soviets
When was the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk signed?	March 3, 1918
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk ceded land to what state?	Germany
What document renamed the state the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic?	Russian Constitution of 1918
What treaty resulted in the recognition of the RSFSR by Latvia and other states?	Treaty of Tartu
Along with Estonia, Latvia, Finland and Lithuania, what state recognized the RSFSR in 1920?	Irish Republic
What was the common name of the Soviet Union?	Russia
Technically, what type of state was Russia?	republic
What was the largest republic in the Soviet Union?	Russia
What percentage of the RSFSR was made up of plains?	70%
In what part of the RSFSR did tundra mainly exist?	the east
Along with petroleum and iron ore, what resource was abundant in the RSFSR?	natural gas
On what date was the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR passed?	December 30, 1922
What body passed the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR?	First Congress of the Soviets of the USSR
Along with the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, what state joined Russia to form the Soviet Union?	Transcaucasian Soviet Federal Socialist Republic
On what date was the 1924 Soviet Constitution adopted?	January 31, 1924
What body adopted the 1924 Soviet Constitution?	the Second Congress of Soviets of the USSR
During what span was there a famine in the Soviet Union?	1932–1933
What document was ratified on December 5, 1936?	the 1936 Soviet Constitution
What were the Kazakh ASSR and Kirghiz ASSR renamed per the 1936 Soviet Constitution?	the Kazakh and Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republics
What republic did the Karakalpak Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic become a part of?	the Uzbek SSR
What effect did the 1936 Soviet Constitution have on the size of the Russia?	reduced
What was Soviet Russia called as of 1937?	the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
What document changed the name of Russia in 1937?	the Russian Constitution of 1937
What state was dissolved on March 3, 1944?	the Chechen-Ingush ASSR
Who ordered the deportation of the residents of the Chechen-Ingush ASSR?	Stalin
Why were the residents of the Chechen-Ingush ASSR deported?	accusations of collaboration with the invaders and separatism
Along with the RSFSR, what republic received territory from the former Chechen-Ingush ASSR?	Georgian SSR
What was the Tuvan People's Republic renamed when it joined the RSFSR?	Tuvan Autonomous Oblast
On what date did the Tuvan People's Republic join the Russian SFSR?	October 11, 1944
What did the former Tuvan People's Republic become in 1961?	an Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic
Along with Estonia, what country was taken over by the Russian SFSR in 1944?	Latvia
What modern districts of Estonia and Latvia were annexed by the RSFSR in 1944?	Pechorsky and Pytalovsky Districts
Near what town did the RSFSR annex territory in 1944?	Ivangorod
Along with Sakhalin Island, what islands were occupied by the Soviets after the Second World War?	Kuril Islands
What administrative division did Sakhalin Island become a part of?	the RSFSR
The ownership of what islands are disputed with Japan?	the southernmost Kurils
On what date was Kaliningrad Oblast annexed?	April 17, 1946
What province of Germany did Kaliningrad Oblast form a part of?	East Prussia
What administrative division did Kaliningrad Oblast become a part of?	the Russian SFSR
Who was demoted on February 8, 1955?	Malenkov
To what position was Malenkov demoted?	deputy Prime Minister
What position was held by Nikita Khrushchev?	First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
Who benefited from the demotion of Malenkov?	Nikita Khrushchev
When was the Chechen-Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic transferred from the Georgian SSR?	January 9, 1957
What territory was transferred along with the Chechen-Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic?	Karachay Autonomous Oblast
Who transferred the Chechen-Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in 1957?	Khrushchev
To what republic was the Karachay Autonomous Oblast transferred in 1957?	the Russian SFSR
What republic had the Karachay Autonomous Oblast previously been a part of?	the Georgian SSR
Who lost power in 1964?	Nikita Khrushchev
Who assumed a position of power in 1964?	Leonid Brezhnev
When did Leonid Brezhnev die?	1982
Whose assumption of power ended the era of stagnation?	Mikhail Gorbachev
How did Mikhail Gorbachev end the era of stagnation?	introduced liberal reforms in Soviet society
On what date was the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian SFSR adopted?	June 12, 1990
What body passed the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian SFSR?	the Congress of People's Deputies of the Republic
What was the name of the period inaugurated by the passage of the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian SFSR?	the "War of Laws"
What government was the Russian Federation fighting against during this period?	the Soviet Union
On what date was the office of President of the RSFSR created?	March 17, 1991
Who was the first President of the RSFSR?	Boris Yeltsin
Who was the President of the Soviet Union in 1991?	Mikhail Gorbachev
On what date did the first election for President of the RSFSR occur?	June 12
During what period was there an attempted coup in Moscow?	August 19–21, 1991
On what date was the Communist Party of the Russian SFSR suspended?	August 23
Who signed the decree suspending the Communist Party of the Russian SFSR?	Yeltsin
On what date was the Communist Parties of the USSR banned from operating in the RSFSR?	November 6
Aside from Yeltsin, what notable figure was present at the signing of the August 23 decree?	Gorbachev
In what country is Viskuli located?	Belarus
On what date was the Agreement on the Establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States signed?	December 8, 1991
What is another name for the Agreement on the Establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent States?	Belavezha Accords
What body ratified the Belavezha Accords on December 12?	the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR
The Belavezha Accords consisted of how many articles?	fourteen
When did the Russian Federation assume the Soviet Union's membership in the UN?	December 24
On what day did Gorbachev give up the presidency of the Soviet Union?	December 25
What was the new name given to the Russian SFSR after the resignation of Gorbachev?	the Russian Federation
Who was the first president of the Russian Federation?	Yeltsin
In what periodical was the new sovereign status of the Russian Federation first published?	Rossiyskaya Gazeta
What was the government of the RSFSR called up to 1946?	the Council of People's Commissars
What was the RSFSR government called starting in 1946?	Council of Ministers
When the Soviet Union ended in 1991, what was the RSFSR government called?	Council of Ministers–Government
Who led the first government of the RSFSR?	Vladimir Lenin
Who led the final government of the RSFSR?	Boris Yeltsin
What political organization controlled the RSFSR up to 1991?	the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
What event prompted the end to the control of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in the RSFSR?	the abortive 1991 August coup
Who suspended the Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic?	Yeltsin
Which company is directly above Universal Studios?	NBCUniversal
Which company runs NBC Universal?	Comcast
What is the nickname given to the large studios of which Universal is a part?	Big Six
When was Universal Studios created?	1912
Where does Universal's filming take place?	Universal City, California
What is another name for Universal Studios Inc.?	Universal Pictures
Who is the ultimate owner of Universal Studios?	Comcast
What is the street address of Universal Studios' production studios?	100 Universal City Plaza Drive
In what city and state are its production studios located?	Universal City, California
In what city are Universal Studios' corporate offices located?	New York City
What rank does Universal Studios have in terms of age?	fourth
Which film studio from Denmark is older than Universal?	Nordisk
Which French companies are older than Universal?	Gaumont Film Company and Pathé
What is the nationality of Pathé?	French
Along with Pathé and the Gaumont Film Company, what major film studio is older then Universal Studios?	Nordisk Film company
Among major film studies, where does Universal Studios rank in terms of age?	fourth
After a trip to what city did Carl Laemmle leave the dry goods business?	Chicago
In what year was the Motion Picture Trust created?	1908
What notable historical figure was involved in the Motion Picture Trust?	Edison
For what part of a motion picture projector did the Motion Picture Trust hold a patent?	the Latham Loop
What company did Laemmle found in June 1909?	Yankee Film Company
Who were Laemmle's business partners in the Yankee Film Company?	Abe Stern and Julius Stern
In what city and state was the Independent Moving Pictures Company based?	Fort Lee, New Jersey
What was a nickname of Florence Lawrence?	The Biograph Girl
What actor did Laemmle promote?	King Baggot
On what date was the incorporation of the Universal Film Manufacturing Company?	April 30, 1912
In what state was the Universal Film Manufacturing Company incorporated?	New York
Who was the president of the Universal Film Manufacturing Company circa July 1912?	Laemmle
What was the fate of the other partners of the Universal Film Manufacturing Company?	bought out by Laemmle
Along with exhibition and distribution, what business did the Universal Film Manufacturing Company engage in?	movie production
On what date did Universal City Studios open?	March 15, 1915
In square kilometers, what was the size of Universal City Studios?	0.9
What geographical feature separated Universal City Studios from Hollywood?	Cahuenga Pass
What was the biggest Hollywood studio during this period?	Universal
What sort of films were produced by Red Feather?	low-budget programmers
What type of movies came out of Bluebird?	more ambitious productions
What motion pictures were made by Jewel?	prestige motion pictures
What was the profession of George Marshall?	Directors
Who was one of the few female Hollywood directors in this era?	Lois Weber
Who directed Blind Husbands?	Erich von Stroheim
In what year was Foolish Wives produced?	1922
Who starred in The Phantom of the Opera?	Lon Chaney
What year saw a film version of The Hunchback of Notre Dame?	1923
Who was at one time Laemmle's personal secretary?	Irving Thalberg
What was the name of Universal's German production unit?	Deutsche Universal-Film AG
Who ran Universal's German production unit?	Joe Pasternak
In what year did Deutsche Universal-Film AG open?	1926
How many films did Universal's German subsidiary make yearly?	three to four
Along with Germany and Austria, where was Deutsche Universal-Film AG at one time based?	Hungary
what was the policy that Universal followed in its early years?	"clean picture"
By what month and year did Laemmle change his opinion on "unclean pictures"?	April 1927
Why did Laemmle change his position on "unclean pictures"?	Universal was losing money
Along with Walt Disney, who created Oswald the Lucky Rabbit?	Ub Iwerks
Who owned the rights to Oswald?	Universal
Who produced an Oswald the Lucky Rabbit motion picture?	Charles Mintz
What character did Walt Disney create in 1928?	Mickey Mouse
What was the first animated short with synchronized sound?	Steamboat Willie
Who bought the Oswald the Lucky Rabbit cartoons in 2006?	Disney
Who was 2006 seller of the Oswald cartoons?	NBC Universal
What notable figure worked as a sportscaster for ABC?	Al Michaels
Who began producing Oswald cartoons for Universal in 1929?	Walter Lantz
In what year did Walter Lantz cease producing Oswald cartoons for Universal?	1943
How many of Carl Laemmle, Sr.'s relatives were working for Universal as of 1928?	70
What was Carl Laemmle, Sr.'s nickname at Universal?	Uncle Carl
What poet wrote a notable rhyme about Laemmle?	Ogden Nash
At what age did Carl Laemmle, Jr. become president of Universal?	21
What Academy Award-winning director was a relative of Carl Laemmle's?	William Wyler
What was Carl Laemmle Jr.'s nickname?	Junior
What movie was based on an Edna Ferber novel?	Show Boat
In what year was the musical Broadway produced?	1929
What movie won the 1930 Academy Award for Best Picture?	All Quiet on the Western Front
What all-color musical did Universal make in 1930?	King of Jazz
In what year did Universal make a film version of Dracula?	1931
In what year was The Invisible Man made?	1933
What film was produced by Laemmle in 1934?	Imitation of Life
In what year did My Man Godfrey premiere?	1936
When was Universal's version of Frankenstein made?	1931
What part of Universal's business was terminated while it was in bankruptcy?	The theater chain
Along with distribution and studio operations, what part of Universal was retained by Carl Laemmle, Jr. during bankruptcy?	production operations
In what year was Universal's ill-fated film version of Show Boat released?	1936
In what year had Universal previously made a version of Show Boat?	1929
What was the amount of the production loan Universal sought to complete Show Boat?	$750,000
Who granted Universal the production loan?	the Standard Capital Corporation
When did the Standard Capital Corporation take control of Universal?	April 2, 1936
Who became president of Universal after the Standard Capital takeover?	J. Cheever Cowdin
What notable female star left Universal after the Standard Capital takeover?	Margaret Sullavan
Who was Universal's chairman of the board of directors after the Standard Captial takeover?	J. Cheever Cowdin
Along with Margaret Sullavan, what notable film talent left Universal after the Standard Capital takeover?	William Wyler
In what year was Show Boat released?	1936
Who produced the film Three Smart Girls?	Joe Pasternak
Who starred in the film Three Smart Girls?	Deanna Durbin
In what year was Three Smart Girls made?	1936
Prior to his work in America, where was Joe Pasternak employed?	Universal's German subsidiary
What type of films did Joe Pasternak produce in Germany?	light musicals
How old was Gloria Jean in 1939?	13
Along with Donald O'Connor and Bing Crosby, with whom did Gloria Jean star?	Bing Crosby
Who played Destry in Destry Rides Again?	James Stewart
Prior to working at Universal, what studio employed Marlene Dietrich?	Paramount Studios
In what year was Destry Rides again produced?	1939
During what period were the Little Tough Guys films produced?	1938–43
Over what span were the Baby Sandy films made?	1938–41
In what period did Universal produce Hugh Herbert comedies?	1938–42
When did Universal make Tom Mix westerns?	1932–33
In what span did Universal produce westerns with Kirby Grant?	1946–47
What two performers were known as the team Abbott and Costello?	Bud Abbott and Lou Costello
What military comedy did Bud Abbott and Lou Costello star in?	Buck Privates
Along with Abbott and Costello and Edgar Bergen, what radio star appeared in Universal films?	W. C. Fields
Who was the directorial partner of Walter Wanger?	Fritz Lang
In what period did Basil Rathbone star in a series of Sherlock Holmes films?	1942–46
In what period did film versions of Inner Sanctum Mysteries appear?	1943–45
What was the studio that Alfred Hitchcock normally worked for?	Selznick International Pictures
In what year was Shadow of a Doubt produced?	1943
What was the first Universal film to use the three-strip Technicolor process?	Arabian Nights
What actress starred in Arabian Nights?	Maria Montez
Along with Nelson Eddy, who starred in the Phantom of the Opera?	Claude Rains
When was Universal's first version of the Phantom of the Opera made?	1925
In what year was Arabian Nights produced?	1942
In what year was United World Pictures founded?	1945
What producer was involved in the founding of United World Pictures?	Kenneth Young
How long did United World Pictures last?	one year
Who was the head of production at Universal-International Pictures?	William Goetz
Who was William Goetz's father-in-law?	Louis B. Mayer
In what year was the Olivier version of Hamlet made?	1948
Who directed 1946's Great Expectations?	David Lean
In 1947, what company did Universal buy a stake in?	Castle Films
Who ran Realart Pictures?	Jack Broeder
In what year did Universal-International take over Castle Films?	1951
In what year was The Killers produced?	1946
What Universal-International film was about a talking mule?	Francis
In what year was Ma and Pa Kettle made?	1949
What Abbott and Costello film was released in 1948?	Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein
Who bought Rank's share of Universal-International?	Milton Rackmil
Who did many of Universal-International's Arabian Nights films feature?	Tony Curtis
Who notably produced monster and science fiction films for Universal?	William Alland
What Universal director was known for his melodramas?	Douglas Sirk
Who directed monster movies for Universal?	Jack Arnold
Who produced melodramas for Universal?	Ross Hunter
Who was a notable talent agent circa 1950?	Lew Wasserman
What star did Lew Wasserman represent?	James Stewart
What actor featured in Winchester '73?	James Stewart
What legal decision resulted in movie studios letting their contract actors go?	U.S. vs. Paramount Pictures, et al.
What acronym was the Music Corporation of America known by?	MCA
Where did MCA's Revue Productions subsidiary rent space?	Republic Studios
In square kilometers, how large was the lot Universal sold to MCA?	1.5
In what year did Universal sell its 360-acre lot to MCA?	1958
How much did MCA pay for Universal's 360-acre lot?	$11 million
In what year did MCA take over Universal?	1962
What company did MCA create in 1964?	Universal City Studios, Inc.
What new name was given to Revue Productions in 1966?	Universal Television
What was the company formed by the merger of Universal and NBC?	NBC Universal
When did Universal inaugurate its studio tour subsidiary?	1964
Who produced Anne of the Thousand Days?	Hal B. Wallis
Who wrote the original work that the film version of Anne of the Thousand Days was based on?	Maxwell Anderson
In what year was the film version of Mary, Queen of Scots made?	1971
Whose performance in Anne of the Thousand Days garnered a Best Actor nod?	Richard Burton
What was the name of the sequel to True Grit produced by Universal?	Rooster Cogburn
Who partnered with Universal in the creation of Cinema International Corporation?	Paramount Pictures
In what year was the film Airport made?	1970s
What Universal hit film was produced in 1974?	Earthquake
What company was purchased by MGM in 1981?	United Artists
When did United International Pictures start distributing films for DreamWorks?	1997
Who was the head of MCA in 1990?	Lew Wasserman
What is the current name of the company that was called Matsushita Electric in 1990?	Panasonic
How much did Matsushita Electric pay for MCA?	$6.6 billion
In what year was MCA/Universal Home Video Inc. created?	1990
What was the nationality of Matsushita Electric?	Japanese
What percentage of MCA/Universal did Matsushita Electric sell five years after acquiring the company?	80%
To whom did Matsushita sell a large share of MCA/Universal?	Seagram
How much did Seagram pay to buy a large share of MCA/Universal?	$5.7 billion
What did Seagram sell to finance their purchase of a share in MCA/Universal?	its stake in DuPont
What company did Seagram buy in 1999?	PolyGram
Who was the head of Seagram?	Edgar Bronfman Jr.
Who bought the USA cable network from Seagram?	Barry Diller
Who bought Seagram in June 2000?	Vivendi
What was the budget of the film Love Actually?	$40 million
What StudioCanal film received an Academy Award nomination?	Mulholland Drive
Who bought 80% of Vivendi Universal Entertainment in 2004?	General Electric
What percentage of NBC Universal was owned by Vivendi until 2011?	20%
Who bought 51% of NBC Universal in 2011?	Comcast
In what month and year did Comcast buy 49% of NBCUniversal?	March 2013
How much did Comcast pay for 49% of NBCUniversal in 2013?	$16.7 billion
In what year did Paramount Pictures purchase DreamWorks?	2005
What Universal chairperson headed DreamWorks as of 2006?	Stacey Snider
Who became the chairperson in late 2009?	Adam Fogelson
Who was the founder of Universal Partnerships & Licensing?	Stephanie Sperber
Who became chairperson of Universal Pictures in September 2013?	Donna Langley
Universal's deal with what company ended in 2013?	Elliott Management
With whom did Universal sign a marketing and distribution deal in July 2013?	Legendary Pictures
How many years is the deal with Legendary Pictures intended to run?	five years
In what year did Universal's deal with Legendary Pictures begin?	2014
What film studio was brought back in May 2015?	Gramercy Pictures
What division of NBCUniversal revived Gramercy Pictures?	Focus Features
What genre of films will Gramercy be responsible for creating?	action, sci-fi, and horror
In what year did Universal release three billion-dollar films?	2015
Along with Jurassic World and Furious 7, what billion-dollar film was released by Universal in 2015?	Minions
How many studios have released three billion-dollar films in one year?	Universal is the only studio
What was the name of the Universal production company based in Paris?	Universal Productions France S.A.
What was the name of Universal's French distribution company?	Universal Pictures France
What was the English title of Le scandale?	The Champagne Murders
Who directed The Day of the Jackal?	Fred Zinnemann
What film was known in English as Going Places?	Les Valseuses
What is Bell most famous for inventing?	telephone
What year did Bell die?	1922
What was special about his telephone?	practical
What is Bell's full name?	Alexander Graham Bell
What is Bell famous for inventing?	telephone
What were his relatives known for working on?	elocution and speech
What was interesting about his mother and wife?	deaf
What year did Bell get the patent for his telephone?	1876
In what country did Bell patent his telephone?	U.S.
What did Bell never put in his study?	telephone
How many people started the National Geographic Society?	33
Bell was the second president of what magazine?	National Geographic Society
What field did Bell later work in, apart from optical telecommunications and aeronautics?	hydrofoils
What year did Bell become President of the National Geographic magazine?	1898
What city was Bell born in?	Edinburgh
What material marks Bells family  home as his birthplace?	stone
What disease did his two brothers die of?	tuberculosis
At what age did Bell ask for a middle name?	10
What did those close to him call Bell?	Aleck
What sort of things did Bell collect as a child?	botanical specimens
Who was Bell's closest friend as a child?	Ben Herdman
What sort of mill did Bell's neighbors run?	flour
Bell's dehusking machine combined what with nail brushes?	rotating paddles
What was Bell's reward for his dehusking machine?	small workshop
Bell was gifted at art, poetry, and what?	music
What did Bell succeed at without being taught?	piano
How old was Bell when his mom started to go deaf?	12
What part of his mom's head would Bell talk into?	forehead
What did Bell research because of his mom's deafness?	acoustics
Where did Bell's uncle live?	Dublin
What was Bell's father most famous for publishing?	The Standard Elocutionist
Bell learned to accurately read lips even without knowing what?	pronunciation
The Standard Elocutionist was printed how many times?	168
Who taught Bell when he was very young?	father
What school did Bell leave at 15?	Royal High School
What was Bell's favorite subject?	biology
How old was Bell when he became a "pupil-teacher"?	16
In what year did Bell's father take him to see an automaton?	1863
Who created the automaton Bell saw?	Sir Charles Wheatstone
What did the automaton mimic?	human voice
Bell built his own automaton with who?	Melville
What part of the automaton did Bell create?	skull
What living thing did Bell use in his research?	Skye Terrier
What was Bell's pet's name?	Trouve
What phrase did people believe Bell's dog could say?	How are you grandma?
Bell investigated resonance using what?	tuning forks
What did Bell  instruct his dog to do?	growl continuously
Who did Bell get to read his work?	Alexander Ellis
What country was doing work similar to Bell's?	Germany
Who wrote The Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music?	Hermann von Helmholtz
How old was Bell when he wrote his paper?	19
What fictional character is based on Alexander Ellis?	Professor Henry Higgins
By what means did Bell conclude vowel sounds could be made?	electrical
What else besides vowels did Bell decide could be created?	consonants
What language was Bell happy he couldn't read?	German
What did Bell think he didn't know well enough?	electricity
In what year did the Bell's move to London?	1865
Where did Bell go in work in 1865?	Weston House
What building was Bell in?	Somerset College
How did Bell sign his letters?	A.G. Bell
In what year did Bell move home?	1867
What city is Susanna E. Hull located in?	South Kensington
What sort of student attended Susanna E. Hull?	deaf
Who died in 1870?	Melville
Where did Bell's father go to recover from illness?	Newfoundland
What did Bell help his final student get rid of?	lisp
How old was Bell when he went to Canada?	23
What boat did Bell travel on?	SS Nestorian
In what Canadian city did Bell first arrive?	Quebec City
What city did Bell arrive at by train?	Paris
How many acres was the farm the Bell's bought in Canada?	10.5
What building did Bell use as a workshop?	carriage house
What did Bell call his special spot in the back of the property?	dreaming place
What Native American language did Bell learn?	Mohawk
What special status did Bell get in the Mohawk tribe?	Honorary Chief
Where was the Six Nations Reserve located?	Onondaga
What did Bell rework to send music?	melodeon
What is a melodeon a kind of?	pump organ
When did Bell go to Montreal?	1871
Who went with Bell to Montreal?	father
How did Bell's reworked melodeon send music?	electrically
Who ran the Boston School for Deaf Mutes?	Sarah Fuller
What name does the Boston School for Deaf Mutes go by now?	the public Horace Mann School for the Deaf
What month did Bell go to Boston?	April
Bell trained who in Boston?	instructors
What city was the American Asylum in?	Hartford
How many wires did Bell send a signal through?	1
For  his system to work, Bell had to change what about each code?	pitch
Bell needed to fix both the transmitter and what?	receiver
Where was Bell's home?	Brantford
What city did Bell decide to return to?	Boston
In what year did Bell open his own school?	1872
How many people were in Bell's first class?	30
Which of Bell's students is the most well known?	Helen Keller
Bell's goal was to instruct the deaf to speak and not use what?	sign language
What would happen so some children's hands in schools?	tied behind their backs
In what light to many pro-deaf people see Bell?	negative
What was the only language many deaf people had?	signing
With what school did Bell get his next teaching job?	Boston University School of Oratory.
What was Bell's discipline?	Vocal Physiology and Elocution
What did Bell do late at night?	experiments
What health condition did Bell start to have?	headaches
In what year did Bell start to focus on research into sound?	1873
Bell's two remaining students were "Georgie" Sanders and who?	Mabel Hubbard
What was Georgie's father's name?	Thomas Sanders
What disease made Mabel deaf?	scarlet fever
How old was Mabel when she became deaf?	15
On what material did the phonautograph operate?	smoked glass
What kind of reed did Bell want to play with?	metal
What did Bell believe the reeds would turn the signal into?	sound
What instrument is a phonautograph similar to?	pen
In what year was Bell really working on his telegraph?	1874
What business was William Orton in charge of?	Western Union
In 1874 the telegraph was known as the what of commerce?	nervous system
What was the primary motivation for not building new telegraph lines?	cost
Thomas Edison and what other scientist were already asked to work on a better telegraph?	Elisha Gray
Who did Bell go to see in 1875?	Joseph Henry
Who ran the Smithsonian in 1875?	Joseph Henry
What was Henry's reply to Bell's statement that he lacked information to complete his telegraph?	Get it!
Who did Bell meet in 1874?	Thomas A. Watson
What kind of business did Watson work at?	electrical machine
Who did Bell take on to work with him?	Thomas Watson
What month and day did Watson and Bell have a breakthrough?	June 2
How many reeds did Bell conclude he needed?	1
What name was given to the telephone that sort of worked?	gallows
Who gave money to Bell and Watson?	Sanders and Hubbard
What did Bell promise to split with his financers?	U.S. profits
In what country other than the U.S. did Bell try to patent his telegraph?	Britain
Which country did Bell first try to get a patent?	Britain
Who did Bell ask to get a patent in Britain?	George Brown
What kind of telegraph did Bell create?	acoustic
What material did Elisha Gray use to convey sound?	water
On what date did Gray and Bell both put in for a patent?	February 14, 1876
On what day did Bell get to Washington?	February 26
What office in Washington did Bell and Gray visit?	U.S. Patent Office
What sort of machine did Bell and Gray both try to patent at the same time?	telephone
What number is Bell's patent?	174,465
On what date did Bell get his patent?	March 7, 1876
Bell's patent was for the method and what for transmitting vocal and other sounds telegraphically?	apparatus
On what day did Bell go back to Boston?	March 7, 1876
Bell sketched a design that looked like the work of who?	Gray
What kind of transmitter did Bell put in his telephone?	liquid
How did Bell refer to his partner in his well known line?	Mr. Watson
What did the vibrations cause to change?	electrical resistance
Bell implemented Gray's design as a what?	proof of concept
Bell stopped using the liquid-based method after what month?	March
Bell used his own design in all public demonstrations and what?	commercial use
What part of the telephone was investigated by the patent officer?	variable resistance
When did Bell put in his prior patent?	February 25, 1875
What liquid did Bell use in his first application?	mercury
Who declared himself an alcoholic?	Zenas Fisk Wilber
In what war did Wilber and Bailey fight together?	Civil War
How much did Wilber say Bell gave him in order to look at Gray's paperwork?	$100
What did Bell only admit to knowing in a letter?	technical details
From what city did Bell send his first message?	Mount Pleasant
Bell sent messages over wires hooked onto telegraph lines and what?	fences
What did the group at the Bells house hear other people doing?	reading and singing
How much did Bell et al. try to sell his patent for?	$100,000
Who did Bell et al. try to sell his patent to?	Western Union
What did the President think the telephone was, such that he refused to buy the patent?	a toy
How much the the President of Western Union want to pay for the patent later on?	$25 million
In what city was the 1876 Centennial Exposition?	Philadelphia
What important person saw the telephone at the Centennial Exposition?	Emperor Pedro II
Pedro II was the Emperor of what Country?	Brazil
Which Queen did Bell present his invention to?	Victoria
In what year was the Bell Telephone Company founded?	1877
How many people in the United States had a telephone by 1886?	150,000
In what year did Bell get some of Edison's patents?	1879
What addition let people stop yelling into the telephone?	carbon microphone
What company did Bell acquire the carbon microphone from?	Western Union
In what month and year did Bell telephone across the country?	January 1915
What company office did Bell make the original cross country phone call from?	AT&T
What city did Bell make the first cross country call from?	New York
What city did Bell make the first cross country call to?	San Francisco
Who was on the other end of the first cross country phone call?	Thomas Watson
During how many years did the Bell Company battle lawsuits?	18
How many times were Bell's patents contested?	587
How many of the court cases wound up at the Supreme Court?	5
Elisha Gray and what other man were behind many of the court cases?	Amos Dolbear
In 1887 the US Government wanted to undo Bell's patent due to fraud and what?	misrepresentation
The US Government lost the bid to overturn Bell's patent in what court?	Supreme Court
How many years did Bell and the US Government fight in court?	9
What excuse did the judges have for the trial despite the fact that the patents had expired?	precedent
On what date did the US Government stop legal action?	November 30, 1897
Who claimed to have invented the in 1834?	Antonio Meucci
How many court trials did Meucci participate in?	3
At what company were Meucci's prototypes supposedly lost?	American District Telegraph (ADT)
In what year did Western Union absorb ADT?	1901
What event caused Meucci's trials to be dropped?	death
Because of their patent, what didn't Siemens & Halske have to give Bell?	royalties
What was the home city for the International Bell Telephone Company?	Brussels
In what year was the International Bell Telephone Company founded?	1880
Who did Bell marry in 1877?	Mabel Hubbard
How many children did Bell and Mabel have?	4
Where did Bell and his wife go on their honeymoon?	Europe
Before 1897, what did Bell get most of his money from?	lectures
In what year did Mabel's father move to Washington D.C.?	1880
In what year did Bell acquire a house in D.C.?	1882
Where did Bell and Mabel live before 1880?	Cambridge, Massachusetts
What did Bell have to go to court for in D.C.?	patent disputes
In what year did Bell officially become an American?	1882
What was Bell's original nationality?	British
Besides the US and UK, what other country claims Bell as a citizen?	Canada
What does Bell call people who are citizens of two countries?	hyphenated
What Island in Nova Scotia did the Bells go to in 1885?	Breton Island
In 1886, what lake did Bell start building a house near?	Bras d'Or
What did the Bells call the house completed in 1889?	The Lodge
How many people worked for the Bell Boatyard?	40
Where did the Bells live when the Halifax Explosion happened?	Beinn Bhreagh
On what day did the Halifax Explosion happen?	December 6, 1917
Which of their two homes did the Bells start spending more time as Bell aged?	Beinn Bhreagh
What city adopted the Bells?	Baddeck
What did the Bells do to help the victims in Halifax?	mobilized the community
What series of books does Gray say Bell would go to sleep reading?	Encyclopædia Britannica
How many solo patents did Bell get?	18
How many patents did Bell co-author?	12
What famous lab did Bell spend time working for?	Volta
What type of energy did Bell investigate at the Volta Laboratory?	magnetic
The magnetic field is part of what sort of recorder?	tape recorder
What form of water played a part in Bell's home cooling system?	ice
What did Bell think could be collected from farm and factory byproduct?	Methane gas
What kind of toilet did Bell work on?	composting
Right before his death, what kind of energy did he speculate about?	solar
What did Bell call his cord-free phone?	photophone
Who did Bell invent the cord-free phone with?	Charles Sumner Tainter
What did Bell's cord-free phone use to transmit messages?	light
What lab association did Bell and Tainter both eventually join?	Volta Laboratory Association
In the photophone, light carried sound and what?	normal human conversations
Bell and his assistant first used their photophone on what date?	June 21, 1880
How many feet did the first photophone message travel?	700
From what building was the first photophone message sent?	Franklin School
How many years after this photophone message would the first message take place over radio?	19
What did Bell call the best thing he ever made?	The photophone
Bell thought the photophone was better than what famous invention?	telephone
What modern technology takes the next step from the photophone?	fiber-optic communication
When was fiber-optics first patented?	1880
In what decade did fiber-optics become widely used?	1980s
What did Bell create in 1881?	metal detector
What was in James Garfield that they wanted to get out?	bullet
What did Bell think was wrong with the bed, which prevented his machine from finding the bullet?	metal bed frame
On which run did Bell's metal detector give a small indication?	first
When did Bell's metal detector work well?	in tests
Bell gave his story about trying to find the bullet to the American Association for the Advancement of what?	Science
Where did Bell go the day after trying to find the bullet?	Executive Mansion
What kind of mattress was the President directly on?	horse-hair
Where did Bell indicate that the bullet was too deep for his machine to register?	footnote
Who wrote the paper laying out hydrofoils and hydroplanes?	William E. Meacham
What nationality was Meacham?	American
What did Bell start drawing after reading the article?	hydrofoil boat
Who helped Bell investigate hydrofoils in 1908?	Frederick W. "Casey" Baldwin
Which Italian scientist did Baldwin draw inspiration from?	Enrico Forlanini
In what country did Baldwin and Forlanini get together?	France
What did Baldwin liken the hydrofoil boat to?	flying
Which boat was first powered by a Renault engine?	HD-4
What color silk covered Bell's kites?	maroon
Who was on Cygnet I when it crashed?	Selfridge
Bell's kits were flown from 1907 to what year?	1912
How many tetrahedral wings did Bell create?	3
Some of the kites remain at what National Historic Site?	Alexander Graham Bell
What organization did Bell set up due to his interest in aerospace?	Aerial Experiment Association
When was the AEA founded?	1907
Which original member of the AEA held motorcycle speed records?	Glenn H. Curtiss
Which branch of the military was Lieutenant Thomas Selfridge in?	army
What did the AEA work on after kites?	gliders
What material was the Red Wing's frame made of?	bamboo
What kind of plane was the Red Wing?	biplane
How many accident-free flights had the AEA taken by 1909?	150
Who was the first person to die in a plane crash?	Selfridge
What did the AEA name their last plane?	Silver Dart
Who was the first to fly the Silver Dart?	J.A.D. McCurdy
What professional did Bell make sure was present during the first Silver Dart flight?	a doctor
What business did Baldwin and McCurdy start after the AEA folded?	Canadian Aerodrome Company
On what month and day did the Silver Dart take its first flight?	February 23
What kind of parents did Bell state were more prone to having deaf children?	congenitally deaf parents
In 1921 the American Museum of Natural History hosted what event?	Second International Congress of Eugenics
Which biologist ran the Committee on Eugenics?	David Starr
What did Bell like to do that led to his involvement with eugenics?	livestock breeding
What are Bell's personal papers known as?	Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers
In what part of the Library of Congress are Bell's papers kept?	Manuscript Division
Apart from in person, how can one look at many of Bell's papers?	online
In what university is the Alexander Graham Bell Institute?	Cape Breton University
In what province is the Alexander Graham Bell Institute located?	Nova Scotia
Adjusted for inflation, how many dollars were awarded to Bell alongside the Volta Prize?	$250,000
Victor Hugo and what other author helped judge the Volta Prize in 1880?	Alexandre Dumas
Who first established the Volta Prize?	Napoleon Bonaparte
The Volta lab improved the phonograph by replacing tinfoil with what substance?	wax
Which Bell-founded institution still operates in Georgetown today?	Volta Bureau
What magazine did Bell found alongside Hubbard?	Science
When did Bell cease to be President of the National Geographic Society?	1903
What enduring feature of National Geographic did Bell help implement?	illustrations
What award did Bell win in 1902?	Albert Medal
What did Bell receive from many centers of post-secondary education?	honorary degrees
What is the most famous statue built for Bell and his creation?	Bell Telephone Memorial
When was the Bell Telephone Memorial constructed?	1917
In what city was the Bell Telephone Memorial constructed?	Brantford
In which gardens was the Bell Telephone Memorial constructed?	Alexander Graham Bell Gardens
In 1936, what place did Bell receive on a list of best inventors?	First
What was created in Bell's image in 1940?	commemorative stamp
Bell's stamp is part of which line?	Famous Americans Series
On what date was the stamp officially released?	October 28
In which city was the stamp officially released?	Boston
What bird is depicted on the Scottish banknote?	geese
What do the sheep on the Scottish banknote represent?	genetics
What form of currency did Canada issue to celebrate Bell in 1997?	C$100 gold coin
In what year did Canada put out a coin to commemorate the Silver Dart?	2009
In 2002, where did Bell place in a list of the Greatest Britons?	57th
In 2004 Bell was listed in the top how many Greatest Canadians?	10
In what Scottish Hall of Fame is Bell listed?	Scottish Science Hall of Fame
Which institution listed Bell in their Hall of Fame?	National Library of Scotland
What disease contributed greatly to Bell's death?	diabetes
On what day and month did Bell die?	August 2
Who was the last person to see Bell alive?	Mabel
In what Province did Bell die?	Nova Scotia
What kind of wood was Bell's coffin made from?	Beinn Bhreagh pine
What color silk was used in Bell's coffin?	red
What color were attendees asked to not wear at Bell's funeral?	black
Which singer performed at Bell's funeral?	Jean MacDonald
Where was Bell buried?	atop Beinn Bhreagh mountain
Bell's living daughters were named Elsie May and what?	Marian
Over how many years did Bell spend a great deal of time at Beinn Bhreagh?	35
What unit is named after Bell?	The bel
What does the bel and decibel measure?	sound intensity
What lab invented the term "bel."	Bell Labs
In what field is the Alexander Graham Bell Medal given out?	telecommunications
What was the first year the Alexander Graham Bell Medal was given out?	1976
What does ISP stand for?	Internet service provider
what does an isp do?	provides services for accessing, using, the Internet
What forms can an isp be organized in?	commercial, community-owned, non-profit, or otherwise privately owned
What type of organization provides internet access?	ISPs
What are some services provided by an isp?	Internet access, Internet transit, domain name registration, web hosting, Usenet service, and colocation
Why was the internet developed?	a network between government research laboratories and participating departments of universities
when was the internet developed?	1980s
what happened to the internet in the late 1980s?	a process was set in place towards public, commercial use of the Internet
When were remaining restrictions on the internet removed?	1995
how long after the introduction of the world wide web was 1995?	4 years
Where were the first isps established?	Australia and the United States
where was the first commercial isp in the us located?	Brookline, Massachusetts
when was the first commercial isp customer served?	November 1989
when were the first commercial isps established?	1989
what was the name of the first commercial isp in the us?	The World
What would the absence of net neutrality permit?	ISPs to offer content providers a faster track to send content
what may possibly be a solution to net neutrality concerns?	municipal broadband
how did president obama recommend to classify the internet?	a telecommunications service
what did the fcc choose to apply to the internet?	Title II (common carrier)
what would the internet be classified as based on title ii?	telecommunications
When did the FCC rule on net neturality?	February 2015
How did the FCC rule on net neutrality?	in favor
what did the FCC adopt for the internet?	Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934
what amendment did the chairman of the FCC compare this ruling to?	the First Amendment
what did the FCC chairman say both the internet and the first amendment stand for?	free speech
When did the FCC publish its final rule on net neutrality regulations?	13 April 2015
What do ISPs provide?	Internet access
how do isps provide internet access?	a range of technologies to connect users to their network
what is one type of technology used to connect to the internet?	television cable (CATV)
what type of technology is used to connect to the internet wirelessly?	wireless Ethernet (wi-fi)
what was an earlier technology used to connect to the internet?	telephone lines
what traditional options were available for users and small businesses?	copper wires to provide dial-up, DSL, typically asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), cable modem or Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) (typically basic rate interface)
what is it called when fiber-optics are used for end users?	Fiber To The Home
who is served by dial-up, dsl, adsl, cable modems, or isdns?	users and small businesses
What type of customers would typically have more demanding requirements?	medium-to-large businesses, or other ISPs
what does atm stand for in relation to internet providers?	Asynchronous Transfer Mode
what is high-speed dsl used for?	customers with more demanding requirements
what is SONET?	synchronous optical networking
What is a mailbox provider?	an organization that provides services for hosting electronic mail domains with access to storage for mail boxes
What is an organization that provides hosting of electronic mail domains?	A mailbox provider
what is the purpose of a mailbox provider?	It provides email servers to send, receive, accept, and store email
how does a user store electronic mail?	A mailbox provider
What is SMTP?	Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
What is IMAP?	Internet Message Access Protocol
How is access to mail provided?	implementing Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) and possibly providing access to messages through Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), the Post Office Protocol, Webmail, or a proprietary protocol.
what are most mailbox providers as well?	access providers
who possibly controls their own mail servers?	companies, universities, organizations, groups, and individuals
What do internet hosting services provide?	email, web-hosting, or online storage services
Who provides a virtual server service?	Internet hosting services
who provides cloud services?	Internet hosting services
Who does an ISP pay for internet access?	upstream ISPs
Why does an ISP need to pay an upstream ISP?	An upstream ISP usually has a larger network than the contracting ISP
What does an upstream ISP provide for an ISP?	access to parts of the Internet the contracting ISP by itself has no access to
what usually has a larger network, the ISP of the customer or the upstream ISP?	upstream ISPs
What is the simplest case of an ISP using an upstream ISP?	transmit data to or from areas of the Internet beyond the home network
what do transit ISPs provide?	large amounts of bandwidth for connecting hosting ISPs and access ISPs
A mode of interconnection is often cascaded multiple times until reaching what?	a tier 1 carrier
What is a PoP?	point of presence
What provides bandwidth for the connecting of hosting ISPs and access ISPs?	Transit ISPs
What is a VISP?	virtual ISP
What do VISPs resemble?	mobile virtual network operators
What do visps purchase services from?	a wholesale ISP
What are free ISPs?	Internet service providers that provide service free of charge
What do free ISPs display in exchange for service?	advertisements
What are free ISPs similar to?	commercial television
How are freenets run?	on a nonprofit basis
What is a WISP?	wireless Internet service provider
What technology is part of a WISP?	commonplace Wi-Fi wireless mesh networking, or proprietary equipment
What are some bands that Wi-Fi can operate over?	900 MHz, 2.4 GHz, 4.9, 5.2, 5.4, 5.7, and 5.8 GHz bands
What is a wireless internet service provider's network based on?	wireless networking
What is peering?	multiple ISPs interconnect at peering points or Internet exchange points
What does peering allow?	routing of data between each network, without charging one another for the data transmitted
Why is peering used?	data that would otherwise have passed through a third upstream ISP, incurring charges from the upstream ISP
What are IXs?	Internet exchange points
Where do multiple ISPs connect?	peering points or Internet exchange points
Is a tradeoff between efficiency and cost possible?	A tradeoff between cost and efficiency is possible
What sort of route does data follow?	the most efficient route
What are ISPs subject to monitoring by in some countries?	intelligence agencies
What is the controversial N.S.A. program used in the U.S.?	PRISM
What does PRISM do?	provides for broad monitoring of Internet users traffic
What do ISPs integrate into their network to provide information to intelligence agencies?	a wide array of surveillance and packet sniffing equipment
What do DCSnet in the US and SORM in Russia do?	allowing monitoring of Internet traffic in real time
Which form of comics entails the use of photographic images?	fumetti
In addition to onomatopoeia and captions, what can be used to show the dialogue in comics?	speech balloons
What type of comic has taken off in the 21st century?	online webcomics
The various sizes as well as how panels are arranged help with what aspect of comics?	narrative pacing
When did Rodolphe Töpffer create cartoons?	1830s
Which superhero appeared in comics in 1938?	Superman
What is Japanese cartooning known as?	manga
French comics are also known as what?	bandes dessinées
When is the term comics considered singular rather than plural?	when it refers to the medium
The historical aspect of cartooning can be applied to mass reproduction or what?	recurring characters
Some experts believe comics is a combination of what two things?	images and text
What are Japanese comics called?	manga
Who is best known for being the first comics creator in Europe?	Rodolphe Töpffer
Who is considered to be the first comic creator in America?	Richard F. Outcault
When did Outcault's The Yellow Kid appear in newspapers?	1890s
What style of comics did Japan have a long history with prior to World War II?	satirical
In France, what did historians find that they consider a precedent for comics?	Lascaux cave paintings
What Michelangelo work do historians consider to be a precedent for comics?	The Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel
In Egypt, historians consider what to be a precedent for comics?	hieroglyphs
In Rome, what do historians consider to be a precedent for comics?	Trajan's Column
What was the first illustrated humor periodical in Britain during the 19th century?	The Glasgow Looking Glass
When did The Glasgow Looking Glass begin?	1825
In Britain, what was the most liked illustrated humor periodical?	Punch
Which comic character was the first to appear in a weekly magazine?	Ally Sloper
When did Ally Sloper first appear?	1884
Which outlet did comic supplements find success in?	New York World
Which strip had a good deal of success as a comic strip?	Outcault's The Yellow Kid
What comic strip did Bud Fisher have success with?	Mutt and Jeff
When did Mutt and Jeff appear?	1907
When did comic books make an appearance?	1930s
Which comic book had success with its first superhero in 1938?	Action Comics
Which genre of comic books had parents concerned?	crime and horror
Which group was created after a Senate hearing on comic books content?	Comics Code Authority
When did super heroes become popular again in comic books?	1960s
When did the alternative comics movement begin?	1980s
Serialization of comics became less popular when?	1980s
How were comics published when serialization became less common?	as albums
Which small publisher published in formats that were not traditional?	L'Association
Comics continue to thrive regardless of the decrease in what market?	print market
What picture books from the 17th century show manga origins?	toba-e and kibyōshi picture books
What is ukiyo-e an example of?	woodblock prints
When did comic supplements start showing up in Japan?	1890s
Who introduced satirical strips to Japan?	Western expatriates
When did Jiji Manga debut?	1900
Who started the first Japanese comic strip in modern times?	Rakuten Kitazawa
When did comic strips start appearing in hardback collection volumes?	1930s
What comic strip was created by Osamu Tezuka?	Sazae-san
Where were comic strip stories first serialized?	magazines
What is considered the start of the modern comics in Japan?	after World War II
Where do comics usually appear?	newspapers
Where do serialized comics in Japan typically appear?	magazines
How often are European serialized comics in magazines?	monthly or weekly
How often do serialized comics typically appear in Japanese magazines?	weekly
How long is the typical Japanese comic magazine?	hundreds of pages
What are bounds volumes of comics called in America?	graphic novels
What is the name given to Japanese comics volumes?	tankōbon
What type of work is the word novel generally geared towards?	fiction
What term can mean a non-fiction piece of a collection of short pieces?	graphic novels
Where did gag cartoons first make an appearance?	Europe
When did gag single-panel illustrations become known as cartoons?	1843
In which publication was cartoon first used to describe gag single-panel illustrations?	Punch
What did comics have in the United States because of cultural roots?	lowbrow reputation
Who thought pop culture was a risk?	cultural elites
What was thought to be only good for children and those who could not read or write?	Comics
What is a comic that is as long as a book called?	graphic novel
Who helped "graphic novel" get public attention?	Will Eisner
What decade did the term "graphic novel" become well known by the public?	1980s
In addition to printed graphic novels in stores, what became popular online?	webcomics
The popularity of the Watchmen, The Dark Knight Returns and what other comic helped popularize "graphic novel" as a term?	Maus
Who started producing comic strips and theories about them in 1827?	Rodolphe Töpffer
What century had comics in wide production?	19th
What 1925 cartoon made speech bubbles popular?	Zig et Puce
What comics began to dominate in Europe?	Franco-Belgian
When was "The Adventures of Tintin" serialized?	1929
In the United States in the middle of the 20th century comics were seen as a risk to culture and what?	literacy
What was seen as "infantile" in the United States?	comics
Comics were quoted as a sabotage of art and what?	literature
What does bandes dessinées mean?	drawn strips
Comics for adults began to be called what?	Ninth Art
What year did Pilote begin?	1959
What became a best-seller comic in the French language?	Adventures of Asterix
Pilote cartoonists were upset with censorship and what?	editorial interference
When was L'Écho des savanes begun?	1972
Métal hurlant was of what genre?	science fiction
What format did adult comics begin to be published in?	prestige
Which historical overview did Seiki Hosokibara create?	Nihon Manga-Shi
When did Hosokibara create Nihon Manga-Shi?	1924
What was created in 2001 to give students comic scholarships?	Japan Society for Studies in Cartoon and Comics
Who helped the rest of the world use the word manga outside of Japan's borders?	Frederik L. Schodt
What publication is Schodt responsible for?	Manga! Manga! The World of Japanese Comics
Who put together a history of American comics in 1947?	Coulton Waugh
What was the name of Waugh's work?	The Comics
Who created a book about comics from a philosophical point of view?	David Carrier
What book did Will Eisner create in 1985?	Comics and Sequential Art
What word is used in France for comics?	bandes dessinées
What word is used in Japan for comics?	manga
What does bandes dessinées mean?	drawn strip
What is the definitive factor of bandes dessinées?	drawn images
What comics are on the Internet?	Webcomics
Webcomics reach large audiences and new what?	readers
With webcomics, readers have access to what?	archived installments
Not held back by size limits, webcomics are said to have a what?	infinite canvas
Storyboards and what are thought to be comics by some?	Wordless novels
Storyboards are used a lot by what?	Film studios
Storyboards are not considered what?	an end product
Who does not often see storyboards used in film making?	the public
A book with pictures with no captions that tell a story are called what?	Wordless novels
What has not been reached as far as defining comics is concerned?	consensus
R. C. Harvey, Will Eisner and others are considered to be comic what?	Theorists
What are there prominent examples of in comic history?	pantomime comics
Comic critics, such as McCloud, stressed that sequences of what should be primary?	images
What century had forgotten comic forms rediscovered?	20th
In the 1840s, Töpffer wrote theories about whose work?	his own
Who introduced the term "multiframe"?	Henri Vanlier
Who used a semiotics method to study comics in the 1970s?	Pierre Fresnault-Deruelle
Who used cognitive science to learn how people understand comics?	Neil Cohn
What Russian word is used for comics?	komiks
What German word is used for comics?	comics
What Chinese word was derived from the Japanese word manga?	manhua
What Korean word was derived from the Japanese word for manga?	manhwa
The word comic comes from the humorous pieces found where?	newspaper comic strips
Comic is used for what other kind of work other than humorous works?	non-humorous
Comic books are what type of books?	periodicals
What is the term that the English use for the comics out of Japan?	manga
What is the term that the English use for the comics that come out of Belgian?	bandes dessinées
Though one person typically creates the comic, there are usually a number of what involved in actually designing it?	specialists
What is a person called who does the initial pencil work for the artwork?	penciller
What does an inker do?	finishes the artwork in ink
What are the individual images with action called in comics?	Panels
Narrative is placed into panels using what?	encapsulation
Who puts the panels together using closure?	The reader
Timing and pace of comics is made by adjusting size, shape and what of panels?	arrangement
When a comic panel has events that are not at the same time the panel is considered to be what?	asynchronous
What association with comics is strong?	Speech balloons
The presence of a single speech balloon in an image turns it into what?	comics
What type of words are used to do sound effects in comics?	onomatopoeia
What type of ink is often used in making comics?	India ink
What method is mostly used in making comics?	Cartooning
Mixed media and what else are becoming popular for making comics?	digital technology
Motion lines and what are often used in comics?	abstract symbols
What is Saint Helena tropical island named after?	Saint Helena of Constantinople
What ocean is Saint Helena located in?	South Atlantic Ocean
What is the population of Saint Helena?	4,255
How big is Saint Helena tropical Island?	16 by 8 kilometres
When was the island discovered?	1502
How many Boers were taken prisoner during the Second Boer War?	more than 5,000
Why was Dinuzulu kaCetshwayo imprisoned on the island?	leading a Zulu army against British rule
The roots of what were established on Saint Helena?	environmentalism
What did scientists attempt to boost artificially on Saint Helena?	rainfall
The environmental intervention was linked to the conceptualization of what process?	environmental change
What date was the island discovered on?	21 May 1502
What navigator discovered the island?	João da Nova
What country was João da Nova doing service for?	Portugal
What person is Saint Helena Island named after?	Helena of Constantinople
What did the island have an abundance of when discovered?	trees and fresh water.
What was imported by the settlers of the island?	livestock, fruit trees and vegetables
What kind of buildings were built by the settlers?	a chapel and one or two houses.
Who was left on the island to recover when sick?	mariners
What was the island a source of for ships travelling from Asia to Europe?	food
Who probably located the island on their final leg of their circumnavigation trip?	Englishman Sir Francis Drake
What did English ships of war attack on the island?	Portuguese India carracks
Who developed a far east trade and began to frequent the island?	the Dutch
Who gave up calling at the island due to attacks on their shipping?	The Portuguese and Spanish
Who claimed Saint Helena in 1633?	The Dutch Republic
What year did the Dutch abandon the island?	1651
Which colony did the Dutch abandon the island for?	Cape of Good Hope.
Who was granted a charter to govern Saint Helena?	the English East India Company
Who granted the English East company a character to govern the island?	Oliver Cromwell
Who was the first governor of Saint Helena?	Captain John Dutton
What year did the first governor arrive to Saint Helena?	1659
Who had the sole right to fortify and colonize the island?	East India Company
What did the English East India Company have difficulty attracting?	new immigrants
What problems lead to a suggesting to relocate the population?	Ecological problems
What was the name of the governor who suggested relocating the population of Saint Helena?	Isaac Pyke
What was the location that was suggested the population be moved too?	Mauritius
How many slaves were on the island in 1723?	610
When did the Island start to experience a period of prosperity?	1770
What captain visited the island in 1775 on their trip around the world?	James Cook
What church was erected in Jamestown in 1774?	St. James' Church
What is the official residence of the governor?	Plantation House
Who set up an astronomical observatory on Saint Helena?	Edmond Halley
What university did Edmond Halley attend?	University of Oxford
How many feet was the telescope that was set up in the observatory?	24
What district is the telescope set up in?	Longwood district
What hemisphere of stars did Edmond Halley want to study with the telescope?	Southern
Saint Helena was an important port of which company?	East India Company
What did ships replenish at Saint Helena?	water and provisions
What vessel was owned by Captain James?	HMS Endeavour
What vessel resupplied at the Island in May 1771?	HMS Endeavour
Vessels of what navy protected convoys?	Royal
What was made illegal in 1792?	importation of slaves
What year did Coolie labourers arrive?	1810
How many coolie labourers were on the island by 1818?	600
What was the population of the island in 1814?	3,507
The British government detained who in Saint Helena?	Napoleon Bonaparte
What year was Napoleon Bonaparte taken to the island?	1815
Where did Napoleon Bonaparte stay until he found permanent residence?	Briars pavilion
What ended up being the permanent residence of Napoleon Bonaparte?	Longwood House
What year did Napoleon Bonaparte pass away?	1821
Who took full control of the island after Napoleon's death?	East India Company
The EIC made what available to the government of the island between 1815 and 1830?	the packet schooner St Helena
The packet schooner St Helena brought supplies of what to the island?	wine and provisions
Which product of Saint Helena was praised by Napoleon?	coffee
Where did Saint Helena's coffee get popular after Napoleon's death?	Paris
What product got popular in Paris after Napoloen's death?	coffee
When was importation of slaves banned in Saint Helena?	1792
The emancipation of the slaves of Saint Helena did not take place until what year?	1827
Who banned slavery in their colonies?	British Parliament
Over how many slaves ended up getting emancipated on Saint Helena?	800
What act gave control of Saint Helena to the British Crown?	1833 India Act
Who turned over control of Saint Helena to the British Crown?	East India Company
During the latter half of the 19th century what ships became prevalent that weren't dependent on trade winds?	steam ships
How many ships were going to the island in 1855?	1,100
By 1889 how many ships were going to the island?	288
Who established a naval station to cut down on African slave trade on the island in 1840?	British
Between 1840 and 1849 how many freed slaves landed on the island?	over 15,000
What were the freed slaves known as?	Liberated Africans
Which french emperor gained possession of Longwood house and the land surrounding it?	Napoleon III
What year did the French Emperor Napoleon III take control of Longwood house?	1858
Who was the last resident of Longwood house before Napoleon III took it over?	Napoleon I
Who has authority over Longwood house?	French Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Who arrived in Jamestown during their solo round the world voyage?	Joshua Slocum
When did Joshua Slocum arrive in Jamestown?	11 April 1898
When did Joshua Slocum depart from Jamestown to continue his trip?	20 April 1898
Who presented two lectures on their voyage?	Sir R A Standale
What country does the local industry that manufactures fibre get their flax from?	New Zealand
What island was made a dependency of Saint Helena in 1922?	Ascension Island
What was the name of the airport the United States built on Ascension Island?	Wideawake airport
What year was Wideawake Airport built?	1942
What did the Island sell for increased revenue during this period?	flax
What year did flax prices peak?	1951
The British Post Offices decision to use what kind of fibres hurt the flax industry?	synthetic fibres
What year did the Island's flax mills close?	1965
What year did the Union Castle shipping line slowly start to reduce their service calls to the island?	1958
Which shipping company replaced Union-Castle Line mailship service?	Curnow Shipping
What year was Union-Castle Line mailship replaced?	1977
What right was lost by the citizen of the islands due to the act?	right of abode in Britain
What department was formed to help raise the living standards of the citizens in Saint Helena?	The Development and Economic Planning Department
What year was the Development and Economic Planning Department formed?	1988
Where was the only work outside of Saint Helena located?	Falkland Islands and Ascension Island
What year was the replacement for the RMS St Helena launched?	1989
Who launched the replacement RMS St Helena?	Prince Andrew
What route was the replacement RMS St Helena built for?	Cardiff–Cape Town route
What kind of layout did the RMS St Helena have?	a mixed cargo/passenger layout.
What year did the Saint Helena Constitution officially take effect?	1989
In 2002 what act granted full British citizenship to the citizens of the islands?	British Overseas Territories Act 2002
What were the dependent territories renamed to?	British Overseas Territories
How much money was spent on construction of the island's airport?	250 million
Which government built the island's airport?	UK government
When was the airport expected to be fully functional?	early 2016
Which industry is the airport supposed to help when it becomes complete?	tourism
How many tourists are expected annually thanks to the airport?	up to 30,000
What is the nearest port to Saint Helena?	Namibe
What is the closest international airport to Saint Helena called?	the Quatro de Fevereiro Airport
What is the mail boat that serves the island called?	RMS St Helena
What hemisphere is the island located in?	Western
What area is the island classified as being in by the United Nations?	West Africa
How many square miles is Saint Helena?	47
What kind of rock are coastal regions of Saint Helena covered with?	volcanic
How many feet high is the highest peak of Saint Helena?	2,684
What year did Diana's Peak officially become a state park?	1996
What was formed in 2002 to replant parts of the great wood?	Millennium Forest project
How close are the rockets and islets off the coast?	one kilometre
Which direction from the island is Upper Black Rock located?	South
Which direction from the island is Bird Island located?	Southwest
Which direction from the island is Lighter Rock located?	West
Which direction from the island is Frightus Rock located?	Southeast
What is the national bird of Saint Helena?	the Saint Helena plover
What is the Plover known locally as?	wirebird
What current affects the environment of Saint Helena?	Benguela Current
On average, how much lower are the temperatures in the central areas in celsius?	5–6
How many districts is the island of Saint Helena divided into?	eight
What do the districts also serve as?	statistical subdivisions
When was Saint Helena first settled?	1659
What was the population of the island in 1659	4,250
Where were slaves initially brought from to the island?	Africa
Later on, what two locations were slaves brought from?	India and Madagascar
Which year did the inhabitants decide there were too many slaves?	1792
In 1840 what did Saint Helena become?	a provisioning station
What squadron was Saint Helena a provisioning station for?	British West Africa Squadron
What country did the British West Africa Squadron prevent slaves from being sent to?	Brazil
How many slaves ended up staying on the island after being freed?	500
How many slaves were freed from the island?	many thousands
When did Imported Chinese labor arrive?	1810
How many imported Chinese laborers were there at the peak of importation?	618
What year did importation of Chinese Laborers peak?	1818
What kind of citizenship do the citizens of Saint Helena hold?	British Overseas Territories citizenship
On what date was full British citizenship restored to the citizens of the island?	21 May 2002
What act restored the full British citizenship of the citizens of Saint Helena?	British Overseas Territories Act 2002
What was there a long pattern of from the island starting during the post Napoleonic period?	emigration
When did the population of the island start to steadily decline?	late 1980s
What was a big factor in emmigration to the UK?	prospect of higher wages
What communion do most residents of the island belong to?	Anglican
When was the 150th anniversary of the diocese celebrated?	June 2009
Not only are most residents of the island members of the Anglican communion, but what else?	the Diocese of St Helena
The Diocese of Saint Helena has it's own what?	bishop
When did Roman Catholics start to appear on the island?	1852
What year did the Salvation Army show up on Saint Helenas?	1884
When did Baptists come to the island?	1845
How many Johovah's Witnesses were on the island?	35
When did the Seventh-day Adventist arrive on the island?	1949
Who has executive authority in Saint Helena?	Queen Elizabeth II
Who exercises the authority on behalf of the queen in Saint Helena?	the Governor
Who is responsible for Defence and Foreign Affairs?	the United Kingdom
How many seats are in the Legislative Council of Saint Helena?	15
Who presides over the executive council?	the Governor
The head of government on the island is who?	the Governor
When were proposals for a Chief Councillor put on hold?	23 March 2013
What caused high unemployment on the island?	loss of full passports
Who is the only reigning Monarch to have visited the island?	King George VI
What year did King George VI visit the island?	1947
When did Prince Phillip arrive in Saint Helena?	1957
Prince Andrews, son of Prince Phillip visited in what year?	1984
What did the government of Saint Helena fund in 2012?	St. Helena Human Rights Action Plan 2012-2015
What kind of articles were published to help this plan?	awareness-raising articles
How was support for members of the public given?	with human rights queries
What has been more prominently reported in recent years in Saint Helena?	reports of child abuse
Who has been accused of lying about the child abuse issue of Saint Helena?	Britain’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Who has Britain’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office been accused of lying to about child abuse?	the United Nations
Saint Helena has a high proportion of what kind of birds?	endemic
What kind of plants are common on Saint Helena?	vascular
What organization identified Saint Helena as important for bird conservation?	BirdLife International
 Saint Helena is on the United Kingdom's list for future what?	UNESCO World Heritage Sites
How many lichen forming fungi have been recorded on the island?	more than 200
How many endemic species of fungi have been found?	9
What kind of invertebrates have been found on the island?	freshwater, terrestrial and marine
What kind of crop economy did the Island originally have?	monocrop
What year did the crop economy change?	1966
What was produced during the time the Island was monocrop?	flax
Saint Helena's economy is now almost completely sustained by what?	aid from the British government
How much % of production does the public sector cover?	50%
What is the tourist industry mostly based around?	the promotion of Napoleon's imprisonment
What kind of fishing tourism occurs on the island?	sportfishing
How many hotels are on the island?	3
Tourism is completely based on what arriving to the island?	the RMS St Helena
What does Saint Helena have the most expensive of?	coffee
What is Tungi Spirit made out of?	Opuntia ficus-indica
Ascension Island, Tristan da Cunha and Saint Helena all issue their own what?	postage stamps
What was the GDP of the island in 1999-2000?	£12 million
By 2006 the GDP had dropped to what?	£11 million
Imports to the island mostly occur from what countries?	the UK and South Africa
What are the main exports of the island?	fish and coffee
Tourists spent how much in  2004-05?	£0.4 million
How much was public expenditure on the island in 2001-2002?	£10 million
By 2005-06 public expenditure had risen to what?	£12 million
In 2012-2013, public expenditure was what?	£28m
UK aid had risen to how much in the same period?	£12.1 million
 Wages and salaries represent how much % of the island's expenditure?	38%
How many individuals were unemployed on the island in 2013?	31
Employment on the island is dominated by what sector?	public
In 2013 the number of government jobs was what?	800
What % of people are employed in the private sector in Saint Helena?	45
How many private businesses employee people on Saint Helena?	218
What % of households were spending less than £20 per week in 2004	8%
What % of the population claimed social security benefits in 2006/7?	22
How much of the population is over age 60?	20%
How many copper tokens were Issued in 1821?	70,560
Who issued the copper tokens in 1821?	Saul Solomon
How much was each copper token worth?	a halfpenny
When did the Crown take over the island?	1836
What is the Saint Helena currency?	the Saint Helena pound
The government of Saint Helena produces it's own what?	coinage and banknotes
What year was the Bank of Saint Helena established?	2004
The Saint Helena pound is at parity with what other currency?	pound sterling
How many commercial airports are under construction in Saint Helena?	1
What is the only method of travel currently available to Saint Helena?	ship
A large airfield is located on what portion of the island?	Ascension Island
What kind of flights are offered to limited civilians?	RAF flights
What ship runs between Saint Helena and Cape town on 5 day voyages?	RMS Saint Helena
What year was the RMS Saint Helena supposed to be decommissioned?	2010
What needs to be completed before the RMS Saint Helena can be decommissioned?	the airport
When was the construction of an airport in Saint Helena announced?	March 2005
The airport was expected to be completed by what year?	2010
Who was the approved bidder for the airport?	Impregilo
Which governor departed to London to try to speed up the construction of the airport?	Andrew Gurr
When did the British government agree to help pay for the new airport in Saint Helena?	22 July 2010
Which south african company is helping to engineer the airport?	Basil Read
The new airport opening date is when?	February 2016
Which countries will be able to fly to Saint Helena using the airport?	South Africa and the UK
Which airline will provide weekly service to Saint Helena?	Comair
What kind of aircraft was the first to land at the new airport?	South African Beechcraft King Air 200
What date did the aircraft land at the new airport?	15 September 2015
What are they calibrating via test flights at the airport?	the airport's radio navigation equipment.
Who conducted the first helicopter landing at the airfield?	Wildcat HMA.2 ZZ377
Where did the helicopter embark on visiting?	HMS Lancaster
When did the aircraft visit HMS Lancaster?	23 October 2015
What kind of vehicle offers basic transportation to people in Saint Helena?	A minibus
Where does the minibus travel to?	Jamestown
On what days does the minibus take people into Jamestown?	weekdays
What day did Radio Saint Helena start operations?	Christmas Day 1967
What was the range of Radio Saint Helena in miles?	62
How many days a year was Radio Saint Helena broadcast internationally?	1
What newspaper did Radio Saint Helena collaborate with?	St Helena Herald
What day was Saint Helena Radio shut down?	25 December 2012
What date was Saint FM radio launched?	January 2005
What date was Saint FM radio closed?	21 December 2012
Which newspaper is the sister company of Saint FM radio?	St Helena Independent
Which company took over the channels vacated by Saint FM?	Saint FM Community Radio
What date did Saint FM Community Radio launch?	10 March 2013
What kind of people can join Saint Fm Radio Community?	everyone
Who runs Saint Helena online?	a former print and BBC journalist
Who is partnered with Saint Helena online?	Saint FM and the St Helena Independent
What does Sure South Atlantic LTD offer?	television
How many analogue terrestrial UHF channels does Sure South Atlantic LTD have?	17
What is the feed signal of Sure South Atlantic received by?	a satellite dish
SURE provides what kind of service to the territory?	telecommunications
What kind of network does SURE provide it's service from?	digital copper-based telephone network
When was the first fibre-optic network installed?	August 2011
How big is the satellite dish at the satellite ground station in feet?	25
When was the satellite dish installed?	1989
Where was the satellite dish installed?	The Briars
Both telephone and internet services are subject to what?	sun outages
What is the international calling code for Saint Helena?	+290
Who shares the calling code +290 with Saint Helena?	Tristan da Cunha
How many digits did Saint Helena change their phone numbers to?	5
When did Saint Helena change the amount of digits in their phone numbers?	1 October 2013
What digit are Saint Helena phone numbers prefixed with?	2
What speed is Saint Helena internet access?	10/3.6 Mbit/s
What is the internet service provided through?	Intelsat 707
Who provides the internet service in Saint Helena?	SURE
What kind of population does SURE service?	more than 4,000
How many satellites provide the link to the internet?	1
What kind of broadband service is provided on the island?	ADSL
What is the maximum speed of the broadband service?	1536 KBit/s downstream and 512 KBit/s upstream
What is the lite price of the broadband service?	£16 per month
What is the gold price of the broadband service?	£190 per month
What location has a few public wifi spots available to the public?	Jamestown
How long is the South Atlantic Express in miles?	6,214
Who runs the South Atlantic Express?	eFive
On what date did eFive announce they would reroute the cable through Saint Helena?	6 October 2012
Who lobbied for the cable reroute into South Helena?	A Human Right
How many local newspapers does the island have?	two
Where are both newspapers available?	the Internet
Since when has the St Helena Independent been published?	November 2005
When was the Sentinel Newspaper introduced?	2012
How many primary schools does the island have?	3
What are the 3 primary schools called?	Harford, Pilling, and St Paul’s
What is the name of the secondary school for the island?	Prince Andrew School
How many students were enrolled in primary school in 2010?	230
When does the mobile library service operate?	weekly
Who provides programs to students with special needs?	The Education and Employment Directorate
What curriculum does the island adapt?	The UK national curriculum
What are the qualifications offered?	GCSE, A/S and A2, to Level 3 Diplomas and VRQ qualifications
Saint Helena is a member of what kind of association?	International Island Games Association
Where did the Saint Helena cricket team make it's debut in international cricket?	Division Three of the African region of the World Cricket League
When did the Saint Helena cricket team make it's debut in international cricket?	2011
Where does the Governor's cup take place?	between Cape Town and Saint Helena island,
What months does the Governor's cup take place?	December/January
When did the most recent Governor's cup take place?	December 2010
What kind of groups are on Saint Helena and Ascension Island?	scouting and guiding
When was Scouting established on Saint Helena?	1912
Who visited the scouts on their return from the tour of Africa in 1937?	Lord and Lady Baden-Powell
What book describes Lord and Lady Baden-Powel's visit?	African Adventures
Aspiration and preaspiration are used in what?	phonetics
Aspirated consonants are what in English?	allophones
What are two language types where the difference is contrastive?	Indian and East Asian
With what word should you see a candle flicker or feel a puff of air?	pin
In English the first consonant in "pin" is what?	aspirated
What does IPA stand for?	International Phonetic Alphabet
Written IPA consonants use symbols for what?	voiceless consonants
What modifier indicates a voiceless bilabial stop?	p
pʰ represents what?	aspirated bilabial stop
What is not often aspirated?	Voiced consonants
The symbol followed by bʰ would likely mean the consonant has what type of release?	breathy
Voiced aspirated consonants are what type?	breathy-voiced
There are no IPA symbols for what?	degrees of aspiration
What may be doubled to indicate a long aspiration?	aspiration modifier
What language, according to the text, may need double stops to indicate aspiration length?	Korean
How are voice-onset time details usually presented?	numerically
A preaspirated consonant is marked how?	placing the aspiration modifier letter before the consonant symbol
What represents a preaspirated bilabial stop?	⟨ʰp⟩
How are unaspirated or tenuis consonants sometimes marked for unaspiration?	with the modifier letter
What is the superscript equal sign?	⟨t˭⟩
Most often, unaspirated consonants are what?	left unmarked
How are unaspirated consonants left unmarked?	⟨t⟩
What is created when the vocal folds are spread and do not vibrate?	Voiceless consonants
What is created when vocal folds are slightly closed and vibrate?	voiced consonants
What is it called when a person's vocal cords stay open after a consonant?	Voiceless aspiration
Aspiration of stops is seen as voiceless velar airflow in some languages, such as what?	Navajo
In Navajo, the aspiration of affricates can be seen as what?	an extended length of the frication
In Eastern Armenian, aspirated consonants occur in what?	consonant clusters
Where are consonants aspirated in just the final position?	Wahgi
As well as lasting as long as an English aspirated stop, the Armenian and Cantonese aspiration lasts as long as what?	unaspirated stops
Aspiration alters with what?	place of articulation
What happens when an aspirated consonant is doubled or geminated?	the stop is held longer and then has an aspirated release.
What is comprised of a stop, fricative, and aspirated release?	An aspirated affricate
What two languages mentioned have have preaspirated [ʰp ʰt ʰk]?	Icelandic and Faroese
What do scholars say the preaspirated [ʰp ʰt ʰk] are too?	consonant clusters
What do preaspirated stops contrast with in Icelandic?	double stops and single stops
The Sami tongue also has what?	Preaspirated stops
Which Sami tongue has unvoiced stop and affricate phonemes pronounced preaspirated?	North Sami
How many contrastive aspirated fricatives does Choni Tibetan have?	up to four
Indian languages commonly have murmured consonants instead of what?	True aspirated voiced consonants
True aspirated consonants are considered what?	rare
True aspirated consonants have been found in Kelabit Taa and what else?	Kx'a languages
What has a different significance in various languages?	Aspiration
What two forms can aspiration be in?	allophonic or phonemic
Aspiration is what, in English and some other languages?	allophonic
How are stops distinguished?	voicing
Voiceless stops are at times what?	aspirated
Voiced stops are most often what?	unaspirated
When following a word such as spill, they are what for most speakers?	unaspirated
If the letter s is a different place in the word, it is typical unaspirated unless the word is what?	compound words
If there is a cluster such as st and it belongs to different morphemes, the stop is what?	aspirated
If the st belongs to one morpheme, then the stop is what?	unaspirated
In languages like Thai and Icelandic, tenuis and aspirated consonants are what?	phonemic
[p˭ s˭] and [pʰ ʰp sʰ] are separate what?	phonemes
How are lenis consonants distinguished from fortis consonants?	their lack of aspiration
If the lenis are ⟨b d ɡ⟩, what are the fortis counterparts?	⟨p t k⟩
Mandarin has stops and affricates that are distinguished by what?	aspiration
Tenuis stops have letters that are representative of English voiced consonant in what?	pinyin
What kind of stops in pinyin are written with letters that representative of voiceless consonants?	aspirated stops
What has a three-way distinction in regards to stops and affricates?	Wu Chinese
What is the actual distinction for Wu Chinese?	/p pʰ b/
What is /b/ representative of, in addition to aspirated and unaspirated consonants?	Muddy consonants
What kind of voice are muddy consonants pronounced with?	slack or breathy
How many distinctions in stops do languages like Bengali and Hindi have?	four
What is another term for voice-aspirated?	breathy-voiced
Which distinction has Punjabi lost?	breathy-voiced consonants
Telegu, Kannada and others are considered to be some of the what languages?	Dravidian
What has no distinction between the categories  of voiced, voiceless, aspirated and unaspirated?	native Dravidian words
What language has two-way distinctions between aspirated and voiced?	Western Armenian
Western Armenian /tʰ/ compares to eastern Armenian /tʰ/ and what?	/d/
The Western Armenian voiced /d/ compares to the Eastern Armenian voiceless what?	/t/
Early Greek (before Koine) have been redone with what?	aspirated stops.
What Greek dialect had three-way stop distinction like Eastern Armenian?	Classical Attic
Who referred to the Classical Attic dialect stops by the three distinctions?	Greek grammarians
What is the representation for the three places of articulation?	/pʰ tʰ kʰ/
Earlier Greek was represented by what?	Mycenaean Greek
Whether a stop was labial, coronal or velar depended on what two things?	dialect and phonetic environment
Dialects such as Aeolic and Doric had how many distinctions that were the same at one point in time?	three
Which two dialects lost aspiration at times?	Ionic and Aeolic
Rather than /tʰ/, what did the Doric dialect have in place during the Classical period?	fricative
Attic Greek lenited to what?	voiceless and voiced fricatives
The lenited Attic Greek yielded /θ ð/ in what periods?	Medieval and Modern Greek
Aspiration may refer to a sound change of what?	debuccalization
Debuccalization is when consonants are weakened to become what?	glottal stop or fricative
What is another term for a consonant being weakened?	lenited
What is breathy voice?	a type of phonation or vibration of the vocal folds
The ⟨bʰ⟩ in the Indo-Aryan languages is better transcribed how for breathy voice?	⟨b̤⟩, with the diacritic
What do some linguists restrict the double-dot subscript ⟨◌̤⟩ to?	murmured sonorants
What are, according to the text, murmured for their duration?	vowels and nasals
What uses the ⟨◌ʱ⟩?	breathy-voiced release of obstruents.
What is hydrogens chemical symbol?	H
What is the atomic number used for hydrogen?	1
What is the atomic weight for hydrogen?	7000100794000000000♠1.00794 u
What element is considered the lightest?	Hydrogen
What form can you find hydrogen is on Earth?	molecular
What is the molecular make-up of hydrogen?	H2
What are three properties of hydrogen at normal temperature and normal pressure?	colorless, odorless, tasteless
What charge does hydrogen display in ionic compounds when it is called a hydride?	negative
What field of study has hydrogen and it's properties played a key role in development?	quantum mechanics
When was hydrogen gas artificially produced for the first time?	early 16th century
Who first recognized that hydrogen was a discrete substance?	Henry Cavendish
When it is burned what does hydrogen make?	water
What is the Greek translation for hydrogen?	water-former
What market primarily uses ammonia production?	the fertilizer market
Name a process that uses fossil fuels along with hydrogen.	hydrocracking
For hydrogen what is the enthalpy of combustion?	286 kJ/mol
What are two forms of hydrogen gas?	dihydrogen or molecular hydrogen
Which element has a enthalpy of combustion at −286 kJ/mol?	Hydrogen
What kind of light do hydrogen-oxygen flames make?	ultraviolet light
What caused  the Hindenburg to explode?	hydrogen combustion
What are two other dangerous acids?	hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride
What temperature does hydrogen react with these elements?	room temperature
What model id used to calculate energy levels of hydrogen?	Bohr model
What attracts planets and celestial items?	gravity
What does the electromagnetic force attract to one another?	electrons and protons
What kind of movement does the electron not have in ground state?	angular
How many different spin isomers exist?	2
What state are the protons in when in the orthohydrogen form?	triplet state
When hydrogen gas is in standard temperature and pressure, what form is it considered in>	normal
What percent of para form does hydrogen gas contain?	25%
What percent of ortho form does hydrogen gas contain?	75%
What are some catalysts used in hydrogen cooling	ferric oxide, activated carbon, platinized asbestos, rare earth metals, uranium compounds, chromic oxide, or some nickel compounds
What ind of charge does hydrogen take when mixed with electronegative particles?	positive charge
What type of charge does hydrogen take when combined with a metal?	negative
When hydrogen forms with a metal, what is the compound called?	hydrides
Is H2 reactive in standard conditions?	not
What is the form of hydrogen and carbon called?	hydrocarbons
What is the form of hydrogen and heteroatoms called?	organic compounds
What is the study of organic compounds properties known as?	organic chemistry
What is the study of living organisms known as?	biochemistry
Organic compounds are only required to conatin what?	carbon
 Who suggested that hydride anions existed?character does the H atom have in a hydride?	Gilbert N. Lewis
What group of hydrides is BEH considered polymeric?	group II
How many binary borane hydrides are known?	over 100
How many binary aluminum hydrides are there?	1
What chemistry do hydrides serve as bridging ligands?	inorganic chemistry
What do hydrides that are bridging ligands link up?	link two metal centers
What group is briging ligands most common in?	group 13
When hydrogen oxidates, what is it removing?	electrons
When hydrogen oxidates, what does it end up giving?	H+
What theory suggests that acids are proton donors?	Bronsted-Lowry
What is another term for a bare proton?	H+
Where can oxonium ions be found?	in acidic solution with other solvents
What other term is a solvated protons referred as?	hydronium ion
What kind of molecular hydrogen is the H+3 knows as?	protonated
What kind of cation is the H+3 knowns as?	trihydrogen cation
How many natural isotopes does hydrogen have>	3H
What are the names of these isotopes?	denoted 1H, 2H and 3H
Which isotopes have unstable nuclei?	4H to 7H
Which element is the only that has different names for its isotopes?	Hydrogen
What are the only two names still used for radioactive isotopes?	deuterium and tritium
What are the symbols used for deuterium and tritium?	D and T
What does the symbol P represent?	phosphorus
What are the preferred symbols for deuterium and tritium?	2H and 3H
What year was the discovery of hydrogen gas?	1671
Who discovered Hydrogen gas?	Robert Boyle
Who recognized hydrogen gas as a discreet substance?	Henry Cavendish
In what year did Henry Cavendish recognize hydrogen gas as a discreet substance?	1766
What does gas produce when burned?	water
How did Lavoisier produce hydrogen for his experiments?	reacting a flux of steam with metallic iron through an incandescent iron tube heated in a fire
Who was the first to liquidize hydrogen?	James Dewar
In what year Did James Dewar first liquidize hydrogen?	1898
What year was Deuterium discovered?	1931
Who was the first to discover deuterium?	Harold Urey
What year was tritium discovered?	1934
Who invented the hydrogen filled balloons?	Jacques Charles
What year was hydrogen filled balloons invented?	1783
what were the hydrogen lifted airships called?	Zeppelins
In what year did the first zeppelin make flight?	1900
Who made the first non stop transatlantic crossing?	the British
What year was this done?	1919
What year did the airship get destroyed?	1937
What city was the ship over when it caught fire?	New Jersey
In what year did the first hydrogen cooled turbogenerator go into service?	1937
What state is the Dayton Power and light Company located?	Ohio
What year was the first nickel hydrogen battery used?	1977
In what year did the hubble space telescope finally get the nickel hydrogen battery?	2009
What is the hydrogen atom made up of?	a proton and an electron
What theory is the hydrogen atom a big part of?	atomic structure
When was the quantum mechanical treatment of the hydrogen atom developed?	1920s
Who observed the specific heat capacity of H2?	Maxwell
What cause H2 to resemble monatomic gas?	spacing of the (quantized) rotational energy levels
What theory supports this?	quantum theory
What percent of normal matter is hydrogen?	75%
What percent of atoms is hydrogen?	90%
What 2 forms of mass is most of the universe consisted of?	dark matter and dark energy
Clouds of H2 form what?	stars
In what states is hydrogen mostly found in the universe?	atomic and plasma
Hydrogens electron and proton are not bound together in what state?	plasma
in the interstellar medium, what state is hydrogen in?	neutral atomic state
The neutral hydrogen found in the damped Lyman-alpha systems dominates what?	cosmological baryonic density of the Universe
How abundant is hydrogen on the earths surface?	third most abundant
what produces hydrogen gas?	bacteria and algae
What molecular form is found in the interstellar medium?	protonated molecular hydrogen
What generates protonated molecular hydrogen?	ionization of molecular hydrogen from cosmic rays
On what planet can you find  protonated molecular hydrogen?	Jupiter
In what way can Neutral triatomic hydrogen exist?	excited form
How does nature produce H2?	expelling reducing equivalents in biochemical reactions
How do labs produce H2?	by-product of other reactions
What is an easy way to produce hydrogen?	electrolysis of water
Where does the gaseous oxygen form at?	anode
Where does the gaseous hydrogen form at?	cathode
When you combine an alloy of alluminum and gallium to water, what do you get?	hydrogen
What else can it produce?	alumina
What can be reused after the formation?	the expensive gallium
The most economical way to prepare hydrogen involves removing it from what?	hydrocarbons
What temperature is needed for steam to react with methane?	1000–1400 K, 700–1100 °C or 1300–2000 °F
At what pressure does PSA work best in?	high pressures
What is synthesis gas used for?	production of methanol
Besides methane, what else can be used to produce synthesis gas?	Hydrocarbons
How can it be recovered through steam?	use of carbon monoxide through the water gas shift reaction
When hydrogen is generated from natural gas, what des it produce?	ammonia
How is hydrogen produced as a co product?	Electrolysis of brine to yield chlorine
What are the thermochemical cycyles in a testing phase for?	produce hydrogen and oxygen from water and heat without using electricity
What are labs trying to produce hydrogen from?	solar energy and water
What countries are testing this?	France, Germany, Greece, Japan, and the USA
What condition is iron and steel alloys slowly oxidized?	anaerobic
What does the anaerobic corrosion of iron lead to?	formation of ferrous hydroxide
What is another name for formation of ferrous hydroxide?	green rust
Under what condition can ferrous hydroxide be oxidized?	anaerobic
What does this process form?	magnetite and molecular hydrogen
What reaction describes this process?	Schikorr reaction
How is hydrogen produced when there is no atmospheric oxygen?	serpentinization by the anaerobic oxidation
Where do you find silicate?	crystal lattice of the fayalite
What is the most common gas found in power tranformers?	hydrogen
Where are large quantities of H2 needed?	petroleum and chemical industries
What are the consumers of H2 in petrochemical plant?	hydrodealkylation, hydrodesulfurization, and hydrocracking
Where is hydrogen highly soluble?	rare earth and transition metals
Where can you find soluble hydrogen?	nanocrystalline and amorphous metals
What influences hydrogens solubility in metals?	local distortions or impurities in the crystal lattice
When are these useful?	when hydrogen is purified by passage through hot palladium disks
When is it damaging?	gas's high solubility is a metallurgical problem, contributing to the embrittlement of many metals, complicating the design of pipelines and storage tanks
Where else is H2 applied?	in physics and engineering
How is H2 used in electrical generators at power stations?	as the rotor coolant
Why is it used as the rotor coolant?	it has the highest thermal conductivity of any gas
What research uses liquid H2?	cryogenic
Why would one use hydrogen mixed with nitrogen?	as a tracer gas for minute leak detection
What industries can you find these applications?	automotive, chemical, power generation, aerospace, and telecommunications
How is hydrogen used as a food additive?	allows food package leak testing
What isotope is used in nuclear fission?	Deuterium
Where is tritium produced?	nuclear reactors
What is tritium used for?	production of hydrogen bombs, as an isotopic label in the biosciences, and as a radiation source in luminous paints
How is hydrogen used at power stations?	as a coolant in generators
Why is it used as a coolant?	favorable properties that are a direct result of its light diatomic molecules
What are these properties?	low density, low viscosity, and the highest specific heat and thermal conductivity of all gases
Is Hydrogen considered an energy resource?	not
Where does the sun get its energy from?	nuclear fusion of hydrogen
How does hydrogen function when it s burned?	energy carrier
What form of hydrogen has been discussed as a ussage for fuel?	elemental
Why is hydrogen employed?	to saturate broken ("dangling") bonds of amorphous silicon and amorphous carbon that helps stabilizing material properties
How is hydrogen used in oxide materials?	a potential electron donor
What oxide materials use hydrogen as an electron donor?	ZnO, SnO2, CdO, MgO, ZrO2, HfO2, La2O3, Y2O3, TiO2, SrTiO3, LaAlO3, SiO2, Al2O3, ZrSiO4, HfSiO4, and SrZrO3
What enzymes are used to produce H2?	hydrogenases
When does hydrogen gas occur?	in the transfer of reducing equivalents produced during pyruvate fermentation to water
What is the natural cycle of hydrogen production and consumption by organisms called?	hydrogen cycle
What is the decomposition of water into its components called?	Water splitting
Where does water splitting occur?	in the light reactions in all photosynthetic organisms
What organisms can form H2 gas?	alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and cyanobacteria
How are these gases formed?	by specialized hydrogenases in the chloroplast
What threats can hydrogen cause to human saftey?	potential detonations and fires when mixed with air to being an asphyxiant in its pure, oxygen-free form
What can hydrogen embrittlement lead to?	cracks and explosions
What do physical and chemical properties of hydrogen depend on?	the parahydrogen/orthohydrogen ratio
How long can it take to reach the equilibrium ratio?	days or weeks
What do Hydrogen detonation parameters depend on?	container geometry
What do people typically call a web browser?	browser
What platform is a browser used on?	World Wide Web
What does URL mean?	Uniform Resource Identifier
What allows a person to direct their browser to a resource?	Hyperlinks
The primary function of a browser is to use what?	the World Wide Web
In addition to accessing the Internet, browsers can also access info that is put there by web servers in what?	private networks
A browser can also access files where?	file systems
When was the first browser created?	1990
Who invented the first browser?	Sir Tim Berners-Lee
What was Berners-Lee a director of?	the World Wide Web Consortium
What organization did Berners-Lee create?	World Wide Web Foundation
Who released Mosaic?	Marc Andreessen
When was Mosaic released?	1993
When Andreessen left the company he worked for, what new company did he start?	Netscape
What browser did Andreessen release in 1994?	Netscape Navigator
Who released the Internet Explorer browser?	Microsoft
When did Microsoft release Internet Explorer?	1995
The release of Internet Explorer started the first what?	browser war
What was bundled with Internet Explorer?	Windows
Opera was introduced in what year?	1996
What accounted for 1.1% of browser use in April 2011?	Opera-mini version
Opera focused on which quickly growing market?	mobile phone web browser
Opera is also available on which video game console?	Nintendo's Wii
What did Netscape launch in 1998?	Mozilla Foundation
Netscape wanted to have a competitive browser using what?	open source software model
What was the resulting browser for the Mozilla Foundation?	Firefox
When was Firefox released?	late 2004
When was the first beta release for Safari?	January 2003
Who created Safari?	Apple
Which browser is the newest to enter the field?	Chrome
When was Chrome released?	September 2008
As Chrome usage increases, which browser usage has continued to decrease?	Internet Explorer
When did Chrome become more used than all versions of Internet Explorer?	May 2012
What was bundled for free with the Windows OS?	Internet Explorer
Internet Explorer was partially funded in what two ways?	sales of Windows to computer manufacturers and direct to users
What other OS could use Internet Explorer?	Mac
Who investigated the bundling of the IE browser with Windows OS?	the European Commission
When did the European Commission say they would investigate the bundling?	January 2009
The Commission felt that bundling the browser with Windows computers harmed what?	competition between web browsers
The Commission felt that the bundling undermined what?	product innovation
What browser was automatically included with OS X?	Safari
Which company pays Firefox to make their search engine the default on their browser?	Google
What other browser has Google as the default search engine?	Chrome
The increased revenue funds what, in addition to Google?	Google Chrome
What is the main use of a browser?	to bring information resources to the user
What does URL stand for?	Uniform Resource Locator
What is the determining factor in how a URL will be interpreted?	The prefix of the URL
What does http stand for?	Hypertext Transfer Protocol
What does ftp stand for?	File Transfer Protocol
A news: prefix is given to the user's what?	default newsgroup reader
What is it called when content is changed from markup to an interactive document?	rendering
Browsers typically have plug-ins to support what?	Flash applications and Java applets
What can resources have to connect to other resources?	hyperlinks
Features on a browser can range from minimal with little support to what?	rich user interfaces
When a browser includes a lot of extras, it can be referred to as what?	Internet suites
What does IRC stand for?	Internet Relay Chat
What does not allow windows to pop up without consent?	pop-up blockers
A computer program that continues the functionality of a browser is called what?	browser extension
A list of websites a user can click to get back to easy have been what by the user?	bookmarked
What are "bookmarks" called in Internet Explorer?	Favorites
The top browsers have a built-in what?	feed aggregator
Firefox does web feeds as what?	live bookmarks
The Opera feed reader is more what?	traditional
HTTP Secure is supported by what?	Most browsers
Cache, download history, cookies, browsing and what else can be quickly deleted in browsers?	form and search history
A comparison of browser must be seen to know what?	current security vulnerabilities
Quick development of what kind of browsers led to non-standard HTML dialects?	proprietary web browsers
Non-standard dialects led to what?	problems with interoperability
Modern browser support standards-based and defacto what?	HTML and XHTML
HTML and XHTML should be what by all browsers?	rendered in the same way
A user interface, UI backend, layout engine and other things are part of what?	Web browsers
The layout engine, rendering engine, user interface and other things are components that offer different what of web browsers?	functionalities
What is the capital of Massachusetts?	Boston
What is the approximate population for 2014?	655,884
How many square miles does Boston cover?	48 square miles
What was the population of Boston in 2014	655,884
How many square miles is Boston?	48 square miles
What place is Boston in for largest city in the US?	24th
Which of the United States is Boston located in?	Massachusetts
How many square miles is the city proper of Boston?	48
The large metropolitan area of Boston is also called what?	Greater Boston
What is the estimated population of Greater Boston?	4.7 million people
What is the capital and largest city in Massachusetts?	Boston
When was Boston founded?	1630
Where was Boston Founded?	Shawmut Peninsula
List one major event that took place in Boston.	Boston Massacre
How many people visit Faneuil Hall annually?	20 million
What year was Boston founded?	1630
What is the name of the peninsula Boston was founded on?	the Shawmut Peninsula
Bostons rich history attracts many what each year?	tourists
The Faneuil Hall draws over how many tourists to Boston each year?	20 million
What ranks in the top of the country for investment?	businesses and institutions
Households in Boston claim the highest average rate of what in the United States?	philanthropy
Bostons businesses rank top in the country for what?	environmental sustainability and investment
Where does Boston rank as far as cost of living in the United States?	The city has one of the highest costs of living
How does Boston rank on world livability?	high
Boston is internationally known for education and medicine because of its many what?	colleges and universities
What was the name before the city was called Boston?	Trimountaine
What did Boston's early settlers call the area?	Trimountaine
What does Trimountaine mean?	three mountains
What year was the city renamed Boston?	1630
Who named the city Boston?	Puritan colonists from England
What were the puritan colonists searching for when they came to Boston?	fresh water
What year was the Cambridge Agreement signed?	1629
America's first public school was founded in Boston in what year?	1635
Who was Massachusetts first governor?	John Winthrop
How many french and Indian wars did Boston participate in?	four
Who led the signing of the Cambridge Agreement?	John Winthrop
Boston became one of the wealthiest international ports after what war?	the American Revolution
What long held tradition helped make Boston a wealthy port?	seafaring tradition
Boston was the location of many important events of what war?	the American Revolution
What act was put in place during the Napoleonic wars and the war of 1812?	The Embargo Act of 1807
What act cut down on Boston's harbor activity?	The Embargo Act of 1807
What became an important part of the city's economy during the Napoleonic Wars and the war of 1812?	manufacturing
In what century was manufacturing more important to Boston than trade?	19th century
When did Boston stop being known for it's garment production and leather goods?	the early 20th century
What was the name given to old Boston families?	Boston Brahmins
Who came to be known as the nation's social elites?	Boston Brahmins
Boston was admired for what kind of life?	literary life
Boston improved culturally because of its generous what?	artistic patronage
Boston was overtaken by Salem, Massachusetts in what type of trade?	slave trade
What movement did Boston become the center of after it stopped slave trade?	the abolitionist movement
What law involving slaves did the city react strongly to?	the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850
What President attempted to make an example out of Boston due to it's view on the Anthony Burns Fugitive Slave Case?	Franklin Pierce
What was the City of Boston's name before it was the City of Boston?	the Town of Boston
What year was the name changes to the City of Boston?	1822
Boston was chartered as what in 1822?	a city
What was the population of Boston in 1822?	about 46,226
How many square miles was the city in 1822?	4.7 square miles
How did Boston's population change in the 1820's?	Boston's population grew rapidly
The first Europen immigrants arrival changed what in Boston?	the city's ethnic composition
What was the estimated population of Irish people living in Boston in 1850?	about 35,000
What religion did Irish and Italian immigrants bring with them to Boston?	Roman Catholicism
What is Bostons largest religious group today?	Catholics
What was used to fill a mill pond that became the Haymarket Square?	the crown of Beacon Hill
What sits on Beacon Hill today?	State House
What famous disaster happened in Boston in 1872?	The Great Boston Fire of 1872
What was the rubble from the Great Boston Fire used for?	as landfill along the downtown waterfront
During what century did businesses move out of Boston to find cheaper labor?	20th century
Projects to renew the city were put into place by what?	the Boston Redevelopment Authority (BRA)
How did the people of Boston react to the demolition of the West End?	with vociferous public opposition.
What year did the first community health center in the US open?	1965
Where was Colombia Point Health Center located?	the Dorchester neighborhood
In 1990, the Colombia Point Health Center was renamed what?	Geiger-Gibson Community Health Center
The New York Times bought what famous Boston newspaper?	The Boston Globe
Who bought FleetBoston Financial?	Bank of America
What year did Bank of America buy FleetBoston Fonancial?	2004
Two Boston department stores merged to form what Cincinnati based department store?	Macy's
What department stores merged to form Macy's?	Jordan Marsh and Filene's
On what date did bombs go off at the Boston marathon?	April 15, 2013
At what point of the Marathon were the bombs exploded?	near the finish line
How many fatalities were there at the marathon?	three
About how many people were injured in the explosion?	264
What is the total area of Boston?	89.6 square miles
How many square miles of land is Boston?	48.4 square miles
How many square miles of water is Boston?	41.2 square miles
How many feet above sea level is the City of Boston?	19 ft
Boston is the only state capital in the contiguous US to have what type of coastline?	oceanic coastline
What is the name of the region that surrounds Boston?	Greater Boston
What river seperates Boston from Charlestown?	The Charles River
What direction from Boston is Boston Harbor?	To the east
Calf Island and Green Island are considered part of what National Recreation Area?	Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area
What s Boston sometimes called?	city of neighborhoods
How many neighborhoods are in Boston?	23 neighborhoods
What division of the City Government designated the 23 neighborhoods?	Office of Neighborhood Services
How much of Inner Bostons land area did not exist when the city was founded?	More than two-thirds
The modern land area was created by the gradual filling in of surrounding what?	tidal areas
Tremont Street is named after what original hill in Boston?	Trimountain
A train full of gravel came from Needham to fill what?	the Back Bay
The Boston Public Library is located in what part of Boston?	the Back Bay
Most of the city lies in which USDA plant hardiness zone?	6b
What minimizes the influence of the Atlantic ocean on Bostons weather?	Prevailing wind patterns
What is the hottest month in Boston?	July
What is the coldest month in Boston?	January
On what coast is Boston located?	the North Atlantic
What type of weather systems in Boston can produce much snow and rain?	Nor'easter
What is the average rainfall in the City of Boston per year?	43.8 inches
What is the average snowfall per year in the City of Boston?	43.8 inches
When does most snowfall occur?	December through March
During what seasons is fog common in Boston?	spring and early summer
When can tropical storms and hurricanes threaten Boston?	late summer and early autumn
Sea breezes occur during what season?	late spring
What months do thunderstorms occur in Boston?	May to September
What is the average hours of sunshine per year in Boston?	2,600
About what was the population of Boston in 2010?	617,594
How many housing units were there in Boston in 2010?	272,481
How many people are in Boston during work hours?	1.2 million
What can the population of Boston rech during special events?	2 million
What is the density of Boston's population?	12,200 persons/sq mile
What percentage of the City of Bostons population is 19 and under?	21.9%
What percentage of the City of Boston's population is 20 to 24?	14.3%
What percentage of the City of Bostons population is 25 to 44?	33.2%
What percentage of the City of Bostons residents are 45 to 64?	20.4%
What percentage of the City of Boston's residents are over 65?	10.1%
What is the average household income in Boston?	$51,739
What is the average family income in Boston?	$61,035
What is the average income for a full time male worker?	$52,544
What is the average income for a full time female worker?	$46,540
What percent of families fall below the poverty line?	16.0%
What percent of Boston's population was white in 1950?	94.7%
In 2000, what percen tof the population were non hispanic and white?	49.5%
What year did minorities become the majority of the population for the first time?	2000
In recent years, the whote population has begun to move where?	formerly non-white areas
What year did non hispanic whites once again become the majority of the population?	2006
What people form the largest ethnic group in the city?	People of Irish descent
What percentage of the city's population is Irish?	15.8%
What is the second largest ethnic group in the city?	Italians
What percentage of the citys population is italian?	8.3%
How many Chinese Americans lived in Boston City proper in 2013?	Over 27,000
How many Jewish people live in the City of Boston?	25,000
How many Jewish people live in the Boston Metro area?	227,000
What is the total number of congregations in Boston?	22
What adjascent communities also hold a high Jewish population?	Brookline and Newton
What is the estimated percentage of the population of Brookline and newton that are jewish?	one-third
What neighborhoos has a high rate of hispanics?	the East Boston neighborhood
How many hispanics live in the City of Boston?	107,917
How many Puerto Rican hispanics live in greater Boston?	175,000+
How many Mexican hispanics live in greater Boston?	25,000+
How many Colombians live in greater Boston?	22,000+
In 2014, what percentage of the city identified as Christian?	57%
In 2014, what percentage of the city identified as Protestant?	25%
In 2014, what percent of the City of Boston was Catholic?	29%
In 2014, what percentage of Bostons residents did not claim to belong to any religion?	33%
In 2014, other religions mad eup what percentage of the citys population?	10%
How many member attended the Catholic Church in the Boston area in 2010?	two million
How many Catholic churches were in the Boston area in 2010?	339
How many Episcopal churches were in the Boston Metro area in 2010?	160
What Boston church is one of the oldest congregations in the US?	Old South Church
What year was Old South Church organized?	1669
What rank does Boston hold as far as being an economically powerful city in the world?	among the top 30
What is the economy of Boston?	$363 billion
What ranking in the country does Greater Boston metro hold as far as economy?	sixth-largest
What ranking in the world does greater Boston metro hold as far as economy?	12th-largest
How many college students does Boston attract?	more than 350,000
Students from around the world contribute how much a year to Bostons economy?	$4.8 billion
Because of the number of tech companies, the city is a hub for what?	biotechnology
The Milken Institute rated Boston as the top what in the country?	life sciences cluster
Of all cities in the US, Boston received the highest amount of funding from where?	the National Institutes of Health
The city is innovative becaus eit has access to what type of capital?	venture capital
There is a  high presence of what type of company in the city?	high-tech companies
Route 128 and Greater Boston are centers for what type of investment?	venture capital investment
What remains an important sector?	high technology
A large part of Boston's economy is made up of what?	Tourism
How many tourists visited Boston in 2011?	21.2 million
How much did tourists spend in Boston in 2011?	$8.3 billion
What year did the number of Tourists from china and the UK top the list?	2014
Mutual funds and insurance are what type of industry?	financial services
What Boston investment firm helped make mutual funds popular in the 1980's?	Fidelity Investments
What helped make Boston one of the top financial cities in the US?	Fidelity Investments
Boston is the center for what type of capital firms?	venture capital
In 2016, GE Corporation decided to move its global headquarters to where?	the Seaport District in Boston
How many students are in Boston Public schools?	57,000
How many schools are in Boston?	145 schools
What is the oldest public high school in the US?	The Boston Latin School
What percentage of Bostons public students are African American?	35%
How many member of the Association of American Universities are in Boston?	four
How many students are enrolled in boston and Cambridge?	250,000
Who is the citys fourth largest employer?	Boston University
Babson College is what type of institution?	Smaller private schools
What small private law school is located in Boston?	New England School of Law
What was the name of Americas first all female law school?	New England School of Law
Wher e is Lesley University College of Art and Desighn located?	Metropolitan Boston
What is another name for New Englans school of Art and Design	Suffolk University
What is the oldest independant conservatory in the US?	the New England Conservatory
What college plays an important role in making Boston known for Jazz?	Berklee College of Music
What Univesity located outside of Boston still holds a large presence in the city?	Harvard University
What is the nations oldest college?	Harvard University
Where does Harvard plan to expand to?	Allston
What was MIT originally known as?	Boston Tech
In 1916, MIT moved across the river to what city?	Cambridge
Since the early 1990's, Boston has had less of what type of crime?	violent crime
Boston police and local groups make an effort toprevent youth from doing what?	joining gangs
The Boston Miracle is the name for the reduction in what crime from 1990 to 1999?	Murders
What was the murder rate in Boston in 1990?	26.5 per 100,000
How many reported murders were there in 2008?	62
How many murders were there in 2014?	52
How many murders were there in Boston in 2015?	39
Boston is culturally similar to what area?	greater New England
What is the Boston accent known as?	Boston English
Who influences Boston's politics and religion?	Irish Americans
What are Bostons neologisms more commonly known as?	Boston slang
Food with an emphasis on seafood, salt, and dairy is an exaple of what?	regional cuisine
Known for its literary culture, Boston has also been called what?	Athens of America
What century did Ralph Waldo Emerson write in?	the nineteenth century
What was the name of the bookstore the authors met in?	Old Corner Bookstore
Where was the Atlantic Monthly first published?	the Old Corner Bookstore
What year was the Boston Public Library founded?	1852
The Boston Symphony Orchestra is a member of what?	Big Five
What classical music magazine called the Boston Symphony orchestra one of the worlds best orchestras?	Gramophone
What does Boston Symphony orchestra call home?	Symphony Hall
Where is Symphony Hall located?	west of Back Bay
Where is the theater District located?	south of Boston Common
What event occurs on New Year's Eve?	First Night
Where is the annual Boston Arts festival?	Christopher Columbus Waterfront Park
Where are Italian Summer feasts held?	the North End
Whos is honored in the Italian Summer Feasts?	Catholic saints
How long are the Harbor-Fest festivities?	week-long
What is preserved in the Boston national Historical Park?	several historic sites
What is marked by a line of red bricks in the ground?	the Freedom Trail
Where is the institute of contemporary Art located?	in the Seaport District
What is one of the oldest libraries in the US?	The Boston Athenaeum
Where is the New England Aquarium located?	within the city
How long has Boston been a religious center?	from its earliest days
How many Roman Catholic parishes are in Boston?	nearly 300
Where is the Cathedral of the Holy Cross located?	the South End
Where is the headquarters for the Christial Scientists?	Back Bay
What was the city's first Anglican church?	King's Chapel
How is the air quality in Boston?	generally very good
How many days between 2004 and 2013 was the air unhealthy?	4 days
Who determined that the air quality was unhealthy on those 4 days?	the EPA
Allston Green District is an example of what?	cleaner energy facilities
How many green housing facilities does the Allston green District contain?	three
How often is Boston's climate plan updated?	every three years
When was the last time the climate plan was modified?	in 2013
Whos is the late Mayor of Boston?	Thomas Menino
Who came up with the Renew Boston Whole Building Incentive?	Mayor Thomas Menino
The incentive reduced the cost of what in buildings?	cost of living
The goal is to get how  many residents to sign up?	500
How much does the program cost?	free
Lots of older buildings are supported by what?	wooden piles
The piles begin to rot if exposed to what?	air
What has been happening to groundwater levels?	dropping
Where does the groundwater go instead of into the ground?	directly into sewers
How many major North American sports leagues are there?	four
How many championships has Boston won in these leagues?	36 championships
How many championships have the sports leagues won since 2001?	nine
Why did the city turn down the chance to host the 2024 Olympic games?	financial concerns
When did Boston withdraw its bid for hosting the Olympic games?	July 27, 2015
Who plays their games at Fenway park?	The Boston Red Sox
Where is Fenway park?	near Kenmore Square
What year was the first game of the first world series played?	1903
What year was fenway Park built?	1912
What was the name of Bostons first baseball team?	Red Stockings
What is the TD Gardens former name?	the FleetCenter
What was the FleetCenter built to replace?	Boston Garden
How many teams is TD garden the home to?	two
How many people can be seated in a basketball game at TD Garden?	18,624
How many people can be seated for an ice hockey game at TD Garden?	17,565
What league do the new England patriots belong to?	the National Football League
What year were the new England patriots founded in?	1960
What was the original name of the new England patriots?	Boston Patriots
When dod the Boston patriots change their name?	after relocating
What stadium do the patriots play in?	Gillette Stadium
How many NCAA Division I members play in Boston?	four
Which college participates in college football at the highest level?	Boston College
What is the name of the highest level of college football?	the Football Bowl Subdivision
Who participates in the second highest level of college football?	Harvard
What is the name of the second highest level of college football?	Football Championship Subdivision
What is one of the most famous sporting events in the city?	the Boston Marathon
When is the head of Charles Regatta held?	October
How many people were killed in the explosions at the Boston marathon?	three
What is the oldest public park in the US?	Boston Common
Where is Boston Common located?	near the Financial District and Beacon Hill
What is next to Boston Common?	Boston Public Garden
The Emerald necklace is a string of what?	parks
Who designed the Emerald necklace?	Frederick Law Olmsted
What ranking does the Boston park system have?	third-best
Who ranks city park systems?	ParkScore
Parkscore ranks the number of resident within what distance of the park?	a half-mile
How often are elections for mayor held in Boston?	every fourth year
What kind of power does the mayor have?	extensive executive power
Who became Mayor in january, 2014?	Marty Walsh
Who oversees the Boston Public Schools?	The School Committee
What is the capital of Massachusetts?	Boston
As the state capital, Boston plays a large role in what?	state politics
What is the MWRA?	Massachusetts Water Resources Authority
What is the name of the massachusetts port authority?	Massport
Where is the John F kennedy Federal office building located?	The city
What court is located in Boston?	the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
What is the name of the famous bank located in Boston?	Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Boston is split between how many congressional districts?	two
What district is the North 3/4 of the city located in?	the 7th district
Who represents the 7th district?	Mike Capuano
What year was Capuano elected?	1998
What district is the South fourth of Boston located in?	the 8th district
The Boston Globe and the Boston herals are two of Bostons what?	daily newspapers
Where is the Christial Science Monitor headquarters?	Boston
When did the Christian Science Monitor end daily print newspapers?	2009
How often does The Christian Science monitor publish their magazine?	weekly
What is the name of the teen paper that the Boston Globe provides to schools?	Teens in Print
Where is the main office of Siglo21?	Lawrence
The former publisher of the Boston phoenix owns what Spanish newspaper?	El Planeta
What is the name of the citys only lesbian owned LGBT magazine?	The Rainbow Times
What year was the Rainbow Times founded?	2006
What locations does the Rainbow Times serve?	all of New England
Where is the headquarters for the Rainbow Times?	Boston
What is the national ranking of Bostons radio market?	11th largest
What Bostom Am radio station is a sports and talk station?	WEEI
What is the name of Boston Colleges radio station?	WZBC
What is the name of Harvards radio station?	WHRB
WBUR and WGBH are exaples of what type of radio station?	NPR
What ranking does the Boston television DMA hold?	8th largest in the United States
What is the sister station to WBZ-TV?	WSBK-TV
What is the citys PBS station?	WGBH-TV
MundoFox is an example of what?	Spanish-language television networks
Where are most of the television stations transmitters located?	Needham and Newton
What is the Longwood medical and Academic Area located next to?	the Fenway district
Where is Massachusetts General Hospital located?	the Beacon Hill area
Where is St. Elizabeths medical center located?	Brighton Center
What agency oversees health concerns for city residents?	The Boston Public Health Commission
A lot of Bostond medical facilities are associated with what?	universities
The Longwood medical and Academic Area is affiliated with what medical school?	Harvard Medical School
Tufts- new England medical Center was renamed what?	Tufts Medical Center
What neighborhood is the Tufts medical Center located in?	Chinatown
What is the name of the first municipal Hospital in the US?	Boston City Hospital
What Airport is located in East Boston?	Logan Airport
Who operates Logan Airport?	Massport
What is the name of Bostons main airport?	Logan Airport
What airport is North of Logan Airport?	Beverly Municipal Airport
What airport is south of Logan Airport?	Norwood Memorial Airport
How did the streets of downtown Boston grow?	organically
Boston is at the East end of what Interstate?	I-90
What year was the O'neill tunnel put in place?	2006
The streets of Back bay grew into a what?	planned grid
How many people in Boston use public transportation?	nearly a third
Where does Boston rank nationally in terms of public transportation use?	fifth-highest
What is the name of Bostons subway system?	MBTA
The MBTA is also known as the what?	T
How long is bostons subway system?	65.5 miles
Where do Amtrack's Northeast corridor and Chicago lines start?	South Station
Where do Amtrack's Northeast corridor and Chicago lines end?	Back Bay
Trains serving new Yourk and Washington D.C also stop where?	Route 128 Station
What suburbs of Boston is the Route 128 Station located in?	southwestern
Where does the Downeaster service to maine start?	North Station
What is Bostons nickname?	The Walking City
What type of commuters does Have than any other largely populated city?	pedestrian
What percent of Boston's population commutes by walking?	13 percent
What year did walkscore rank Boston the third most walkable city in the US?	2015
What was the walk score given to Boston?	80
Bicycling magazine named Boston one of the worst cities in the US for what?	cycling
What magazine put Boston on its Future best City For Biking list?	Bicycling magazine
What is the name of the bike share program in Boston?	Hubway
What year did Hubway launch?	2011
How many rides did Hubway log in its first year?	more than 140,000
What is the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System?	a Chinese satellite navigation system
How many satellite constellations does the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System have?	two separate satellite constellations
What are the two satellite constellations?	a limited test system that has been operating since 2000, and a full-scale global navigation system
How long has the limited test system been operating?	since 2000
How is the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System written in traditional Chinese?	北斗衛星導航系統
What was the first BeiDou system called?	the BeiDou Satellite Navigation Experimental System
Who does the BeiDou-1 operate for?	mainly for customers in China and neighboring regions
What is another name for the BeiDou Satellite Navigation Experimental System?	BeiDou-1
How many satellites does the BeiDou-1 have?	three
How long has the BeiDou-1 been operating?	since 2000
What is the name of the second generation of BDS?	BeiDou Navigation Satellite System
What is another name for the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System?	COMPASS or BeiDou-2
How many satellites will the BeiDou-2 have?	35
When did the BeiDou-2 begin construction?	January 2015
When did the BeiDou-2 begin operating?	December 2011
When did China begin constructing the third BeiDou system?	mid 2015
What is the third BeiDou system called?	BDS-3
When was the first BDS-3 satellite launched?	30 September 2015
How many BDS-3 satellites have been launched?	4
How long ago was the BeiDou Satellite System first launched?	Fifteen years
How much revenue for companies is generated by the BDS system?	$31.5 billion
What are some companies that profit from the BDS system?	China Aerospace Science and Industry Corp, AutoNavi Holdings Ltd, and China North Industries Group Corp.
What is the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System named after?	the Big Dipper constellation
What is the Big Dipper constellation known as in Chinese?	Běidǒu
What does Běidǒu translate as?	Northern Dipper
Who named the constellation Běidǒu?	ancient Chinese astronomers
What was the Běidǒu constellation used for?	to locate the North Star Polaris
Who first came up with the idea for a Chinese satellite navigation system?	Chen Fangyun and his colleagues
When did Chen Fangyun come up with the idea for a satellite navigation system?	in the 1980s
The China National Space Administration said the satellite navigation system would be developed in how many steps?	three
What was the name of the first satellite launched for the system?	BeiDou-1A
When was BeiDou-1A launched?	20 December 2000
What was the name of the third satellite launched for the system?	BeiDou-1C
What was the purpose of launching the BeiDou-1C satellite?	a backup satellite
When was the BeiDou-1C satellite launched?	25 May 2003
When did China announce service plans for the BeiDou system?	2 November 2006
What was the accuracy range that China promised to offer in 2008 with the BeiDou system?	10 meters
What was the timing and speed that China promised to offer in 2008 with the BeiDou system?	timing of 0.2 microseconds, and speed of 0.2 meters/second
When was the fourth satellite for the BeiDou-1 system launched?	February 2007
What is the name of the fourth BeiDou-1 satellite?	BeiDou-1D
What is the BeiDou-1D satellite sometimes called?	BeiDou-2A
What is the purpose of the BeiDou-1D satellite?	serving as a backup satellite
What happened to the BeiDou-1D satellite that needed to be repaired?	a control system malfunction
When was the first satellite for the BeiDou-2 system launched?	April 2007
What is the the first satellite for the BeiDou-2 system called?	Compass-M1
What is the purpose of the Compass-M1 satellite?	to validate frequencies for the BeiDou-2 constellation
When was the second satellite for the BeiDou-2 system launched?	15 April 2009
When was the third satellite for the BeiDou-2 system launched?	17 January 2010
How much was China going to invest in the European Galileo positioning system project?	€230 million (USD296 million, GBP160 million)
In 2003, what was the planned purpose of the BeiDou navigation system?	only be used by its armed forces
When did China join the Galileo project?	October 2004
When was China Galileo Industries (CGI) founded?	December 2004
Who said in 2008 that China was unsatisfied with its involvement in the Galileo project?	the Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post
What is the BeiDou-1?	an experimental regional navigation system
The BeiDou-1 is made up of how may satellites?	four
How many satellites in the BeiDou-1 system is used for back up?	one
What were the BeiDou-1 system satellites based on?	the Chinese DFH-3 geostationary communications satellite
How much did each satellite for the BeiDou-1 system weigh?	1,000 kilograms (2,200 pounds) each
What type of satellites does the American GPS system use?	medium Earth orbit satellites
What type of satellites does the BeiDou-1 system use?	satellites in geostationary orbit
What is the purpose of the BeiDou-1 system using stallites in geostationary orbit?	the system does not require a large constellation of satellites
What service area is covered by the BeiDou-1 system?	from longitude 70°E to 140°E and from latitude 5°N to 55°N
What is the frequency of the BeiDou-1 system?	2491.75 MHz
When was the first satellite for the BeiDou-1 system launched?	October 31, 2000
What was the first satellite for the BeiDou-1 system called?	BeiDou-1A
When was the second satellite for the BeiDou-1 system launched?	December 21, 2000
What was the second satellite for the BeiDou-1 system called?	BeiDou-1B
When was the last satellite for the BeiDou-1 system launched?	May 25, 2003
In 2007, what was the reported resolution of the BeiDou system?	as high as 0.5 metres
What is the calibrated accuracy of the BeiDou system?	20m
What is the uncalibrated accuracy of the BeiDou system?	100m
Who reported the resolution of the BeiDou system in 2007?	the official Xinhua News Agency
How much did a BeiDou-1 ground terminal cost in 2008?	around CN¥20,000RMB (US$2,929)
How much more did a BeiDou-1 ground terminal cost than a current GPS terminal?	almost 10 times the price
Why is a BeiDou-1 ground terminal so expensive?	due to the cost of imported microchips
Where was the ELEXCON fair held in 2009?	Shenzhen
What was presented at the ELEXCON fair in 2009?	a BeiDou terminal priced at CN¥3,000RMB
Who is the chief designer of the BeiDou navigation system?	Sun Jiadong
What did Sun Jiadong have to say about the BeiDou navigation system?	"Many organizations have been using our system for a while, and they like it very much."
Who is Sun Jiadong?	the chief designer of the navigation system
What was the BeiDou-2 system previously known as?	COMPASS
How may satellites will the BeiDou-2 system have?	35
How many geostationary orbit satellites will the BeiDou-2 system have?	5
How many non-geostationary orbit satellites will the BeiDou-2 system have?	30
What is the purpose of the geostationary orbit satellites in the BeiDou-2 system?	for backward compatibility with BeiDou-1
What are the ranging signals of the BeiDou system based on?	the CDMA principle
What positioning levels will the BeiDou system offer?	open and restricted (military)
Where will the public service for the BeiDou system be available?	globally to general users
Who designed the COMPASS navigation system?	Sun Jiadong
How many satellites will the COMPASS navigation system use?	75+ satellites
What types of services will be offered by the BeiDou system?	a free service to civilians and licensed service to the Chinese government and military
What is the range of accuracy for the free service offered to civilians?	10-meter location-tracking accuracy
What is the range of accuracy for the licensed service used by Chinese government and military?	10 centimetres
As of right now, who uses the licensed military service?	the People's Liberation Army and to the Military of Pakistan
What is something the licensed military service can be used for?	communication
How many frequencies does the COMPASS system use?	four bands
What are the four bands of frequencies used by the COMPASS system called?	E1, E2, E5B, and E6
Which frequency bands are most likely to cause issues of inter-system interference with the Galileo system?	E1 and E2
Which bands are used by the Galileo system for their public service?	E1 and E2
According to International Telecommunication Union (ITU) policies, who is given higher priority to a specific frequency band?	the first nation to start broadcasting in a specific frequency
How much information about the COMPASS system did Chinese authorities release?	little was officially announced
What is one thing launching the first COMPASS satellite enable researchers to do?	to study general characteristics of the signals
What is another thing launching the first COMPASS satellite enable researchers to do?	to build a COMPASS receiver
When was the Compass-M1 satellite launched?	14 April 2007
What is the purpose of the Compass-M1 satellite?	for signal testing and validation and for the frequency filing
The purpose of the Compass-M1 satellite is similar to the purpose of what other satellite?	the GIOVE satellites for the Galileo system
What is the altitude of the Compass-M1 satellite?	21,150 km
What is the inclination of the Compass-M1 satellite?	55.5 degrees
What frequency bands does Compass-M1 transmit in?	E2, E5B, and E6
What is the phase shift of the sub-signals detected in each frequency band used by  Compass-M1?	90 degrees (in quadrature)
What are the two sub-signals in each frequency band referred to as?	"I" and "Q"
What is the intended purpose of the "I" component?	likely to be intended for the open service
What is the intended purpose of the "Q" component?	probably intended for the restricted service
When did the investigation of the signals transmitted by Compass -M1 begin?	immediately after the launch of Compass -M1 on 14 April 2007
What did engineers at CNES report in June 2007?	the spectrum and structure of the signals
Who reported the complete decoding of the “I” signals components?	researchers from Stanford University
Who built the COMPASS receiver?	a group of engineers at Septentrio
What was the purpose of building the COMPASS receiver?	report tracking and multipath characteristics of the “I” signals on E2 and E5B
What is the difference between the "I" signals on E2 and E5B and the civilian codes of GPS (L1-CA and L2C)?	Compass signals have somewhat greater power
When did the Compass system begin operation on a trial bases?	December 2011
When did the Compass system begin offering navigation, positioning and timing data to China and nearby locations?	27 December
What will improve the positioning accuracy of the Compass system?	as more satellites are launched
Upon launching, the Compass system, what was the location accuracy promised to users?	accurate to the nearest 10 m
Upon launching, the Compass system, what was the speed promised to users?	within 0.2 m per second
When did the BeiDou-2 system start offering services?	December 2012
Where did the BeiDou-2 system start offering services in 2012?	the Asia-Pacific region
At the time when BeiDou-2 system began offering services, what was the positioning data the system was able to provide?	between longitude 55°E to 180°E and from latitude 55°S to 55°N
When did the Beidou system begin operating in China?	December 2011
When is it projected that the global navigation system will be finished?	by 2020
As of December 2012, how many satellites had been launched for the BeiDou-2 system?	16
Of the 16 satellites launched for the BeiDou-2 system, how many are operational?	14
When was the Compass-M1 satellite launced?	2007
How many satellites were launched from 2009-2011?	nine
What was achieved by launching 9 additional satellites from 2009-2011?	functional regional coverage
How many satellites were launched since 2007?	16
When did the BeiDou system begin transitioning to global coverage?	2015
How did the BeiDou system begin transitioning to global coverage?	with the first launch of a new-generation of satellites
When were the 18th and 19th satellites for the BeiDou system launched?	July 25, 2015
Where were the 18th and 19th satellites for the BeiDou system launched from?	the Xichang Satellite Launch Center
What were the 18th and 19th satellites for the BeiDou system launched with?	Long March 3B/Expedition-1 carrier rocket
What is the Expedition-1?	an independent upper stage capable of delivering one or more spacecraft into different orbits
What will the three latest satellites provide after testing?	navigation services
What kind of testing will be performed on the three latest satellites?	testing of a new system of navigation signaling and inter-satellite links
How many satellites will be used to test a new system of navigation signaling?	three
What is the name for the rules issued by the heads of the Church?	Canon law
In what type of religion are canon laws applicable?	Christian
Which institutions make up the Catholic Church?	Latin Church and Eastern Catholic Churches
What body was first responsible for creating canon?	church council
What does canon law consist of?	canons
What is the Greek term for canon?	kanon
What is the Hebrew term for canon?	kaneh
What is the Arabic term meaning canon?	Qanun
What is the common definition of the word canon as it appears in Greek, Arabic and Hebrew?	reed
Which English term is derived from the same root as the Greek, Arabic and Hebrew words for canon?	cane
How many ancient canons exist in the Eastern Church?	eighty-five
How many ancient canons exist in the Western Church?	fifty
What is another term for Apostolic Canons?	Ecclesiastical Canons
When was the First Council of Nicaea held?	325
What is the Greek definition of κανὠν?	a rule
Who enforces canon law in Catholicism?	the Church's hierarchical authorities
What is the name for the collection of formal rules in Catholicism?	canon law
What does management of canon law aim to regulate?	external organization and government
What is canon law's purpose with respect to members of the Catholic Church?	order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the Church
What is another name for the collections of other Catholic churches led by the Supreme Pontiff?	rites
How many major rites exist?	five
Who is the leader of the Roman Catholic Church?	the Supreme Pontiff
What term characterizes the intersection of the rites with the Roman Catholic Church?	full union
Which denomination is led by the Supreme Pontiff?	Roman Catholic
What are the permanent sources of positive ecclesiastical law?	immutable divine and natural law
What are the impermanent sources of positive ecclesiastical law?	changeable circumstantial and merely positive law
What is given to the universal positive law of the Roman Catholic Church by its leader?	formal authority and promulgation
What is the pope's official title?	Supreme Pontiff
What three divisions of power often found in government does the pope hold?	legislative, executive, and judicial
What entity believes itself to have the longest standing internal mechanism of laws in Western Europe?	The Catholic Church
What is a legal system older than Catholic law?	Roman law
What is the term for laws produced at the Council of Jerusalem?	canons
When was the Council of Jerusalem held?	first century
Apart from the Old and New Testaments, which other cultures influenced canon?	Roman, Visigothic, Saxon, and Celtic
Which period followed the jus antiquum?	the jus novum
What is the most recent era of Latin canon law?	the Code of Canon Law
What is the name for the time preceding the Code of Canon Law?	the jus vetus
In what ways did the Eastern Catholic Churches's legal systems vary from those of the west?	different disciplines and practices
What led to the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches?	process of codification
When was the law of the Eastern Catholic Churches promoted?	1990
Who sponsored the promulgation of Eastern Catholic Church laws?	Pope John Paul II
What was the name of the formal version of laws ruling the Eastern Catholic Churches?	the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
What profesional roles from secular law does the Catholic Church also employ?	lawyers, judges
What is not present in the Catholic legal system as compared with non-religious law?	civilly-binding force
What does J.C.B. stand for?	Juris Canonici Baccalaureatus
What is the English equivalent of the term abbreviated by J.C.B.?	Bachelor of Canon Law
What is the Latin term for Licentiate of Canon Law?	Juris Canonici Licentiatus
What ancient law served as the precursor to the type of legislation seen in the Roman Catholics?	Roman Law Code of Justinian
What word characterizes the type of procedure found in American and British courts?	adversarial
What term characterizes the type of procedure used in Roman Church courts?	inquisitorial
What is the English meaning of inquirere?	to enquire
What continent's laws developed alongside those of the Church?	Europe
In which types of law can elements of canon law be seen?	modern civil law and common law
Who stated that Church law can be seen in the growth of civil law institutions?	Edson Luiz Sampel
What two regions does Sampel cite as examples of the influence of canon law?	Europe and Latin American
What does Sampel claim had a great impact on?	contemporary society
What school of thought serves as a model for canon theory?	Aristotelian-Thomistic
Which philosopher is quoted by the Catechism?	Aquinas
What word is not specifically given meaning in the Code of the Church?	law
What does Aquinas define as the aim toward which law is working?	the common good
What term expresses the idea of law derived from Aquinas as interpreted by the Catechism?	a rule of conduct
Prior to 1917, what church was in a similar situation as the Eastern Catholic Churches as regards its legal system?	the Latin or Western Church
What was different about the Eastern Churches compared with the Western?	more diversity in legislation
What was still a main factor in the Eastern Church laws?	custom
When did Pius XI announce his goal of codifying the law of all Eastern Churches?	1929
During what time period were the Codes for Eastern Churches made available, prior to the final version?	1949 through 1958
When was the original Code of Canon Law published?	1917
For which part of the Roman Catholic Church was the first Code published?	the Roman Rite
During what years was the Second Vatican Council held?	1962 - 1965
For whom was a new edition of canon law released in 1983?	the Roman Rite
When was the first Code produced for Eastern Churches?	1990
What language is used by members of the Orthodox denomination?	Greek
What are the constituents of the Pēdálion?	canons and commentaries upon them
What does Pēdálion mean in English?	Rudder
Which Orthodox leaders are free to adapt canon as required?	bishops
Which groups do Orthodox scholars point to when defending their way of interpreting canon?	the Ecumenical Councils
In what institution do church courts still have relevant functions in secular society?	the Church of England
In what century did Saxons and Normans separate?	12th
What type of law is not found in ecclesiastical systems in the modern day?	common law
At which universities were canon law degrees abolished?	Oxford and Cambridge
Who was responsible for banning canon law education from Oxford and Cambridge?	Henry VIII
What is a term for the Church of England and churches that align with it?	the Anglican Communion
What is an example of a member of the Anglican Communion in America?	the Episcopal Church
What is an example of a member of the Anglican Communion in Canada?	the Anglican Church of Canada
What do extant churches of the Anglican Communion still operate with?	their own private systems of canon law
As of 2004, what do all Anglican Communion Churches share?	principles of canon law
What term characterizes the way in which the existence of canon principles can be shown?	factually
Through what does each member of the Anglican Communion make a contribution to Church law?	its own legal system
What kind of force could the canonical principles be said to have within the Communion?	living
What does having common principles show and support for churches int he Communion?	unity
What are two other possible terms for canon law among some denominations?	"practice and procedure" or "church order"
In what types of institutions are canon rules called "practice and procedure"?	Presbyterian and Reformed churches
What aspect of management is covered by church order?	government
What aspect of decorum is covered by practice and procedure?	discipline
What aspect of faith is covered by canon law?	worship
What group took issue with the Roman canons?	the Presbyterians
In what year was there documented criticism of Roman church law by Presbyterians?	1572
To whom did Presbyterians complain in 1572?	Parliament
For how long did the Reformed Church state that canon had been administered by members of the church?	1500 years
Which church officials were responsible for the administration of canon law?	bishops
What is a fundamental collection of documents of the Lutherans?	The Book of Concord
Beginning in what century was the Book of Concord a central part of the Lutheran Church?	16th
What kind of statement is the Book of Concord?	confessional
What are the legislative systems of various Lutheran institutions called?	canons
What kind of belief is the subject of the Book of Concord?	orthodox
How many official radio and television networks does the government of Somalia operate?	two
Are communication services in Somalia mainly located in the public or private sector?	private
As internet access increases, news media and online portals replace what form of media?	Print media
What year was the national postal service of Somalia relaunched?	2013
In 2012, what act was approved to establish a National Communications regulator?	National Communications Act
Are communications services in Somalia mostly concentrated in the public or private sector?	private
Communications in Somalia are mostly concentrated in what sector?	private
How many official rado iand TV networks does the governemt of Somalia run?	two
What type of media decreases and internet connectivity increases?	Print media
What types of media increases as internet connectivity and access increases?	radio stations and online portals
What year is the postal service in Somalia set to relaunch?	2013
Who funded the new telecommunications firms in Somalia?	Somali entrepreneurs
China, Korea, and Europe lent what to the creation of the new firms.	expertise
What do the new telecommunications firms in Somalia offer that is not available in many other parts of the continent?	affordable mobile phone and internet services
Money transfers and wireless internet are two things that customers can now accomplish via what?	mobile phones
When the civil war began, many telecomunications companies were created to provide missing what?	infrastructure
Sprint, ITT, and Telenor are examples of what?	multinational corporations
Who provides service to every City, town, and hamlet in Somalia?	Somali telecommunication companies
aproximately how many main lines are there per 1000 people?	25
what is another word for availability of telephone lines?	tele-density
How much does Hormuud Telecom gross per year?	$40 million
What year did Dahabhiil acquire the majority of Somtal network?	2008
Where is Somtal network located?	Hargeisa
Buying Somtal Network allowed Dahabshiil to expand into what type of banking?	mobile banking
STC stands for what?	Somali Telecommunication Company
The STC allows its customers to communicate across how many networks?	three
Investing in what Industry is a sign that Somalia's economy is continuing to improve?	telecom industry
What sector provides key communication services?	telecom
What year was the national Communications act enacted?	2012
What Act clears the way for a National Communications Regulator?	the National Communications Act
What types of stakeholders consulted on the bill to enact the National Communications Act?	academic and civil society
The National Communications Act is expected to create and invironment favorable for what?	investment
Continued infrastructure development results in more efficient what?	service delivery
What is the name of the Somali postal service?	Somali Post
What is the name of the National postal service of Somalia?	Somali Post
When was the infrastructure of the postal service destroyed?	during the civil war
What airport is home to the Emirates post mail hub?	Dubai International
How many phases made up the reconstruction plan for the Somali Post?	three
Over what period of time did the reconstruction plan for the Somali Post cover?	ten years
How many branch offices will be constructed in the capital in phase one of the reconstruction plan?	16
How many branch offices will be creted in general bases?	17
What year did Somali authorities rejoin the Universal Postal Union?	2012
What year did postal service in Somalia resume?	2013
Who is helping the Somali Postal service reach its capacity?	Universal Postal Union
What type of assistance does the postal union provide?	technical
What type of equipment does the postal union provide?	basic mail processing equipment
When was Radio Mogadishu established?	during the colonial period
What languages di Radio Mogadishu originally broadcast in?	Somali and Italian
What countrys assistance helped Radio Mogadishu modernize?	Russian assistance
What type of services were offered in Somali, Amharic, and Oromo?	home service
Mustaqbal Media Corporation is based where?	Mogadishu
In what year was Shabelle Media network awarded the media of the year prize?	2010
How many short wave radio stations broadcast from the capital?	one
About how many private radio stations does the region of Puntland have?	six
What is the former name of Radio Gaalkacyo?	Radio Free Somalia
Where does RAdio Gaalkacyo operate from?	Galkayo
What province is Galkayo located in?	Mudug province
How many government operated radio stations exist in the Somaliland region?	one
What TV station is the main public service broadcaster in Somalia?	Somali National Television
Where is Somali National Television located?	Mogadishu
What year did experimental broadcasts of Somali National Television begin?	2011
When was Somali Nation Television officially re-launched?	April 4, 2011
Howmany hours a day does SNTV broadcast?	24
Horn Cable Television and Universal TV are examples of what?	private television networks
What type of Tv startions replay AL=jazeera and CNN?	private television networks
Where does SBC TV broadcast from?	Bosaso
What is the commercial capital of Puntland?	Bosaso
Howmany governemnt run channels do Puntland and Somaliland regions have?	one
Where was The Mogadishu Times published?	Mogadishu
What year did free media outlets begin to expand?	2003
Advertisers switched from print ads to what to reach more customers?	radio and online commercials
Whos is a former editor with The Delka Broadsheet?	Issa Farah
What is the IST?	Information Support Team
As of December 2012, Somalia did not have systematic what?	internet blocking or filtering
What internet standards were also unlear as of December, 2012?	content standards online
What years was the first ISP established in Somalia?	1999
Somalia was one of the last countries on what continent to get connected tothe internet?	Africa
In 2009, what percent of Somalia has internet coverage?	53%
The quickest growing local businesses in Somalia are what types of businesses?	internet commerce and telephony
What was the numbe rof Somali internet users in the year 2000?	200
What was the number of internet users in the year 2011?	106,000
Goes the number of internet users in Somalia continue to rise or fall?	rise
What was the number of mobile subscribers in Somalia in 2008?	512,682
What is the estimated number of mobile subscribers in Somalia in 2015?	6.1 million
What is the STA?	Somali Telecommunication Association
What sector does the STC oversee?	ICT sector
In 2006, who reported that there were over half a million internet users within the territory?	STA
How many established ISP were within the territory in 2006?	22
How many cyber cafes were withing the territory in 2006?	234
As of what year were dial up, wireless , and satellite services available?	2009
What was the landline growth rate of Somalia in 2009?	12.5%
What was the flat rate per month for unlimited landline calls in Somalia in the year 2009?	$10 per month
What was Somalias largest ISP in 2009?	Global Internet Company
Who was the only provider of dial up service in Somalias SouthCentral regions in 2009?	Global Internet Company
Mogadishu and Bosaso are what in Somalia?	major cities
What city in Soalia has the largest nuber of subscribers?	Mogadishu
Where was the headquarters of the largest wireless internet services?	Mogadishu
What is another name for Dalcom?	Wanaag HK
What wsas the satellite internet growth rate as of 2009?	10% to 15% per year
Dalkom Somalia provided internet over what?	satellite
Who were one of the main clients of the local satellite service providers?	internet cafes
As broadband access rose, what happened to the demand for satellite services?	gradually began to fall
Hormuud Telecom launched what service in 2012?	Tri-Band 3G
Who was the 3G service for?	internet and mobile clients
what type of connection was the first of its kind in Somalia?	Tri-Band 3G
What type of connection does Tri-Band 3G offer its customers?	faster and more secure
what does 3G stand for?	third generation
What year did Somalia receive its first fiber optic connection?	2013
in 2013, an agreement between Hormuud Telecom and Liquid Telecom provided residents access to what type of cable provider?	broadband
How many miles long is Liquid Telecoms Network?	10,500 mile
How will the fiber optic connection impact the price for online access for the average user?	more affordable
Where is Dalcom Somalia currently building a 1000 square mile data center?	Mogadishu
What place is Catalan named for?	Catalonia
What type of language is Catalan?	Romance language
What is Catalan called in Valencia?	Valencian
Where is Catalan the only official language?	Andorra
What is the second most often spoken language is Catalonia?	Catalan
What is the most used language in Catalonia?	Spanish
What is the type designation of Catalan in Catalonia?	native
What group spends money to promote the language?	The Generalitat of Catalunya
What language is promoted in Catalonia?	Catalan
From what language did Catalan come?	Vulgar Latin
In what area did Catalan develop?	eastern Pyrenees
When did Catalan develop in the Eastern Pyrenees?	9th century
When was Catalan's Golden Age as a dominant language?	Low Middle Ages
What year started the decline of Catalan as a main language?	1479
What happened in 1975-1982?	Spanish transition to democracy
What has this official language state done for Catalan?	increased prestige
Where is there nothing like this non-state speech community?	Europe
Besides being the official language and language of education, what other group uses Catalan?	mass media
What is the division of Catalan dialects?	Eastern and Western
What is the basic difference between the dialects?	pronunciation
What is the differenctiation between Catalan and Valencian?	different varieties
What are Catalan and Valencian assumed to be?	the same language
What are Catalan and Valencian considered to be in the language?	two standard varieties
What does Catalan have in common with other Romance languages in the same area?	many traits
Where is Catalonia located?	Iberian Peninsula
What other Iberian Romance languages are found in this area?	Spanish and Portuguese
Besides vocabulary and grammar, what other diffinence is there from other similar area languages?	pronunciation
What are these similar Latin derived languages called?	Gallo-Romance
How many genders does Catalan have?	two
What numbers does Catalan have?	singular, plural
What style of grammar does Catalan have?	inflectional
What is used in Catalan as word endings that is different from other similar Romance languages?	consonants
What is Catalan the derivitive of?	Catalonia
What is the Latin for Calalunya?	Gathia Launia
Where did the Catalan  people originate?	March of Gothia
What is the root word from which Catalonia comes?	Gothia
When did the reference Catelaner first appear?	mid 14th century
What is a Catalan person called in the 15th century?	Catellain
What language is the source of the term Catellain?	French
What is the language source of the term Catelaner?	English
Since what year has this term been used?	1652
Where is Valencia used instead of Catalan?	Valencian Community
What are Catalan and Valencian the names for?	the same language
What affect does  different pronunciations in the two areas of Catalan speakers produce?	dialects
What language did Catalan descend from?	Vulgar Latin
When had Catalan covered the eastern end of the Pyrenees?	9th century
Besides the Pyrenees, what area had Catalan covered by the 9th century?	Hispania Tarraconensis
Who broadened their territory and the use of Catalan in the 8th century?	Catalan counts
When did the County of Barcelona separate from the Carolengian Empire?	988
When did macaronic Latin start showing signs of Catalan?	11th century
When did texts begin to appear solely in Romance?	by 1080
To what language did Catalan display similarities?	Gallo-Romance
What Gallo-Romance language did Old Catalan separate from?	Old Occitan
When did Catalan rulers broaden their territory to north of the Ebro River?	11th and 12th centuries
When did the Catalan rulers take over Valencia and the Balearic Islands?	13th century
When Catalan reach Sardinia?	14th century
Where did the Catalan language reach in the 15th century?	Murcia
When did Murcia become Spanish speaking?	15th century
When was the golden age of Catalan?	Low Middle Ages
Where was the center of the Crown of Aragon?	city of Valencia
What was the official language of Sicily until the 15th century?	Catalan
Until what century was Catalan used as the official language in Sardinia?	17th
Who called Catalan one of the great languages?	Costa Carreras
Who wrote Tirant lo Blanc?	Martorell
What kind of tale was Tirant lo Blanc?	chivalry
To what does Matorell's work show a transition?	Renaissance values
What other writer showed a transition to the Renaissance?	Metge
In what was the first Catalan book printed on the Iberian Peninsula?	movable type
When were Castille and Aragon united?	1479
After 1479, what language became more valued?	Spanish
When did Catalan literature begin a downward trend?	16th century
What language began to supersede Catalan?	Spanish
At this time what classes became bilingual?	urban and literary
When was the Treaty of the Pyrenees?	1659
What part of Catalonia did Spain give to France?	northern part
Why did Spain give part of Catalonia to France?	Treaty of the Pyrenees
What language began to influence Catalan?	French
When did French become the official language of that part of Catalonia?	1700
When did France outlaw Catalan?	1789
What upheaval had occurred in France just before the prohibition of patois?	French Revolution
Besides Catalan, Alsatian, and Breton, what other patois were banned?	Occitan, Flemish, and Basque
What are French non standard languages called?	patois
When did the French obtain Algeria?	1833
Where did the Algiers immigrants come from?	Northern Catalonia and Minorca
What was the Catalan immigrant's speech called?	patuet
How many Catalan speakers lived in Algiers by 1911?	around 100,000
When did most Catalan speakers leave northern Catalonia?	1962
What is the official language of France?	French
Where does the General Council want to promote Catalan?	in public life and education
Who recognized Catalan as a departmental language?	General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales
What language does the General Council want to promote?	Catalan
What declined in the 16th and 17th centuries?	Catalan
Where did Catalan experience defeat?	War of Spanish Succession
When was the war of Spanish Succession?	1714
What did the war in 1714 mandate as the proper language in documentation?	Spanish
Who was defeated in the War of Spanish Succession?	Catalan
What did the 19th century produce in Catalan literature?	revival
What is Renaixenca?	Catalan literary revival
When did Aribau write Ode to the Homeland?	1833
When did this revival period begin?	1833
In what century did Vedaguer, Oller, and Guimera wrte?	early 20th
Since the transition what language has been proclaimed mandatory in schools?	Catalan
Where is the teaching of Catalan mandatory?	in all schools
Since the transition, what is the official language?	Catalan
Besides as an official  and an educational language, where else is Catalan the prefered language?	mass media
Where has Catalan always been the only language?	Andorra
When was the Andorran constitution produced?	1993
What policies are the Andorrans enforcing?	Andorranization policies
What is an Andorran school policy?	Catalan medium education
What is the only language of Andorra?	Catalan
What kind of  shifts are taking place in Catalan speaking areas?	language shift processes
How old are most of the native language speakers in northern Catalonia?	60 or older
When was it determined that most native speakers in France are 60 or older?	2004
What percentage of primary students study Catalan as a foreign language?	30%
What do 15% of secondary school students study as a foreign language?	Catalan
What is Catalan being supplanted by in Alicante?	Spanish
What is Catalan being replaced by in Alghero?	Italian
What are the anti-Catalan attitudes in Valencia and Ibiza?	ingrained diglossic attitudes
What is another expression for bilingual attitudes?	diglossic attitudes
What is Spanish replacing in Alicante province?	Catalan
To what branch of Gallo-Romance languages is Catalan attributed?	Occitano-Romance
Who disagrees with putting Catalan in the Occitano-Romance branch?	linguists
What kind of linguists do not like placing Catalan in the Occitano-Romance category?	Spanish ones
What is Catalan a variety of?	Occitan language
What are the degrees of similarity with Occitan and Gallo-Romance languages?	varying degrees
What are there besides degrees of similarity with Occitan?	differences
What does Catalan share with other Romance languages?	many traits
Why does Catalan share many traits with other Romance languages?	closely related
What does Catalan share with nearby Romance languages?	many traits
Where is the Catalan language mostly located?	Iberian Peninsula
In pronunciation what is Catalan different from?	Ibero-Romance group
What are examples of Ibero-Romance languages?	Spanish and Portuguese
To what group is Catalan most closely related?	Occitan
What is the similarity between Catalan and Italian?	87%
Hoe similar is Catalan to Portuguese?	85%
What is the percent relationship of Catalan to Spanish?	80%
What is the relationship similarity to Ladin?	76%
How related is Sardinian to Catalan?	75%
What has Catalan often been considered?	dialect of Spanish
During what dictatorship was Catalan considered a dialect?	Francoist
What area was Roman Tarraconensis language different from?	rest of Roman Hispania
What language branch did Catalan share a history with?	Occitan
What is Occitan a branch of?	Western Romance
What is the origin of language elements found in Catalan and not in Spanish?	Germanic
What is the origin of some Spanish words?	Latin origin
What has different results in Spanish and Catalan?	Germanic superstrate
What element in Spanish is more prominent than in Catalan?	Arabic element
What language loanwords are found in both Spanish and Catalan?	Arabic loanwords
In which language is the Arabic element stand out more?	Spanish
Where does the Catalan word alfabia come from?	of Arabic origin
What is the origin of the Spanish word teja?	Latin origin
What are the linguistic blocks Catalan lies between?	Ibero-Romance and Gallo-Romance
What kind of linguistic choices does Catalan have?	unique
What type of unique choices does Catalan have?	lexical
What is the Catalan to miss somebody?	enyorar
What are the Paisos Catalans	Catalan Countries
What is that determination based on?	cultural affinity and common heritage
What status does Catalan Countries have?	no official status
What is the interpretation of the term?	Various interpretations
What is the term for Catalan Countries?	Països Catalans
How is Catalan different from other Romance languages?	many monosyllabic words
What other type of endings do Catalan words have?	consonant clusters
What kind of final devoicing does the language have?	obstruent
What do many words feature?	couplets
What is the standard pronunciation of Catalan?	Central Catalan
What is Central Catalan?	standard pronunciation
What are the descriptions for?	standard pronunciation
Where do you look for the pronunciation of different dialects?	section pronunciation
Where does Catalan get its vowel system?	Vulgar Latin
How many stressed phenoms are there?	seven
Where is this a common feature?	Western Romance
What is the exception to this common characteristic?	Spanish
What differs in vowel reduction?	Dialects
How many  reduced unstressed are vowels are there in Central Catalan?	three
What vowel stays distinct?	/i/
What kind of vowel processes do other dialects have?	different
Where do unstressed vowels reduce to three?	In Central Catalan
Where do you find dialectic vowel reductions?	section pronunciation
What field studies the placement of Catalan in the world?	Catalan sociolinguistics
What is the study of the differenet varieties of Catalan?	Catalan sociolinguistics
What is this a subdiscipline of?	Catalan philology
What does it want to do with the language, the speakers, and reality?	analyse the relation
What outside affects does this study include?	other languages in contact
What do the dialects of Catalan feature?	uniformity
In comparison to what are the dialects uniform?	other Romance languages
What is high among dialects?	intelligibility
What is the percentage of intelligibility between dialects?	90% to 95%
What dialect is the exception to intelligibility?	Alguerese
What is the major difference between the two blocks?	treatment of unstressed a and e
How are a and e in western dialects?	distinct
What have a and e done in eastern dialects?	merged
What two dialects does Western Catalan include?	Northwestern Catalan and Valencian
How many dialects are in the eastern group?	four
To what division does Central Catalan belong?	Eastern block
What other divisions can be made of dialects?	subdialects
What block does Northwestern Catalan and Valencian belong to?	Western Catalan
What comprises the standard pronunciation of Catalan?	Central Catalan
Where are the most speakers found?	Central Catalan
In what densely populated area is it spoken?	Barcelona province
What part of the province of Tarragona is Central Catalan spoken?	eastern half
What is the vowel system of Catalan?	Vulgar Latin
How many stressed phonemes are there in Catalan?	seven
Where is this system common?	Western Romance
What language is the exception?	Spanish
What language form differs in the amount of vowel reduction?	Dialects
Where do unstressed vowels reduce to three?	Eastern Catalan
What is the exception to this reduction?	Majorcan
Which vowel remains distinct?	/i/
In what language do unstressed vowels reduce to four?	Majorcan
What reduction pattern do some vowels follow?	Eastern Catalan
What other pattern do other vowels follow?	Western Catalan
What letter remains distinct?	/u/
/u/ remaining distinct is like what form of Catalan?	Western Catalan
What do unstressed vowels reduce to in Western Catalan?	five
Which letters remain distinct?	/a u i/
Where did this pattern come from?	Proto-Romance
In what other languages is this pattern found?	Italian and Portuguese
What do other Western dialects sometimes  offer?	further reduction
What form has the same /e/ as Central and Western?	Balearic
What vowel does Central have a larger occurrence of?	/e/
What is the result of /e/ being the same in Central,  Western and Belearic?	higher incidence
What language is parle or tem ?	Valencian
What language  is parlo or temo ?	Northwestern
What language is parl?	Balearic
What language form is parli?	Northern
Where do you find medieval plurals?	nouns and adjectives
What letter is lost in some words?	/n/
When homens loses /n/, it becomes what word?	homes
The medieval jovens becomes what what word?	joves
What kind of plural words lose /n/?	proparoxytone
What do the two blocks of Catalan display differences in?	word choices
How can you explain differences in the language groups?	as an archaism
What form is innovative?	Central Catalan
What are the two blocks of Catalan?	Eastern and Western
What does an archaism explain?	lexical divergence
What is Standard based on?	Eastern Catalan
What form is excepted by most speakers?	Standard Catalan
What language forms are not now used in eastern Catalonia?	traditional ones
What is jo compro changed to ?	jo compre
What common Valencian forms are used?	many verbal forms
What forms are also common in the rest of Western Catalan?	verbal forms
Where is IEC's standard used?	the Balearic Islands
How is the standard used there?	adapted for the Balearic dialect
What is a first person singular  feature of the Balearic standard?	non-ending
Where has the IEC adapted its standard to the Alguerese dialect?	Alghero
What definite article is found rather than el?	lo
What is -v- used for?	imperfect tense
What dialect employs many archaic words?	Alguerese
What type of pronouns has Alguerese adapted?	weak pronouns
Where is the Catalan speaking part of Aragon?	La Franja
When did the government of Aragon  degree the establishment of a language regulator?	2011
What language is the regulator meant to standardize?	Catalan
Where is the language to be regulated located?	La Franja
How is Valencian classified?	Western dialect
What kind of Valencan is spoken in Western Catalonia?	northwestern varieties
Where are the provinces of Lleida and Tarragona?	Western Catalonia
What forms are mutually intelligible?	Catalan and Valencian
What is the percentage of intelligibility between Catalan and Valencian?	90% to 95%
How do linguists view Catalan and Valencian?	as the same language
How do Valencian scholars view Catalan and Valencian?	as the same language
What is the official regulating body of  Valencian?	the Valencian Academy of Language
Who says that there is linguistic unity between Catalan and Valencian?	Valencian Academy of Language
Who established the AVL?	Valencian parliament
Over what does the AVL  make rules governing?	use of Valencian
What is the AVL standard based on?	Norms of Castelló
Who uses this standard?	everyone who writes
Who is exempt from the standard and uses their own?	Royal Academy of Valencian Culture
What do most Valencian people think Valencian is in regards to Catalan?	different
When was an opinion poll done concerning Valencian?	between 2001 and 2004
Who is less likely to believe that Catalan and Valencian are different?	younger generations
Who uses a Valencian standard separate from Catalan?	Royal Academy of Valencian Culture
How many scholars outside of linguistics agree with the Royal Academy?	A minority
What has produced a great deal of controversy?	clash of opinions
When did the EU create the European Constitution?	2004
Who gave the EU translations of the European Constitution?	Spanish government
As what can divergence in the groups be shown?	as an archaism
How does central Catalan behave with the groups?	as an innovative element
What are the two dialectical groups of Catalan?	Eastern and Western
What language has a lexical unity?	Catalan
What can use words from different dialects?	Literary Catalan
What kind of words are excepted from literary use?	restricted use
When did the preference of use of words from northern dialects begin?	19th century
What affect did this favoring of northern dialects have on other dialects?	detriment of others
What kind of choice is now available in word choice?	greater freedom of choice
Where does Catalan get a lot of its learned words?	Greek and Latin
When did the process of acquiring words from Latin and Greek begin?	very early
In whose work can you find examples of acquired words?	Ramon Llull
When did Catalan have a greater number of Greco-Latin words than other Romance languages?	fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
Whose writings are a good example of learned words in Catalan?	Roís de Corella
What is common in Romance languages?	agglutination
What kind of derivation in Catalan is similar to other languages?	morphological
What word additive is usually added to verbs?	Prefixes
What other word changes can occur in derivations?	sound alternations
What word supplement  can be put on an already existing word base?	affixes
What is the usual masculine suffix?	-o
What kind of words does Catalan have few of?	suppletive couplets
What languages have more couplets than Catalan?	French
What languages are  similar to Catalan in numbers of  couplets?	Italian and Spanish
What language is not like Catalan in suppletive couplets?	French
What languages have a tendency to lose gender-invariable adjectives?	Occitan and French
What is ab example of a gender marked adjective?	bullent/bullenta
What would be the traditional form of a gender-invariable adjective?	bullent/bullenta
What is the usual way to make a plural?	suffix -s
What can the addition of the suffix -s produce?	morphological alternations
To what are these morphological changes similar?	gender inflection
What is an important plural alternation?	addition of -o-
What does the large number of omissions  make the determinatives?	complex
What is much like the neighboring languages?	inflection of determinatives
What language does Catalan have more contractions than?	Spanish
Catalan has less contractions than what language?	Italian
What type of word is added to the contraction of the preposition?	article
What has Central Catalan mostly abandoned?	unstressed possessives
What other language shares this type of construction?	Italian
What is an example of an article +stressed forms?	el meu
What is an example of an unstressed possessive?	mon
How many forms of personal pronouns are there in Catalan?	13 distinct forms
How many personal pronouns are there is Spanish?	11
What is the number of personal pronouns in Italian?	9
How many different combinations of unstressed pronouns are there?	65
What is this distinction similar to?	all other Romance languages
What modern language does not have a T-Y distinction?	English
What does this imply the use an extra group of pronouns for?	formality
What languages use extrapositioning in sentences less than Catalan?	French or Spanish
What do you not need to use in Catalan?	passive voice
What languages use the passive voice more than Catalan?	French or English
What method does Spanish use to identify the object?	preposition
What is Catalan verbal inflection ?	more complex
What plays a primary part in Catalan?	Suffixation
What plays a secondary part in Catalan?	morphological alternations
How are vowel alternances in Catalan?	active
What system is common to Western Romance?	Catalan verbal system
What have many dialects replaced?	synthetic indicative perfect
What is the Catalan verbal system common to?	all Western Romance
How are Catalan verbs grouped?	into three conjugations
Which conjugation has about 3500 verbs?	first conjugation
How many verbs are in the third conjugation?	700
Which conjugation has less than 100 verbs?	second
How many surnames does everyone in Spain have?	two
Which one of one's father's surnames is used?	first
What is Spain thinking of doing to the two surnames?	joining both surnames
What conjunction would be used to join a person's surnames?	in
What is the official language of Estonia?	Estonian
How many people in Estonia speak Estonian?	about 1.1 million
How many people in different migrant communities speak Estonian?	tens of thousands
What branch of the Uralic language family does Estonian belong to?	Finnic
What language family does Estonian belong to?	Uralic
What country has Estonian as its official language?	Estonian
In Estonia how many people speak Estonian as their native language	1.1 million
Of what language family is Estonian a part of?	Uralic
On which branch of Uralic language family can Estonian be found?	Finnic
How many estimated non native speakers of Estonian are there in Estonia?	tens of thousands
Who is interested in the degrees of phonemic length?	linguists
What are the phonemic length's three degrees?	short, long, and "overlong"
What is a matter of dispute among linguists regarding the distinction?	the underlying phonological mechanism
What Uralic language branch contains Estonian?	Finnic
What are two other languages in the Finnic branch?	Finnish, Karelian
What language group is Estonian not a part of?	Indo-European languages
What languages are related to Estonian but not closely?	Hungarian and to the Sami languages
Who spoke German in what came to be known as Estonia?	Baltic Germans
Aside from standard German what German language influenced Estonian?	Middle Low German
What kind of harmony has Estonian lost?	vowel
What language feature does Estonian, Finish and Hungarian share?	agglutinative
In what order are words put in sentences in the Estonian language?	subject–verb–object
What was the minimum number of waves through which modern Estonians migrated into Estonia?	two
What are the names of the two separate Estonian languages?	North and South Estonian languages
When did the Northern Crusades happen?	13th century to 1918
Which countries took part in the Northern Crusades?	Denmark, Germany, Sweden, and Russia
Following the crusades which country was dominated?	Estonia
What did the aftermath of the crusades end up delaying in Estonia?	indigenous literacy
How far back do the first written records of Estonia's Finnic languages go?	13th century
Where can records of Estonian place names be found?	Originates Livoniae
Which Chronicle contains the Originates Livoniae?	Chronicle of Henry of Livonia
Aside from place names what else from the Estonian language can be found in the Originates Livoniae in Chronicle of Henry of Livonia?	words and fragments of sentences.
What was the first Estonian language book to be published?	a Lutheran manuscript
When were the Kallamaa prayers written?	1524 and 1528
What was the fate of the Lutheran manuscript printed in 1525?	destroyed
At what point in its existence was the Lutheran manuscript destroyed?	immediately after publication
What two people are responsible for the first still in existence book in the Estonian Language?	S. Wanradt and J. Koell
In what year was S. Wanradt and J. Koell's book written?	1535
What type of book was it?	bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism
What book specifically for the use of priests was printed in Estonian?	An Estonian grammar book
What year was the priests' grammar book put into print?	1637
Which Estonian poet's works were printed from 1810 to 1820?	Kristjan Jaak Peterson
What subjects were Kristjan Jaak Peterson poems on?	patriotic and philosophical
When was Peterson born?	March 14
What is another name given for Peterson's birthday?	Mother Tongue Day
What university did Peterson attend?	German-language University of Dorpat
In the years between 1918 and 1940 how many Estonian language books were printed?	23,868
In the roughly four centuries previous to 1918 how many Estonian language books were printed?	14,503
In what language were 14,503 books published prior to 1918?	Estonian
What Age's ideas allowed Estonian writings to gain significance?	Age of Enlightenment
Who thought their future would be fused with Estonians?	Baltic Germans
Who had admiration for the ancient Estonian culture?	Estophile educated class
Who conquered the ancient Estonians?	Danes and Germans
When did the ancient Estonian era of freedom come to an end?	13th century
What year did Estonia's War of Independence take place?	1919
After Estonia achieved independence what was made their state language?	Estonian
What percentage of Estonians thought of themselves as ethnic Estonian's in 1945?	97.3%
What language was spoken by ethnic Estonians?	Estonian
What happened to Estonia during WWII?	invaded and occupied
Who invaded Estonia?	Soviet Union
After the Soviet invasion what other language became the second official Estonian language?	Russian
What was another country with similar immigration patterns to post Soviet Estonia?	Latvia
What became more intense in the 1970's in Estonia?	pressure of bilingualism
What historical event once again freed Estonia?	collapse of the Soviet Union
Following the Soviet collapse what became the only official Estonian Language?	Estonian
What language was no longer promoted as one of Estonia's main languages?	Russian
What came into being in January 1989?	The Law on the Status of the Estonian Language
Following the departure of the Soviet immigrants what was the percentage of Estonians in Estonia?	above 70%
How many groups of Estonian dialects are there?	two
What are the names of the Estonian dialect groups?	the northern and southern dialects
What is the northern city to which the northern dialect is associated?	Tallinn
Where is the kirderanniku dialect spoken?	the northeastern coast of Estonia
What is the city where the southern dialect was historically spoken?	Tartu
What dialect is also known as the central dialect?	the keskmurre
What is the dialect from Lake Peipsi?	the idamurre or eastern dialect
What dialects of the northern group are spoken on the saarte murre?	Saaremaa and Hiiumaa
What is another name for Estonian's northern group's western dialect?	the läänemurre
What dialects comprise the southern group?	the Tartu, Mulgi, Võru (Võro) and Setu (Seto) dialects
More importantly than their language aspect how do the Seto and Võro dialects set themselves apart from each other?	their culture
Aside from being thought of as variants of Estonian's southern group what else are the Tartu, Mulgi, Võru (Võro) and Setu (Seto) dialects sometimes considered?	separate languages altogether
What religion is associated with Seto and Võro?	Christian
From what script does the Estonian language get its alphabet?	Latin
What is another language that uses Latin for its alphabet?	Finnish
In the Estonian language how is the letter A pronounced?	[æ], as in English mat
What principles usually govern the Estonian orthography?	phonemic principles
To how many phoneme's does each grapheme correspond?	one
What type of deviations are there from the single phoneme to each grapheme general principle?	some historical and morphological deviations
On what occasions are š and ž replaced with sh and zh?	Where it is very impractical or impossible to type š and ž
What is an example of a word containing a voiceless glottal fricative?	Pasha (pas-ha)
 In what Orthagraphy does Modern Estonian orthography have its basis?	Newer Orthography
Who is responsible for the creation of the Newer Orthography?	Eduard Ahrens
In what century was the Newer Orthography created?	19th century
Previous to the Newer Orthography what orthography was in place?	Older Orthography
From what other country's orthography did the Older Orthography get its basis?	standard German orthography
In Soviet international publications what language's transliteration are Estonian words and names often back-transliterations from?	Russian
What famous encyclopedia contains a Russian back-transliteration of Estonian?	Encyclopædia Britannica
What is the Russian back-transliteration from Encyclopædia Britannica?	"ostrov Khiuma"
What is the typological form of Estonian?	transitional
What is Estonian typologically transitioning from?	an agglutinating language
What sort of form is Estonian transitioning into?	a fusional language
How are words ordered in Estonian canonically?	subject–verb–object
What language lacks gendered nouns and pronouns?	Estonian
In the nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative cases what always agrees with the noun in number and case?	adjectives
What other language has a telicity contrast?	Finnish
Aside from the accusative, where can the direct object of the verb be found?	partitive
What is the accusative used for?	total objects
From what system is a distinctive future tense lacking?	verbal system
What is used in place of the future tense?	present tense
What does Estonian use to show actions performed by an undecided subject?	special forms
Close to 33 percent of Estonian's vocabulary belong to what group of languages?	Germanic languages
What is the main Germanic language from which Estonia gets the Germanic portion of its vocabulary?	Low Saxon
When did Low Saxon make its appearance as part of the Estonian language?	during the period of German rule
From what other Germanic language does Estonian derive its vocabulary?	High German
Standard German is part of what Germanic language?	High German
What two letters can be replaced with each other a lot of the time in Estonian?	'b' & 'p'
What happens in many cases when a word starts with an 's'?	The initial letter 's' is often dropped
In an example of replacing 'b' with 'p' how is 'baggage' pronounced?	pagas
Who was the journalist who was also a language planner?	Ado Grenzstein
In what years did Ado Grenzstein do journalism work in Estonia?	1870s–90s
What is another term for making up words from nothing?	formation ex nihilo
Who in the course of their language planning attempted to use the formation ex nihilo technique?	Ado Grenzstein
Of all of Estonian's language reformers who is the most well known?	Johannes Aavik
What was the period of time in which Johannes Aavik was alive?	1880–1973
What is the technique Aavic used to create Estonian words out of nothing?	creations ex nihilo
In what publication can examples of ex nihilo words be found?	Aavik’s dictionary
How many words did Aavik put in his dictionary?	approximately 4000
What languages did Aavik know?	Ancient Greek, Latin and French
When was Aavik's dictionary published?	1921
What is another term for words created by Aavik?	Aavikisms
Instead of being created from nothing Aavik's ex nihilo terms are thought to actually possibly have been influenced by what?	foreign lexical items
What is a source for the particles in paper?	wood
What is a common use for paper?	writing
What is the last step in paper production?	drying
When was the pulp papermaking process developed?	2nd century AD
What country was the process developed in?	China
What country is leading in production of paper?	China
What country is the second largest produced of paper?	United States
Which court eunuch was associated with the papermaking process?	Cai Lun
Who is credited with the papermaking process?	Cai Lun
What material did paper replace upon its invention?	silk
Which Age did the invention of the papermaking process contribute towards?	Golden Age
What century is the first papermaking process attributed to?	2nd
In what century did the papermaking process spread from China to Europe?	13th
Which middle eastern city did the papermaking process to Europe from?	Baghdad
What name did the process take on in Baghdad?	bagdatikos
In which century did the process become much cheaper than before?	19th
Which Canadian inventor helped F.G. Keller to develop their own process?	Charles Fenerty
What Latin word is paper derived from?	Papyrus
What language is papyrus derived from?	Greek
What process changes the properties of the fibres used in papermaking?	maceration
What plant was used in Egypt to make papyrus?	Cyperus
What part of the Cyperus plant was used in making papyrus?	the pith
What is separated from the cellulose fibres?	lignin
What type of paper is paper made from chemical pulps known as?	wood-free
What percentage of fibres are wasted in the bleaching process?	5%
What percentage of cotton is cellulose?	90%
How many chemical pulping processes are there?	three
What decade does the sulfite process date to?	1840s
What process is most commonly used?	The kraft process
What is another process used to pulp straws with high silicate content?	Soda pulping
Besides the thermomechanical process, what is a process used in pulping?	groundwood pulp
What is the main ingredient in the groundwood process?	debarked logs
What strength of paper is produced by mechanical pulps?	weak
Recylced papers can be made with what new type of pulp?	virgin
What type of clay improves the characteristics of the pulps used in papermaking?	china clay
What is added for sizing purposes?	Additives
What besides china clay is used as a filler?	chalk
How is the water removed by force from a sheet of paper?	Pressing
What is used to collect the water expelled from pressing?	felt
What is used to collect water when hand-making paper?	blotter sheet
Besides a blotter sheet, what can be used to collect water?	felt
What is the main component of drying the paper?	air
At what percentage moisture content is the papermaking process trying to achieve in the end?	6
Besides calcium, coated paper has a thin layer of what?	china clay
What process is done to polish the surface of the paper?	calendering
What is the shiniest type of coated paper?	Gloss
What papers give the best optical density?	Gloss
What contraption is used to carry the paper to the web printing presses?	reels
In what manner are sheets normally cut?	long-grain
If the paper is not to be used in the web printing process, what is done?	cut into sheets
What type of paper is produced on a machine like the Fourdrinier?	wove paper
What is used to apply watermarks and other patterns?	rollers
What is in common with the lentgh along and across the grain of paper produced by a machine such as the Fourdrinier?	density
What leaves a pattern on the paper that has a consistent density width and lengthwise?	wire mesh
What type of lines does wove paper not exhibit?	Laidlines
What are small regular lines left on paper when handmade in a mould?	Laidlines
What runs perpendicular to the laidlines?	chainlines
Which is lines are commonly higher in density, laidlines or chainlines?	Laidlines
What tool is often used in measuring the thickness of paper?	caliper
In the United States, what units are used when stating the measurements of paper thickness?	thousandths of an inch
Someone measuring the thickness of paper in the UK is likely to use what unit?	mm
Sated in inches, what is the common range of paper thickness?	0.0028 and 0.0071 in
What characteristic is paper usually classified by?	weight
In the US, the weight of what is used to classify paper for sale?	a ream
Paper rated at over 110lb is considered what type of stock?	card
What ISO sizing system does Europe use?	ISO 216
If paper is over 160g what is it considered as?	card
Besides thickness, what attribute is used in stating the weight of a ream in Europe?	dimensions
Commercial paper is commonly defined by what?	length and width
Most commercial paper in North America is cut in what manner?	standard paper sizes
Standard paper sizes are usually described with what terms?	length and width
Most countries besides the US use what ISO System?	ISO 216
What country first adopted the ISO 216 standard?	Germany
What is the largest standard size paper?	A0
How many sheets of A1 paper would cover one single piece of A0 paper?	2
What is the lowest numbered A paper that is commonly used at home?	A3
What is the lightest density of paper produced?	tissue paper
What is the common density of printing paper?	800 kg/m3
What acidic salts were commonly found in the early types of paper produced?	Alum
Early papermakers added alum to help in what process?	sizing
How was rag paper superior to the early types of paper made using alum?	more stable
What particle is associated with the yellowing of newspapers?	lignin
A book is likely made with paper that has low amounts of what component of wood?	lignin
What does lignin react to to produce the yellowing you see in newspapers?	light and oxygen
Who sponsored the tests that show that all papers are subject to acid decay?	Library of Congress
Besides formic, acetic, and lactic acid, what type of acid does cellulose produce?	oxalic
How many times more yield does the mechanical pulping process produce when compared to to the chemical pulping process?	twice
What type of process is used to produce most paper used in paperback books?	Mechanical
What level of acid is usually found in the paper used by book publishers?	acid-free
In the last 40 years, how much has worldwide paper consumption risen?	400%
What percentage of harvested trees are used in the manufacturing of paper?	35%
What do many paper companies do to ensure the health of forests?	plant trees
What percentage of wood pulp comes from old-growth trees?	10%
What percentage of total waste can be attributed to paper?	40%
How many millions of tons of paper are wasted in the US each year?	71.6 million
How many paper cups are used by Americans each year?	16 billion
How many pages are printed by the average office worker in the US each day?	31
What process of papermaking is most heavily linked to the pollution?	bleaching
How are humans commonly exposed to the byproducts of the bleaching process?	through food
Where are dioxins stored in our animal sources of food?	fatty tissue
What agency internationally regulates dioxins?	the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
What product used in the sale ofpaper is newly used by manufacturers in an effort to be more environmentally friendly?	paperfoam
What is the main benefit of using paperfoam over traditional shrink-wrap?	biodegradable
What is paperfoam primarily made of?	paper
How is paperfoam commonly disposed of?	recycled
What is newly used as a coating in high grease applications?	corn protein
Popcorn bags produced modernly are likely to use what type of coating?	corn protein
PFOA is what type of coating?	synthetic
When was the football league established?	1987
Where is football played?	indoors
What does AFL sand for?	Arena Football League
Who founded The AFL?	Jim Foster
In what year was the AFL founded?	1987
In what decade was AFL sport invented?	1980s
Who was the founder of the Arena Football League?	Jim Foster
What was the inaugural year of the AFL?	1987
Where does the Arena Football League rank amongst professional football leagues in North America by longevity?	third
In yards, how large is an arena football field?	68
What fraction of the size of an NFL football field is an arena football field?	half
How many teams were there in the 2015 season?	12
How many conferences does the AFL have?	2
What are these conferences in the AFL named?	American Conference and National Conference
Which team was the Champion in the 2015 season?	San Jose SaberCats
How many teams played in the Arena Football League in the 2015 season?	12
What team left the AFL after the 2015 season to join another league?	Spokane Shock
What league did the Spokane Shock join after the 2015 season?	IFL
Along with the American Conference, what is the other conference in the AFL?	National Conference
As of 2016, how many teams does each conference have?	four
As of 2016, how many regular season games does an AFL team play?	16
How long is the AFL regular season?	18-week
In what month did the 2015 AFL season begin?	March
What month did the 2015 AFL season end?	August
What is the name of the AFL championship game?	ArenaBowl
What was the name of the AFL development league?	af2
When did the AFL development league begin?	2000
When was the first AFL season played?	1987
What Arena Football League season was cancelled?	2009
In what city and state is the Arena Football League based?	Chicago, Illinois
Who was Jim Foster's employer prior to his founding the Arena Football League?	the National Football League
What was Jim Foster viewing when he came up with the idea for arena football?	an indoor soccer match
Where was Jim Foster when he came up with the idea for arena football?	Madison Square Garden
In what year did Jim Foster conceive of the idea of arena football?	1981
What television network agreed to broadcast an arena football test game?	NBC
What football league began in 1982?	the United States Football League
What team in the USFL did Jim Foster work for?	Chicago Blitz
When did the USFL shut down?	1985
On what date was the arena football test game played?	April 27, 1986
What was Foster's job title with the Chicago Blitz?	executive vice-president
In what city and state did the arena football test game take place?	Rockford, Illinois
At what venue did the test game occur?	Rockford MetroCentre
Along with the Rockford Metros, what was the name of the other team that played in the test game?	Chicago Politicians
On what date did the second test game take place?	February 26, 1987
The second test game was played in what arena?	Rosemont Horizon
How many teams did the Arena Football League originally have?	four
Along with the Chicago Bruisers, Denver Dynamite and Pittsburgh Gladiators, what team was one of the original AFL teams?	Washington Commandos
What was the title of Darrell Davis in the AFL?	executive director of football operations
What was Darrell Davis' nickname?	Mouse
Who was responsible for hiring the first coaches of the AFL teams?	Davis
On what date was the inaugural game of the AFL played?	June 19, 1987
Along with the Commandos, who played in the first Arena Football League game?	Gladiators
How many spectators watched the first Arena Football League game?	12,117
On what date was the first AFL game that aired on television?	June 20, 1987
At what venue did the first televised Arena Football League game occur?	the Rosemont Horizon
On what date did Foster apply for a patent on arena football?	September 30, 1987
When did the United States Patent and Trademark Office grant Foster's patent?	March 27, 1990
On what date was the expiration of Foster's patent?	September 30, 2007
With whom did Foster file his patent?	the United States Patent and Trademark Office
In 1987, what television station sometimes showed arena football games?	ESPN
In the early years of arena football, after what hour were games often aired?	midnight
What AFL game was broadcast on ABC?	Arena Bowl XII
In what year did ABC broadcast an Arena Football League game?	1998
On what ABC program was an AFL game shown?	Wide World of Sports
Who was the coach of the Pittsburgh Gladiators in 1989?	Joe Haering
What day of the week was July 23, 1989?	Saturday
Who was the commissioner of the AFL in 1989?	Jim Foster
What paper featured a photograph of the head coach of the Gladiators punching the commissioner of the AFL?	USA Today
In what arena were the Gladiators playing the Bruisers on July 23, 1989?	Arco Arena
What team did Art Schlichter play for?	Detroit Drive
Where did the Detroit Drive play their home games?	Joe Louis Arena
In what year did the Drive go to their first Arena Bowl?	1988
Who owned the Detroit Drive in this period?	Mike Ilitch
What team did the owner of the Detroit Drive buy that led him to sell the Drive?	Detroit Tigers
Where did the Drive franchise relocate to?	Massachusetts
Before what season did the Drive move to a different state?	1994
What is the name of the AFL team based in Tampa Bay?	Storm
What team is cited as a rival of the Tampa Bay franchise?	Orlando Predators
What team was the rival of the Arizona Rattlers?	San Jose SaberCats
What notable event in the AFL first occurred in 1993?	first All-Star Game
In what city and state did the 1993 All-Star Game occur?	Des Moines, Iowa
What AFL team would be based in Des Moines?	Iowa Barnstormers
What conference lost the first All-Star Game?	American Conference
How many points did the National Conference score in the first All-Star Game?	64
What team did the New York CityHawks become after moving to Hartford?	New England Sea Wolves
What city did the Sea Wolves move to?	Toronto
How many seasons were the CityHawks in New York?	two
How long did the Sea Wolves stay in Hartford?	two seasons
How many seasons did the Toronto Phantoms last?	two
What AFL team did Kurt Warner play for?	Iowa Barnstormers
Kurt Warner was the Most Valuable Player in what Super Bowl?	Super Bowl XXXIV
What NFL team did Kurt Warner play for?	St. Louis Rams
What television network did the AFL sign a deal with in 2000?	TNN
What was the name of the AFL team based in New Orleans?	VooDoo
How many games made up the AFL season in 2003?	16
In what year did the rules first forbid players running out of bounds?	2005
In what year was the ArenaBowl first played at a neutral location?	2005
What year introduced the free substitution rule?	2007
What year saw a rules change that had an impact on the role of the "jack" linebacker?	2008
Who was the commissioner of the Arena Football League for the first half of 2008?	David Baker
For how many years did David Baker serve as commissioner of the AFL?	12
On what date did Baker step down as commissioner of the AFL?	July 25, 2008
What Arena Football League event occurred two days after Baker's resignation?	ArenaBowl XXII
Who temporarily served in the commissioner's post after Baker's departure?	Ed Policy
What team shut down in October 2008?	New Orleans VooDoo
Who made the announcement that the VooDoo were shutting down?	Tom Benson
What business wanted to buy a stake in the AFL?	Platinum Equity
How large a stake did Platinum Equity want to buy in the AFL?	$100 million
What publication announced the Platinum Equity business deal?	Sports Business Journal
On what date was the dispersal draft first scheduled to occur?	December 2
To what date was the dispersal draft first delayed?	December 3
After the second delay, when was the dispersal draft schedule to occur?	December 9
When was free agency first scheduled to begin?	December 4
When was free agency scheduled to begin after the delay?	December 11
What numbered season did Arenafootball2 in 2009?	tenth
In what month and year was it decided to suspend the 2009 Arena Football League season?	December 2008
What National Hockey League season was cancelled?	2004-05
What led the National Hockey League to cancel the 2004-2005 season?	a lockout
Who owned the Columbus Destroyers in 2008?	Jim Renacci
What was the job title of Ed Policy?	interim commissioner
After Ed Policy resigned, what franchise closed?	Los Angeles Avengers
How many weeks after Policy's resignation did the Avengers fold?	Two
How long after the shuttering of the Avengers did the league fail to ratify the new collective bargaining agreement?	One month
What reason did Policy give for his resignation?	the obsolescence of his position in the reformatted league
On what date was it reported that the AFL was considering bankruptcy?	July 20, 2009
What publication reported that the Arena Football League was thinking about filing bankruptcy?	Sports Business Journal
How much debt was the AFL reported to have as of July 20, 2009?	$14 million
What type of bankruptcy was the league reportedly thinking about filing in July 2009?	Chapter 11
On what date did the AFL announce that it was not shutting down?	August 4
What percent of af2 was owned by the AFL?	50.1
On what date was af2 regarded as disbanded?	September 8, 2009
What legal entity was created by af2 league owners?	Arena Football 1
Along with the Orlando Predators, what former Arena Football League team joined af2?	Arizona Rattlers
What Arena Football League season was suspended?	2009
Who owned the Dallas Desperados?	Jerry Jones
When was an auction announced for the Arena Football League's assets?	November 11, 2009
When did the auction for the Arena Football League's assets take place?	November 25, 2009
Who won the auction for the AFL's assets?	Arena Football 1
What was the purchase price for the Arena Football League's assets?	$6.1 million
On what date did AF1 announce that it would be called the Arena Football League?	February 17, 2010
What television network was contracted to show Arena Football League games in 2010?	NFL Network
How many expansion teams were announced in 2010?	two
Along with the Dallas Vigilantes, what expansion team was announced in 2010?	Jacksonville Sharks
Along with the New Orleans VooDoo, Kansas City Brigade, Philadelphia Soul and Georgia Force, what former team returned for the 2011 season?	San Jose SaberCats
Along with the Grand Rapids Rampage, Colorado Crush, Columbus Destroyers and Los Angeles Avengers, what team did not return for the 2011 season?	New York Dragons
What expansion team joined the league in 2011?	Pittsburgh Power
For what NFL team did Lynn Swann play?	Pittsburgh Steelers
What was the former name of the Tampa Bay Storm?	Pittsburgh Gladiators
What anniversary did the Arena Football League celebrate in 2012?	25th
What was the first day of the 2015 AFL season?	March 9, 2012
To what city did the Tulsa Talons relocate?	San Antonio
Who bought the Tampa Bay Storm in 2012?	Jeffrey Vinik
What event resulted in the postponement of the AFL free agency period?	Hurricane Sandy
On what date did the AFL announce its title sponsorship deal?	December 12, 2012
What business was the title sponsor of the AFL?	NET10 Wireless
What was the league renamed after the title sponsorship deal?	NET10 Wireless Arena Football League
When did the AFL title sponsorship deal come to an end?	2014
How many years did the AFL title sponsorship deal last?	two
What was the name of the Los Angeles-based team added in 2013?	Kiss
Along with Paul Stanley, who owned the Los Angeles Kiss?	Gene Simmons
Other than the Los Angeles Kiss, what expansion team entered in the league in 2013?	Portland Thunder
Paul Stanley and Gene Simmons are members of what musical group?	Kiss
What band was Vince Neil a part of?	Mötley Crüe
What was the name of the Las Vegas team owned by Vince Neil?	Outlaws
What was the original intended home field of the Las Vegas Outlaws?	MGM Grand Garden Arena
Where did the Outlaws play their home games?	the Thomas & Mack Center
Along with the Las Vegas Gladiators, what prior AFL team played its home games at the Thomas & Mack Center?	Las Vegas Sting
Who was the first president of the AFL?	Jerry Kurz
What was Jerry Kurz's job title prior to being president of the AFL?	commissioner
Who became commissioner of the AFL after Jerry Kurz?	Scott Butera
Where did Scott Butera work prior to becoming AFL commissioner?	Foxwoods
What was Scott Butera's job title prior to becoming AFL commissioner?	CEO
On what date was it reported that the Las Vegas Outlaws were shutting down?	August 9, 2015
Who first reported the closure of the New Orleans VooDoo?	ESPN
On what date did the Spokane Shock leave the AFL?	September 1, 2015
What rival league did the Spokane Shock join?	IFL
What was the name of the Spokane Shock after they joined the IFL?	Spokane Empire
What day of the week was October 30, 2015?	Friday
At what team's game was an announcement by the AFL supposed to happen on October 30?	San Antonio Spurs
Who worked as an AFL spokesman during this period?	BJ Pickard
What prior AFL franchise was based in Austin?	Austin Wranglers
Along with the San Antonio Talons, what AFL franchise did San Antonio host at one time?	San Antonio Force
Who were the defending champions of the Arena Football League?	San Jose SaberCats
When was it announced that the SaberCats would be shutting down?	November 12
What was the reason given for the closing of the SaberCats?	reasons unrelated to League operations
How many AFL teams are operating as of 2016?	eight
On what date did the AFL take control of one of its teams?	January 6, 2016
What team did the league take control of?	Portland Thunder
Who owned the trademark to the Portland Thunder?	Terry Emmert
Who owned the Desperados trademarks?	Jerry Jones
Who is commissioner of the Arena Football League?	Scott Butera
On what date did the league announce its schedule for 2016?	December 10, 2015
How many teams are active in the AFL for 2016?	eight
How many regular season games will each team play in 2016?	16
How many weeks will the 2016 regular season last?	18
On the weekend of what holiday will all teams have a bye?	Independence Day
Where did ArenaBowl XX take place?	Las Vegas
What arena was ArenaBowl XXI played in?	New Orleans Arena
On what date was ArenaBowl XXI played?	July 29, 2007
In what month and year did Hurricane Katrina occur?	August 2005
What team won ArenaBowl XXI?	San Jose SaberCats
A contract with what television network led to the discontinuation of exhibition games in the preseason?	NBC
How many games was the regular season in 1996?	14
How many games were played in the 2001 regular season?	16
How many games long was the 2011 regular season?	18
How many games will each team play in the 2016 regular season?	16
What league did the AFL found in China?	the China American Football League
When was the AFL's China project announced?	August 2012
Who is leading the China American Football League?	Ron Jaworski
What television network does Ron Jaworski work for?	ESPN
What team is Ron Jaworski the majority owner of?	Philadelphia Soul
Who created Ganlan Media?	Martin E. Judge
What company is Martin Judge the founder of?	the Judge Group
In what year was AFL Global created?	2012
In what month was an exhibition game planned for Guangzhou?	October
Who is the Chief Executive Officer of the China American Football League?	Gary Morris
When does the CAFL plan on start its first season?	2016
When was the abortive first CAFL season supposed to have taken place?	2014
How many teams participated in the 2015 CAFL tournament?	six
In what month did the CAFL tournament occur?	November
In what month did the AFL season originally begin?	May
After the TV deal, when was the start of the AFL season moved to?	February
What days were AFL games traditionally played on before the TV deal?	Friday or Saturday
When were most of the AFL's games played after the TV deal?	Sunday
On what date did the business relationship between the AFL and NBC end?	June 30, 2006
On what date did ESPN buy a minority share of the AFL?	December 19, 2006
At minimum, how many regular season games did the AFL agree to broadcast?	17
On what day would most of the games televised on the ESPN networks be played?	Monday
What network broadcast ArenaBowl XXI?	ABC
Under the deal, how many AFL playoff games did ESPN broadcast each year?	nine
Affiliates of what network broadcast Arizona Rattlers games?	Fox Sports
What cable network did the AFL sign a regional contract with?	FSN
After a hiatus, in what year did the AFL begin operations again?	2010
What cable television network signed a broadcast deal with the AFL in 2010?	NFL Network
On what day would AFL games be shown on NFL Network?	Friday
What streaming service broadcast AFL games that were not on NFL Network?	Ustream
What was the cost to watch AFL games on Ustream?	free
In what year did AFL games temporarily cease to be broadcast on NFL Network?	2012
Why did the temporary cessation of game broadcasts occur?	ongoing labor problems
Why did the NFL Network begin to broadcast games again?	the labor issues were resolved
On what day was an AFL game broadcast live on NFL Network?	Friday
At what time of day was an AFL game shown on Fridays on NFL Network?	night
Who was the AFL's 2013 national broadcast partner?	CBS Sports Network
How many regular season games were shown by CBS Sports Network in 2013?	19
How many 2013 playoff games did CBSSN broadcast?	two
On what channel was the 2013 ArenaBowl broadcast?	CBS
In 2013, on what day were Arena Football League games usually broadcast on CBS Sports Network?	Saturday
Who was the Arena Football League's 2014 broadcast partner?	ESPN
What app were Arena Football League games broadcast on in 2014?	WatchESPN
Along with the ESPN networks, on what network were 2014 AFL games broadcast?	CBS Sports Network
On what channel could one watch ArenaBowl XXVII live?	ESPN
What was the first Arena Football League video game?	Arena Football
For what system was the first Arena Football League video game released?	the C-64
In what year was the first Arena Football League video game released?	1988
On what date was Kurt Warner's Arena Football Unleashed released?	May 18, 2000
Who made Kurt Warner's Arena Football Unleashed?	Midway Games
Who wrote War on the Floor: An Average Guy Plays in the Arena Football League and Lives to Write About It?	Jeff Foley
In what year was War on the Floor released?	2001
What team did Jeff Foley play for?	Albany Firebirds
How many games did Jeff Foley play in?	three
Along with 1999, in what preseason did Foley play for the Firebirds?	2000
In what year did the AFL begin operating under the single-entity model?	2010
Who owns the rights to the players under the single-entity model?	the league
What model of ownership is commonly used in American professional sports?	franchise model
What was the normal per game attendance of AFL games in the 1990s?	10,000–11,000
Along with the recession, what event is held to have decreased per-game attendance below 10,000?	the September 11, 2001 attacks
What was the average per-game attendance in 2007?	12,392
In 2008, what was the average attendance for an AFL game?	12,957
During the 2008 season, how many teams averaged more than 13,000 spectators per game?	eight
What was the AFL's average per-game attendance in 2010?	8,135
In the 2010 season, how many teams drew an average of more than 13,000 fans per game?	one
What team drew more than 13,000 fans per game in 2010?	Tampa Bay
Along with pop, soul, rhythm and blues, quiet storm, and rock, what musical style influenced adult contemporary?	easy listening
What was the prevailing style of adult contemporary music in the 1970s?	soft rock
What type of adult contemporary music was popular in the 1960s?	vocal
What does the acronym AC stand for?	Adult contemporary
Along with easy listening, adult contemporary is a modern day continuation of what style of music?	soft rock
Along with harmonies, what aspect of music is emphasized in adult contemporary?	melody
What is the typical structure of an adult contemporary song?	verse–chorus structure
With what broader style of music does adult contemporary share its structure?	pop music
Along with being pleasurable, what trait makes adult contemporary appropriate for background music?	inoffensive
What type of song is frequently seen in the adult contemporary genre?	romantic sentimental ballads
Along with synthesizers, what electronic instruments sometimes appear in modern adult contemporary?	drum machines
What general type of instruments tend to be used in adult contemporary?	acoustic
What electric instrument is often seen in adult contemporary?	bass guitar
Along with being faint, what characteristic is usually present in electric guitars used in adult contemporary?	high-pitched
What age group does adult contemporary radio typically focus on?	25–44
Along with teen pop, dance and hard rock, what form of music is typically not heard on AC radio?	hip hop
When did advertisers begin to focus on the adult contemporary age demographic?	1960s
What type of music are AC stations noted as playing less of versus hits of the past?	newer music
What is lite AC otherwise known as?	soft AC
What is Christian AC a subgenre of?	contemporary Christian music
Along with hot, soft, urban and Christian AC, what is another prominent time of adult contemporary music?	rhythmic AC
From what decade of easy listening radio does adult contemporary trace its heritage?	1960s
Generally speaking, what percentage of music on easy listening stations was instrumental?	70-80%
On what date was the Billboard easy listening chart first published?	July 17, 1961
How many songs were on the first Billboard easy listening chart?	20
Who performed the first #1 on the easy listening chart?	Brook Benton
Along with Frank Sinatra, Doris Day, Johnny Mathis, Nat King Cole, and Perry Como, who was a prominent early adult contemporary radio artist?	Connie Francis
What type of covers of pop and rock songs were usually played on adult contemporary?	instrumental
What songs from the 1940s and 1950s would adult contemporary stations play?	big band-era recordings
What chart did the Easy Listening chart begin to diverge from?	the Hot 100 chart
In what year did the Easy Listening and Hot 100 charts begin to diverge?	1965
Along with Roger Miller and Barbra Streisand, who was a successful Easy Listening artist in this era?	Bobby Vinton
Why did the crossover between Hot 100 and Easy Listening decrease?	rock music continued to harden
During what decade did rock and roll music first rise to popularity?	1950s
What does the acronym MOR stand for?	middle of the road
Along with pre-rock standards, what type of older songs did MOR stations play?	big band titles
What was another term for easy listening stations?	beautiful music
Easy listening was predominately what type of music?	instrumental
What types of tracks from popular artists did adult contemporary radio play?	hit singles and album cuts
What type of format were adult contemporary and easy listening stations meant to share?	lite
As of what year was hard rock a mainstream type of music?	1965
Along with soft rock, what type of music made up mainstream rock music in the late 1960s?	hard rock
What type of instruments were prominent in soft rock?	acoustic
What genre of music was soft rock descended from?	folk rock
Along with Barbra Streisand, Carole King, Cat Stevens and Bread, who was a prominent soft rock artist of this era?	James Taylor
At the end of what decade did the Hot 100 and Easy Listening charts begin to converge?	1960s
During the middle and early parts of what decade did the similarity of Easy Listening and Hot 100 increase?	1970s
How did Top 40 radio what ifmusic change during this era?	began to soften
With Elton John and the Eagles, what was a prominent adult contemporary artist in this period?	Chicago
During what period was adult contemporary its most commercially successful?	the mid-to-late 1970s
What artist released the best selling album of the 1970s?	Fleetwood Mac
In what year was the best selling album of the 1970s released?	1977
What radio stationed owned by NBC played only soft rock?	WYNY
Who was a prominent figure at NBC's radio division?	Walter Sabo
What genre of music was was listening to by a different demographic than hard rock?	disco
In what decade did genres begin to diverge on the basis of demographic groups?	1970s
Along with Linda Ronstadt, Elton John, Rod Stewart and Elvis Presley, what rock musician sometimes had songs featured on adult contemporary radio?	Billy Joel
During what period were artists like Anne Murray and Barbra Streisand featured on Top 40 radio?	the early 1970s
Along with rock and roll, what genre of music was sometimes featured on Easy Listening radio?	R&B
What genre of music was surprisingly successful on adult contemporary radio?	disco
What type of musicians were artists such as Diana Ross, James Taylor, Carly Simon, Carole King and Janis Ian?	singer-songwriters
When did the Adult Contemporary chart receive its current name?	April 7, 1979
What was the Adult Contemporary chart previously known as?	the Easy Listening chart
Along with rap/hip-hop, what genre of music were aging listeners not as interested in?	heavy metal
During what decade did adult contemporary become a very popular format for radio?	1980s
Along with Richard Marx, Bonnie Tyler, George Michael, Phil Collins, and Laura Branigan, what artist was also frequently played on Contemporary Hit Radio stations?	Michael Jackson
What television station was responsible for the increasing success of Contemporary Hit Radio artists on the AC charts?	MTV
Along with Barbra Streisand, the Carpenters, Dionne Warwick, Barry Manilow and Olivia Newton-John, what adult contemporary staple found it more difficult to score chart hits in the 1980s?	John Denver
Who did Allmusic refer to as "one of the most successful pop and adult contemporary singers of the '80s and beyond"?	Phil Collins
In the 1970s, what two genres were not particularly successful on the adult contemporary charts?	disco or new wave
What genres, featured on the CHR radio format, were rarely found on adult contemporary radio?	hip-hop and harder rock music
During what decade did hip-hop begin to be featured on the radio?	1980s
Along with electronic pop, what type of music was the most successful in the 1980s?	ballad-oriented rock
What genre did the music of Billy Ocean belong to?	soft rock
What was the longest that a song spent at #1 on the adult contemporary charts in the 1980s?	six weeks
In what year did Lionel Richie record "You Are"?	1983
Aside from the adult contemporary chart, on what other chart did Lionel Richie's "Hello" reach the top spot?	Hot 100
What artist issued the album known as "the first true Adult Contemporary album of the decade"?	Linda Ronstadt
In what year was the album Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind released?	1989
What male singer featured on several songs from Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind?	Aaron Neville
What certification did Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind receive?	Triple Platinum
Along with "Don't Know Much," what single won a Grammy?	"All My Life"
What decade saw the emergence of alternative rock?	1990s
What happened to urban R&B in the early 1990s?	softening
The resurgence of traditional pop was one of the factors that led to what change in the music market?	widening of the market
Mainstream artists from what decade generally did not have success on the adult contemporary charts?	1980s
Along with All-4-One, Boyz II Men, Rob Thomas, Christina Aguilera and Backstreet Boys, what 90s artists were notable in the pop/R&B genre?	Savage Garden
What genre of music did Lynda Thomas, Ricky Martin, Selena, Marc Anthony, Enrique Iglesias and Luis Miguel make?	Latin pop
What milestone did Celine Dion, Mariah Carey, Phil Collins, Michael Bolton, Whitney Houston and Shania Twain share on the 1990s adult contemporary charts?	multiple number ones
Along with Sarah McLachlan, Natalie Merchant, Melissa Etheridge and Sheryl Crow, what female singer-songwriter had chart success in the 1990s?	Jewel
On what chart did Whitney Houston see success?	AC
What was the name of the chart created by Billboard in 1996?	Adult Top 40
Adult Top 40 represented a midpoint between what two radio formats?	"adult contemporary" music and "pop" music
What chart is the Adult Top 40 chart sometimes confused with?	Adult Contemporary
What radio programming genre is sometimes confused with the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart?	hot AC
Who invented the term "urban adult contemporary format"?	Barry Mayo
What demographic group is the urban adult contemporary format marketed to?	African Americans
What style of singing is absent from R&B played on urban adult contemporary format stations?	rapping
Along with R&B, gospel and dance music, what type of music is represented on urban adult contemporary stations?	classic soul
Urban adult contemporary music came into being because of pressure on what previously existing format?	Hot AC
Who performed the song "Unbreak My Heart"?	Toni Braxton
What is the name of a notable dance artist along with C&C Music Factory and Black Box?	Amber
What radio station format plays soft AC, hot AC, disco and dance?	rhythmic AC
What artist notably remixed "Unbreak My Heart"?	Soul Solution
What radio station format was sometimes regarded as a type of adult contemporary?	smooth jazz
What type of music was predominantly played on smooth jazz stations?	instrumental
Along with Kenny G and Dave Koz, what artist was featured on smooth jazz stations?	George Benson
What other format of station were smooth jazz artists sometimes featured on?	soft AC
What is Adrian Moreira's job title?	senior vice president for adult music
For what company does Adrian Moreira work?	RCA Music Group
Who wrote, "In other words, AC stations are where pop songs go to die a very long death. Or, to optimists, to get a second life"?	Corey Moss
Where was Corey Moss' article published?	MTV's website
When do adult contemporary stations begin to play Top 40 songs?	after the hits had become established
Who have hot AC format radio stations had to change the music they play?	less and less new music fits their bill
By what two genres are modern pop songs heavily influenced?	dance-pop and electronic dance music
Why is new rock not suitable for mainstream radio?	too alternative
What was the name of DJ Sammy's mix of "Heaven"?	the "Candlelight Mix"
Who recorded the song "Listen To Your Heart"?	D.H.T.
Who is known for the song "Everytime We Touch"?	Cascada
What artist performed the song "Forget You"?	Cee Lo Green
What version of P!nk's "Perfect" appeared on adult contemporary radio in 2011?	edited
Along with Josh Groban, what notable pop artist started out his career on adult contemporary radio?	Michael Bublé
What sort of sound does the music of Susan Boyle have?	ballad heavy
Along with Faith Hill, Shania Twain and LeAnn Rimes, what country artist has had adult contemporary hits?	Carrie Underwood
What genre of music has soft AC found common ground with?	country
What genre of music are bands like Feist and Wilco?	indie rock
Along with Mumford & Sons, Of Monsters & Men, Ed Sheeran and The Lumineers, what indie artist has had adult contemporary success?	Imagine Dragons
In what decade did indie musicians first began getting attention from the adult contemporary audience?	2000s
Along with the recession, what broad economic trend marked the decline of adult contemporary radio stations?	the 2005-2007 economic downturn
Along with CHR, Top 40 and Latino, what format have former AC stations transitioned to?	urban
What AC format is still viable?	hot AC
Declining sales of what items harmed the adult contemporary genre?	physical record
Generally speaking, what is the earliest decade represented by the "oldies" on soft AC stations?	1960s
Along with R&B, pop and rock, what genre of music is represented on modern soft AC stations?	jazz
What genre of music do new songs on soft AC stations often belong to?	"easy listening"
During what period did soft AC stations attempt to reinvent themselves?	the late 2000s/early 2010s
What radio format was described as being "the acoustic equivalent to Prozac"?	soft adult contemporary
What decade saw the birth of the soft adult contemporary format?	1970s
What radio station introduced the term "soft rock"?	WEEI-FM
Where was the station that introduced the term "soft rock" based?	Boston
What processed meat, featured in WEEI-FM's ad slogan, rhymes with Joni?	baloney
In what country is soft adult contemporary called "EZ Rock"?	Canada
Along with MOR, easy listening and soft rock, what format is soft adult contemporary a successor to?	beautiful music
What occupation is stereotypical held by soft adult contemporary listeners?	office workers
What advertising demographic is soft adult contemporary marketed towards?	females aged 25–54
What station first introduced the tagline "everyone at work can agree on"?	KOST
Along with romantic and sexual relationships, family and work, what do soft adult contemporary songs sometimes discuss?	raising children
Music from what two decades is notably featured on the soft AC format?	1960s and 1970s
Along with classic R&B, what genre is notably featured on soft AC stations?	soul
What radio station format is soft AC often contrasted with?	hot AC
What radio station formats faced demographic pressures in the 1960s and 70s?	jazz and big band
What radio station format is facing demographic pressures in the present day?	oldies
What radio station format have many of the former soft AC artists moved to?	adult standards
Certain soft AC stations have found a niche on the radio by doing what?	incorporating more oldies
Why are adult standards format radio stations declining?	aging demographics
Along with Andy Williams, Johnny Mathis, Nana Mouskouri, Celine Dion, Julio Iglesias, Barry Manilow, Engelbert Humperdinck, and Marc Anthony, what notable artist is featured on the soft AC format?	Frank Sinatra
Along with classic hits, what type of music do hot adult contemporary stations feature?	contemporary mainstream music
What is the primary audience of hot adult contemporary format stations?	adult
What demographic do hot AC stations featuring more pop and alternative rock focus on?	Generation Z
Along with urban and rhythmic dance tracks, what genre is featured on hot AC stations with a younger audience?	teen pop
Madonna, Cher, Gloria Estefan and Kylie Minogue are artists in what genre of music?	dance-pop
What type of band are Backstreet Boys and Westlife?	boybands
What genre of music is played by Westlife?	power pops
What genre of music is played by The Eagles?	soft rock
What is the target age range of Hot AC stations?	18-54
What station did Mike Marino work for in 1997?	KMXB
Where was the radio station KMXB based in 1997?	Las Vegas
What age demographic is modern rock radio focused on?	18-34
What is the sex of the listeners modern rock radio is geared towards?	men
Unlike modern rock radio, what sex is adult contemporary radio said to appeal to?	women
What age group is Urban AC focused towards?	adult
What race is the target demographic of Urban AC radio?	African-American
Who is an example of an artist played on Urban AC format radio stations?	Des'ree
What is the name of the popular album released by Des'ree?	I Ain't Movin'
What is the ethnicity of artists commonly played on urban adult contemporary radio?	black
What other adult contemporary radio format is urban AC similar to?	soft AC
What genre of music is not played frequently on urban AC?	hip-hop
What two genres of music are popular on urban AC?	R&B and soul music
Along with Trey Songz, Patti LaBelle, Toni Braxton, Whitney Houston, Aretha Franklin, Frank Ocean, Craig David and Mariah Carey, who is a well-known urban AC artist?	Luther Vandross
What adult contemporary radio format is urban AC not similar to?	hot AC
What radio format is similar to urban AC but features older soul and R&B songs?	rhythmic oldies
What is the earliest decade of music typically featured on the rhythmic oldies format?	1960s
What is the most recent decade music from which music can be heard on a rhythmic oldies station?	1990s
What is the target demographic of the rhythmic oldies format?	African-Americans
What radio format consists of ballads and slow jams?	quiet storm
What is the name of the radio format that is a mixture of urban and soft adult contemporary?	quiet storm
At what time of day is the quiet storm format played?	the evening
What is the typical ethnicity of artists played on quiet storm stations?	Black and Latino
Along with Freddie Jackson, Johnny Gill, Teena Marie, Lalah Hathaway, Toni Braxton, and En Vogue, what artist is popular on quiet storm stations?	Vanessa L. Williams
Along with urban adult contemporary and smooth jazz, what station format might feature music from Sade?	mainstream AC
What other format is sometimes played on urban AC stations?	smooth jazz
When might you hear smooth jazz on a soft AC station?	the weekends
What is a more recent name for the smooth jazz format?	Smooth AC
What was the smooth jazz format renamed?	to lure younger listeners
Along with soft AC, on what station format might adult contemporary R&B be featured?	urban AC
What features are emphasized in adult contemporary R&B music?	songcraft and sophistication
Along with smooth soul and quiet storm, what genre influenced adult contemporary R&B?	Philly soul
During what decade was smooth soul popular?	1970s
Along with drum machines and synthesizers, what electronic instruments are often found in modern R&B-based music?	sequencers
What genre of music did Patti Austin perform?	jazz-R&B fusion
Of what genre was the musician Keith Sweat?	crossover R&B
During what decade were musicians like Al Jarreau and Luther Vandross notably successful?	1980s
What type of songs was Leona Lewis known for?	ballads
Who wrote Boyz II Men's I'll Make Love to You?	Babyface
What is CCM an acronym of?	Contemporary Christian music
What genre of music is performed by MercyMe?	Christian AC
What publication includes Christian AC with its format charts?	Radio & Records
Along with mainstream AC, what format has also featured Christian AC artists on a crossover basis?	hot AC
What AC format is especially known for playing Christmas music in the Christmas season?	soft AC
During what two months does the Christmas season take place?	November and December
Along with Bing Crosby, Dean Martin, Nat King Cole, The Carpenters, Percy Faith and Andy Williams, who is an artist played on AC stations around Christmastime but not otherwise?	Johnny Mathis
When does Christmas music on AC format stations usually begin?	the week before Thanksgiving Day
When is the earlier of the two times that Christmas music on adult contemporary stations typically ends?	after Christmas Day
When is the later of the two times that Christmas music on adult contemporary stations usually ends?	New Year's Day
When is the earliest an AC station will switch to a Christmas format?	the beginning of November
What two formats pioneered the Christmas music tradition in the 1960s?	beautiful music and easy listening
In what century was the term matter defined excluding energy phenomena like light and sound?	20th
What term is used for the substance that composes all observable physical objects?	matter
The mass of an object can come from the motion of its constituents or what other source?	interaction energies
What term is used to describe the type of definition that matter would have if all scientists could agree on its definition?	universal
Prior to the 20th century, the definition of matter included any object that had mass even when it was in what state?	at rest
What kind of particles make up every object in the world that can be touched?	atoms
The smaller particles that make up atoms, like protons and neutrons, are what kind of particles?	subatomic
What subatomic particle has no volume or rest mass?	photons
What  kind of particles are quarks and leptons?	point particles
Despite not having size or volume themselves, quarks and leptons contribute to what measure of composite particles in matter?	volume
How many phases of matter are there?	four
What new phase of matter can be considered with a focus on elementary particles?	quark–gluon plasma
What is the theory that matter is made up of discrete building blocks called?	particulate theory of matter
What colleague of Democritus, also a Greek philosopher, helped him propose the particulate theory of matter?	Leucippus
People have been wondering about the nature of matter for the entire history of what branch of science?	natural sciences
What similar term is often used interchangeably with matter, although the two differ slightly in modern physics?	mass
Being a conserved quantity means that the value of mass doesn't ever change as long as it's in what kind of system?	closed
Special relativity says matter can disappear by conversion into what state?	energy
What planet isn't a closed system but sometimes appears to be because of the approximate conservation of matter?	Earth
What term does science not have a universally-accepted scientific definition for?	matter
Sometimes scientific terms were historically considered in ways we know now aren't compatible because scientists didn't need to distinguish matter from what other term?	mass
What word do physicists sometimes consider to be defined as particles exhibiting rest mass?	matter
What duality describes the conflicting properties of matter in the fields of chemistry and physics?	wave–particle duality
Quarks and leptons are sometimes considered matter because they can't travel at what speed?	the speed of light
What was Westminster Abbey's original name?	Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster
What style architecture is the Westminster Abbey considered?	Gothic
In what city is Westminster Abbey located?	City of Westminster, London
In what years was the Abbey considered a cathedral?	Between 1540 and 1556
What type of building is the Abbey now considered?	Royal Peculiar
What is the formal name of Westminster Abbey?	the Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster
Where is Westminster Abbey located?	City of Westminster, London
When was Westminster Abbey a cathedral?	Between 1540 and 1556
What has been the status of Westminster Abbey since 1560?	Church of England "Royal Peculiar"
What year did the construction of the church begin?	1245
Who commissioned the Abbey to be built?	King Henry III
What was the area previously named?	Thorn Ey (Thorn Island)
In what century was the church established at the location?	7th century
Who was the Bishop in this time frame?	Mellitus, a Bishop of London
What is the meaning of Thorn Ey?	Thorn Island
When was a church first founded at the site?	7th century
Who was Mellitus?	a Bishop of London
When was construction of the present church started?	1245
Who ordered the construction of the church?	King Henry III
What was the name of the fisherman in lore that saw a vision of Saint Peter near the Abbey?	Aldrich
What type of fish did the Abbey receive from Thames fisherman?	salmon
What kind of monks lived at the Abbey?	Benedictine
Who, till this day still gives the Abbey a fish?	Fishmonger's Company
Who along with the King Edgar established the monks at the Abbey?	Saint Dunstan
Who supposedly had a vison of Saint Peter on the River Thames?	Aldrich
Who first gifted salmon to the abbey?	Thames fishermen
Who still gives salmon to the abbey today?	Fishmonger's Company
When was the monk community installed?	960s or early 970s
What architectural design was St Peter's abbey considered?	Romanesque style
What year was the building finished?	1090
What was the date of the Abbey's coronation?	28 December 1065
Who was the first recorded coronation at the Abbey?	William the Conqueror
What King restored the Abbey in the years 1042 and 1052?	King Edward the Confessor
Who rebuilt the abbey for a burial church?	King Edward the Confessor
What style was the church rebuilt in?	Romanesque
When was the building consecrated?	28 December 1065
When did King Edward the Confessor die?	5 January 1066
Who was the first documented coronation?	William the Conqueror
Who were the first monarchs crowned at Westminster Abbey?	Harold Godwinson and William the Conqueror
Since when have coronations been held at Westminster Abbey?	1066
How many royal weddings have occurred at the abbey?	16
Which two reigning monarchs had weddings at the abbey?	Henry I and Richard II
When did royal weddings begin at the church?	1100
Where is the only existant depiction of Edward's abbey?	Bayeux Tapestry
What was the original size of Dunstan's original monk community?	a dozen
How was the community able to increase?	endowments
What is adjacent the abbey?	Palace of Westminster
Who became a powerful force after the Norman Conquest?	The abbot and monks
The Palace of Westminster was the seat of what from the later 12th century?	government
Who was employed on royal service?	The abbot
With what kind of life were the Benedictines allowed to identify?	secular
To what movement was the task of spiritual leadership passed?	Cluniac
What did the abbot remain as a town built around the abbey?	Lord of the Manor of Westminster
What did the monastery help fuel?	the town economy
What did the abbey build on the west side?	shops and dwellings
What encroached upon the sanctuary?	shops and dwellings
What was the abbey to Norman kings?	coronation site
What architect continued work on the abbey?	Henry Yevele
Who was reigning when Henry Yevele finished his work on the abbey?	Richard II
What kind of pavement was commissioned for in front of the High Altar?	Cosmati
What played a large role in King Edward the Confessor's canonisation?	The Confessor's shrine
Who added a Perpendicular style chapel?	Henry VII
Who was the Perpendicular style chapel dedicated to?	Blessed Virgin Mary
What part of France did the Caen stone come from?	Caen
Where did the Portland stone come from?	Isle of Portland
When was the Lady Chapel added?	1503
When was the abbey's annual income £2400–2800?	1535
What was the abbey's annual income as of 2016?	£1,310,000 to £1,530,000
To which other abbey was Westminster Abbey second in wealth?	Glastonbury Abbey
During what was the abbey made second in wealth?	the assessment attendant on the Dissolution of the Monasteries
When did Henry VIII take direct royal control?	1539
Who gave the abbey status of a cathedral in 1540?	Henry VIII
What did the cathedral status save the abbey from?	destruction
What did changing the status of the abbey create?	the Diocese of Westminster
When was Westminster Diocese dissolved?	1550
The abbey was recognised as what until 1556?	a second cathedral of the Diocese of London
Who is the abbey dedicated to?	Saint Peter
The abbey was regiven to the Benedictines under whom?	Mary I of England
Who ejected the Benedictines again in 1559?	Elizabeth I
What was the new name of the abbey when Elizabeth I reestablished it?	Collegiate Church of St Peter
Who was made the first dean of the new church?	The last of Mary's abbots
When did the abbey suffer damage?	1640s
Who attacked the abbey?	Puritan iconoclasts
What protected the abbey?	ties to the state during the Commonwealth
Who had a fancy funeral at the abbey in 1658?	Oliver Cromwell
When was Oliver Cromwell disinterred?	January 1661
When were the western towers built?	between 1722 and 1745
Who built the western towers of the abbey?	Nicholas Hawksmoor
What kind of marble was used for the walls and floors of the abbey?	Purbeck
Under whom did the 19th century rebulding occur?	Sir George Gilbert Scott
What were the two western towers built from?	Portland stone
What was designed for the west front of the abbey but not built?	A narthex
When was the narthex designed?	mid-20th century
The abbey was without towers following the renovation by whom?	Yevele
Westminster Abbey was the third highest place of learning after which two places?	Oxford and Cambridge
The first third of what was translated at the abbey?	King James Bible Old Testament
The last half of what was also translated at the abbey?	New Testament
The New English Bible was composed at the abbey during what time?	20th century
Westminster Abbey suffered damage during what on 15 November 1940?	the Blitz
Who painted the icons hung in the abbey in the 1990s?	Sergei Fyodorov
What was held at the abbey on 6 September 1997?	funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales
Who was the first pope to set foot in the abbey?	Pope Benedict XVI
On what date did the first pope set foot in the abbey?	17 September 2010
What nationality was Sergei Fyodorov?	Russian
Where was Henry III crowned?	Gloucester Cathedral
When was Henry III crowned?	1216
Who had taken control of London when Henry III was to be crowned?	French prince Louis
Who deemed Henry III's coronation to be improper?	the Pope
Who is the usual cleric for coronation ceremonies?	The Archbishop of Canterbury
What is the name of the throne used for coronation?	King Edward's Chair
What is another name for King Edward's Chair?	St Edward's Chair
Upon what are kings of Scots coronated?	the Stone of Scone
Who had stolen the Stone of Scone?	Scottish nationalists
What kind of church is Westminster Abbey?	collegiate church
Who created Westminster Abbey as the Collegiate Church of St Peter Westminster?	Queen Elizabeth I
Who governs the church?	the Dean and Chapter of Westminster
Who are the members of the chapter of Westminster?	the Dean and four canons residentiary
Who assist the chapter of Westminster?	the Receiver General and Chapter Clerk
How many lay vicars are there?	12
How many choristers are there at the abbey?	10
When was the office of Priest Vicar created?	1970s
Henry III rebuilt the abbey in honour of whom?	Edward the Confessor
When did George II of Great Britain die?	1760
Who was Edward the Confessor?	a royal saint
Where was Henry VI buried?	St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle
Where was Richard III buried?	Leicester Cathedral
Where were aristocrats buried from the Middle Ages?	inside chapels
Geoffrey Chaucer was employed as what?	master of the King's Works
Henry Purcell was buried where?	in the abbey
Oliver Cromwell began buring national figures in the abbey starting with whom?	Admiral Robert Blake
Who was buried in the abbey on 4 April 1727?	Isaac Newton
Who was buried in the abbey on 26 April 1882?	Charles Darwin
Who was buried in the abbey on 3 August 1833?	William Wilberforce
Who was buried next to William Wilberforce?	William Pitt
In the early 20th century it became more common to bury what kind of remains?	cremated
In what year was Sir Henry Irving cremated?	1905
Who was buried in the south choir aisle in 2014?	Frances Challen
What family has the Northumberland Vault?	Percy Family
When was The Unknown Warrior buried?	11 November 1920
Where is the memorial chapel of the airmen of the RAF?	At the east end of the Lady Chapel
The memorial chapel of the airmen of the RAF has a window for what?	the Battle of Britain
The window for the Battle of Britain replaced what that was destroyed?	Tudor stained glass window
When was the formal funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales?	Saturday September 6, 1997
When was a second public service held for Princess Diana?	Sunday
Who designed Diana's dress?	Catherine Walker
Who gave Diana the rosary beads?	Mother Teresa
What are also in the precincts of Westminster Abbey?	Westminster School and Westminster Abbey Choir School
Who required the Benedictine monks to maintain a charity school?	the Pope
When were the Benedictine monks required to maintain a charity school?	1179
The choirboys of the abbey are trained where?	Westminster Abbey Choir School
Who built the organ?	Harrison & Harrison
When was the organ built?	1937
When was the organ first used?	the coronation of King George VI
What was included in the new organ from the previous Hill organ of 1848?	pipework
Who designed the two organ cases?	John Loughborough Pearson
What part of the organ is not connected or playable?	the Celestial Organ
When were the bells overhauled?	1971
How many bells make up the abbey ring?	Ten
When were the ten bells cast?	1971
Who cast the abbey bells?	Whitechapel Bell Foundry
Who cast the two service bells?	Robert Mot
When were the two service bells cast?	1585 and 1598
When was the Sanctus bell cast?	1738
Who cast the Sanctus bell?	Richard Phelps and Thomas Lester
Where is the "dish bell" kept?	in the refectory
Under whom was the chapter house built?	Henry III
Who restored the chapter house in 1872?	Sir George Gilbert Scott
What style is the octagonal chapter house?	Geometrical Gothic style
There is an octagonal what below the chapter house?	crypt
What kind of ceiling is in the chapter house?	vaulted
What kind of windows are in the chapter house?	4-light quatre-foiled windows
The architecture of the chapter house is contemporary with what?	the Sainte-Chapelle, Paris
What kind of tiled pavement is in the chapter house?	mid-13th-century
A door in the vestible dates back to when?	1050
When were the exterior flying buttresses added?	the 14th century
Who else met in the chapter house?	King's Great Council and the Commons
What formed the undercroft of the monks' dormitory?	The Pyx Chamber
When does the Pyx Chamber date to?	the late 11th century
When were newly minted coins presented to ensure they met standards?	the Trial of the Pyx
The Pyx Chamber and chapter house are under guardianship of whom?	English Heritage
Who cares for and manages the Pyx Chamber and chapter house?	the Dean and Chapter of Westminster
English Heritage has funded what for the chapter house?	repairs
What is located in the vaulted undercroft beneath the monks' dormitory?	The Westminster Abbey Museum
The area the museum occupies dates back to when?	1065
The vaulted undercroft beneath the monks' dormitory has been a museum since when?	1908
What belonging to Henry V is in the museum?	funeral saddle, helm and shield
What kind of panels are in the museum?	panels of mediaeval glass
Who modelled the effigies in the museum?	sculptor Patience Wright
What are the effigies made of?	wax
What is the effigy of Viscount Nelson wearing?	some of his own clothes
What was recently added to the museum exhibit?	13th-century Westminster Retable
What is the Westminster Retable?	England's oldest altarpiece
What was the altarpiece designed for?	high altar of the abbey
What was damaged but cleaned and then conserved?	altarpiece
What was proposed for the abbey in June 2009?	major building work
On what date did the Dean and Chapter announce that work would not be continued?	4 August 2010
Panter Hudspith refurbished a 14th-century foodstore into what?	a restaurant
What kind of furniture is in the restaurant?	English Oak
Who supplied the furniture for the restaurant?	Luke Hughes and Company
What will be created in the medieval triforium?	The Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries
What has been designed to help with the gallery?	Gothic access tower with lift
When will the new galleries open?	2018
k	ks
j	Ch
n	n
b	b
v	v
What is the legal capital of the Republic of China?	Nanjing
What region is Nanjing in?	lower Yangtze River region
When was the city given the name Nanjing?	Ming dynasty
When did Nanjing become the Chinese national capital?	Jin dynasty
What does Nanjing mean?	"Southern Capital"
What part of China (North, East, South, West) is Nanjing located?	East
What does Nanjing have that is considered one of the world's biggest?	inland ports
What river is Nanjing associated with?	Yangtze River
What city was awarded the 2008 Habitat Scroll of Honour of China?	Nanjing
How long has Nanjing been important?	over a thousand years
How many Great Ancient Capitals does China have?	Four
What city is considered to be the nominal capital of the Republic of China?	Nanjing
What mausoleum is in Nanjing?	Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum
What city was the capital of Eastern Wu during the Three Kingdoms era?	Nanjing
How long ago did "Nanjing Man" live?	more than 500 thousand years ago
What vessel was found 5000 years ago?	Zun, a kind of wine vessel
When was the the fort of Yuecheng built?	473 BC
How long had Nanjing been the capital city of Yangzhou?	about 400 years
When was the Wu state created?	the late period of Shang dynasty
When did Nanjing become a state capital?	229 AD
Who founded Eastern Wu?	Sun Quan
When was Eastern Wu founded?	during the Three Kingdoms period
Who defeated Nanjing and took over in 280?	the Western Jin dynasty
When was Nanjing extended?	211 AD
What happened prior to the collapse of the Western Jin dynasty?	the unification of the region
When did the Jin court head South?	317
Where did the Jin court re-establish itself, after fleeing?	Nanjing
Who fled with the Jin court to the South?	nobles and wealthy families
How long was Nanjing the capital of the Southern dynasties?	more than two and a half centuries
During the time of the North–South division, what city was the center of East Asia?	Nanjing
During the time of the North–South division, how many households were in Nanjing?	280,000 registered households
What is the estimated population of Nanjing during that time?	more than 1.4 million residents
Where did the information on registered households during that period originate?	historical documents
What has survived in Nanjing's suburbs?	A number of sculptural ensembles
In what district are these sculptural pieces located?	Qixia and Jiangning District
Which piece is the best, in terms of preservation condition?	the ensemble of the Tomb of Xiao Xiu
Who was Xiao Xiu?	a brother of Emperor Wu of Liang
When did Xiao Xiu live?	475–518
When was Nanjing made a capital again?	during the Southern Tang (937–976)
During what dynasty did Nanjing become a thriving textile city?	the Song dynasty
What was the name of the short-lived puppet court created by the Jurchens?	The court of Da Chu
Who defeated the court of Song?	the Mongol empire
Who was the first emperor of the Ming dynasty?	Zhu Yuanzhang
Who did Zhu Yuanzhang defeat?	the Yuan dynasty
What did Zhu Yuanzhang build around the city of Nanjing?	long city wall
How long did it take to finish the wall?	21 years
How many workers worked on the wall?	200,000
When was Nanjing considered to be the biggest city in the world?	from 1358 to 1425
What was the number of people in Nanjing in 1400?	487,000
When did Nanjing cease to be the capital?	1421
Where was the capital moved to?	Beijing
Who was the third emperor of the Ming dynasty?	the Yongle Emperor
What is the name of the famous mausoleum in Nanjing?	Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum
Who decimated the Porcelain Tower?	the Taipings
When was the Porcelain Tower destroyed?	in the 19th century
One possibility the Tower was destroyed was to prevent it's use by a hostile enemy. What is the other possibility?	superstitious fear of its geomantic properties
How far from Nanjing is the Yangshan Quarry?	15–20 km (9–12 mi) east of the walled city
What large item is abandoned at the Quarry?	a gigantic stele
How long ago was the stele abandoned?	600 years ago
Why was the stele abandoned?	it was impossible to move or complete it
Who ordered the creation of the stele?	the Yongle Emperor
What Admiral called Nanjing his home?	admiral Zheng He
What visiting king died in China in 1408?	(Boni 渤泥)
What country did this visiting king come from?	Borneo
What stele is at Boni's tomb?	a tortoise stele
When did Beijing lose to Li Zicheng's rebel forces and the Manchu-led Qing dynasty?	1644
What Ming prince was enthroned in Nanjing?	Zhu Yousong
When was Zhu Yousong enthroned?	in June 1644
What was Zhu Yousong's title?	the Hongguang Emperor
The Hongguang Emperor's reign was thought of as the first reign of what dynasty?	the so-called Southern Ming dynasty
When did the Hongguang Emperor leave Nanjing, having been defeated?	late May 1645
Who surrendered Nanjing to invaders on June 6?	Zhao the Earl of Xincheng
What did the Manchu's make all the men in the city do?	shave their heads
When was the Qing dynasty in power?	1644–1911
What was Nanjing called during the Qing dynasty?	Jiangning
What emperors visited Nanjing more than once?	the Kangxi and Qianlong emperors
What year did the First Opium War end?	1842
Who lived in buildings that would later come to be known as the Presidential Palace?	the Qing viceroy and the Taiping king
When did Qing troops regain Nanjing?	1864
How many people died during the Qing troops retaking of Nanjing?	over 100,000
Qing troops allowed no rebels who spoke what dialect to surrender?	Taiping
Who was the leader of the Qing troops?	Zeng Guofan
When was the Republic of China founded?	January 1912
Who was the first president of the Republic of China?	Sun Yat-sen
Who moved the capital from Nanjing to Beijing?	Yuan Shikai
When was Nanjing re-established as the capital of the Republic of China?	1927
What party established Nanjing as the capital of the Republic of China?	the Kuomintang (KMT; Nationalist Party)
Who was the leader of the Kuomintang (KMT; Nationalist Party)?	Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek
What are the 1930's known as, in China?	the Nanking decade
When did the Kuomintang (KMT; Nationalist Party) defeat and take over Beijing?	1928
When did Japan invade Manchuria?	1931
When did Japan invade all of China?	1937
Who killed innocent civilians in the Nanking Massacre?	the Imperial Japanese Army
How many died in the Nanking Massacre?	between 300,000 and 350,000
When was the Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall built?	1985
When was the National Government of China moved to Chungking?	A few days before the fall of the city
When was the Nanjing Regime established?	1940
Who was the leader of the Nanjing Regime?	Wang Jingwei
When did the KMT move back to Nanjing?	1946
What was another name for the Nanjing Regime?	"Reorganized National Government of China"
When did the Communist troops cross the Yangtze River?	21 April
When was Nanjing conquered by the Communist People's Liberation Army (PLA)?	April 23, 1949
Where did the KMT government stay until October 15?	Canton (Guangzhou)
When did the KMT government head to Taiwan?	December 10
When was the People's Republic of China formed?	October 1949
How large is Nanjing, in miles?	2,548 sq mi
Where does the Yangtze River flow in Nanjing?	past the west side and then north side
How far is Nanjing from Shanghai, in miles?	190 mi
How far is Nanjing from Beijing?	750 mi
What is the name of the area of land around Nanjing?	Hsiajiang (下江, Downstream River) region
What city is northeast of Nanjing?	Yangzhou
What is southeast of Nanjing?	Changzhou
What province is to the west of Nanjing?	Anhui province
How many prefecture-size cities are in the province of Anhui?	five
What city is on the border of Nanjing to the East?	Zhenjiang
What is the east-west waterway near Nanjing?	Yangtze River
What is the railway that runs South to North called?	Nanjing–Beijing railway
What mountain is in the East are of Nanjing?	Zhong Mountain
What mountain lies in the west of Nanjing?	Stone Mountain
Stone Mountain is compared to what animal?	tiger
What type of climate does Nanjing enjoy?	a humid subtropical climate
What monsoon affects Nanjing?	the East Asian monsoon
Nanjing is one of three "Furnacelike" cities. What are the other two cities?	Chongqing and Wuhan
How many days of rain does Nanjing get a year, on average?	115 days
How many hours of bright sunshine does Nanjing get each year?	1,983 hours
How many types of minerals are found in Nanjing?	40
Which minerals comprise 40 percent of those in the province?	iron and sulfur
For what mineral reserve does Nanjing rank first in both East Asia and the South East Asia areas?	strontium
What are Nanjing's main water sources?	the Yangtze River and groundwater
What hot spring is in Jiangning?	Tangshan Hot Spring
What lakes are in the middle of Nanjing?	Xuanwu Lake and Mochou Lake
What type of trees are on Purple Mountain?	evergreens and oaks
Who convinced Sun Quan to make Nanjing his capital?	Liu Bei
What impressed Liu Bei so much about Nanjing?	Nanjing's impeccable geographic position
What is Nanjing surrounded by?	the Yangtze River and mountains
When did a thick wave of smog first appear in Central and Eastern China?	2 December 2013
How long was Nanjing ranked as "severely polluted" during this wave?	five straight days
On what days did Nanjing have to issue a Red Alert because of the severe air pollution?	From 5 to 6 December
What is the full name for Nanjing's government?	"People's Government of Nanjing City"
How many parties rule Nanjing?	one-party
What party rules Nanjing?	the CPC
Who is considered to be the governor of Nanjing?	the CPC Nanjing Committee Secretary
who is the executive leader of Nanjing, working under the secretary?	the mayor
What was the population of Nanjing in 2010?	8.005 million
What was the estimated population of Nanjing in 2011?	8.11 million
How was the population figure for 2010 obtained?	the Sixth China Census
What was Nanjing's birth rate?	8.86 percent
How many people were considered to be living in the urban portion of Nanjing?	6.47 million
What is the overwhelming ethnic majority in Nanjing?	Han nationality
What minority nationality is most common?	Hui nationalities
What is the second most common minority group in Nanjing?	Manchu
How many people of Manchu descent live in Nanjing?	2,311
How many minority nationality types does Nanjing contain?	50
In addition to textiles, what other industry is Nanjing known for, since the Three Kingdoms period?	minting
Why is Nanjing so strong in textiles and minting?	its strategic geographical location and convenient transportation
During what dynasty was Nanjing the biggest business center in all of East Asia?	Ming
In what dynasty were textiles particularly popular?	Qing
During the textile boom, how many jobs were created?	around 200 thousand jobs
In what time period did Nanjing transform from a producer to more of a consumer city?	Into the first half of the twentieth century
What mostly caused the shift to a consumer city?	the rapid expansion of its wealthy population
What is Zhongyang Shangchang?	huge department stores
In what year did the revenue of food and entertainment eclipse the output of industry?	1933
How much of the population worked in a service capacity at that time?	One third of the city population
What did the government build in Nanjing during the 1950's?	a series of state-owned heavy industries
The mistakes the government made during this period resulted in what type of growth?	negative economic growth
How many Pillar industries were there from the 1960s to the 1980s?	Five
The inability to compete with multinational firms led to what for workers?	large numbers of layoff
The government wanted Nanjing to be what kind of industrial city?	“world-class”
What type of industries are now dominant in Nanjing?	Service industries
How much of the city's GDP do the service industries contribute to?	about 60 percent
Companies such as Huawei, ZTE and Lenovo have built what in Nanjing?	many R & D centers and institutions
Companies such as Ford, IBM, Lucent, Samsung and SAP have built what in Nanjing?	research center
The top 3 industries in Nanjing are?	financial industry, culture industry and tourism industry
What was Nanjing's GDP in 2013?	RMB 801 billion
What was Nanjing's GDP per person in 2013?	RMB 98,174(US$16041)
Was the GDP in 2013 an increase or decrease over 2012's levels?	increase
How was Nanjing's unemployment rate, compared to the nation as a whole?	lower than the national average
What was Nanjing's GDP ranking in all of China for 2013?	12th
What are the three types of transport in Nanjing?	land, water and air
What is the most popular method of travel for citizens?	public transportation
How many bridges does Nanjing have over the Yangtze River?	five
How many tunnels does Nanjing have over the Yangtze River?	two
Where is the city centre located?	on the south bank
Nanjing's railway is important, and is located in what region of China?	eastern China
What line does Nanjing serve as a railway junction for?	Beijing-Shanghai (Jinghu)
What lines comprise the Beijing-Shanghai (Jinghu) line?	the old Jinpu and Huning Railways
What high-speed railway is Nanjing connected to that contains Shanghai?	Shanghai–Wuhan–Chengdu Passenger Dedicated Line
What type of railway lines are now under construction?	several more high-speed rail lines
How many railway stations are there in Nanjing?	17
Which are the two most prominent railway stations?	Nanjing Railway Station and Nanjing South Railway Station
When was the Nanjing Railway Station originally constructed?	1968
In what year was the Nanjing Railway Station re-built?	2005
Which station is one of the 5 hub stations on the Beijing–Shanghai High-Speed Railway line?	Nanjing South Railway Station
What type of highways let commuters get to cities fast?	Express highways
How many miles of highways are in Nanjing?	140 mi
What are the names of the artery roads in Nanjing?	Zhongshan Road and Hanzhong
Zhongshan Road and Hanzhong cross each other in what area of Nanjing?	in the city centre, Xinjiekou
What is the total coverage of the city with roads, in miles?	181.15 mi/100 sq mi
What are the main types of public transportation?	bus, taxi and metro systems
How many companies are involved with the network of buses?	three companies
How many stations are there in total in the Nanjing metro system?	121 stations
When does Nanjing expect to finish it's light rail line?	2030
How many bus routes are there in Nanjing?	more than 370 routes
What is Nanjing's airport called?	Lukou International Airport
How many routes does Nanjing's airport run?	85 routes
How many passengers did the airport service in 2013?	15,011,792 passengers
When did the airport open for business?	28 June 1997
What airport was the primary airport before Lukou?	Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport
What is the largest inland port for China?	Port of Nanjing
How long is the Port of Nanjing?	98 kilometres (61 mi) in length
How many berths does the Port contain?	64
When did Longtan Containers Port Area open up?	March 2004
How many containers can Longtan Containers Port Area handle?	one million container-capacity
When was the very first Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge finished?	the 1960s
What was the symbolism of the bridge?	symbol of modern China
When did the Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge first open for traffic?	1968
What type of design is the bridge?	a two-tiered road and rail design
How many more bridges have been built since the first one was completed?	four
How many ancient capitals does China have in its history?	four
What type of people does Nanjing draw because of its culture?	intellectuals
In what dynasties did poets congregate in Nanjing?	the Tang and Song dynasties
When did the city serve as the official imperial examination centre?	the Ming and Qing dynasties
What was the name of the examination centre?	Jiangnan Examination Hall
How is Nanjing seen, from a cultural perspective?	as a “city of culture”
Who provides strong support to Nanjing?	local educational institutions
What city is considered one of the more pleasant cities to live in, by the Chinese?	Nanjing
Does Nanjing have a long or short tradition of culture?	a long cultural tradition
Where do some of the country's most prominent art groups call home?	Nanjing
Which opera company is based in Nanjing?	Jiangsu Peking Opera Institute
What art company is based in Nanjing?	Nanjing Xiaohonghua Art Company
Name two dance groups that are based in Nanjing:	the Qianxian Dance Company, Nanjing Dance Company
What is the name of China's oldest stage art?	Kunqu
What is one of the best theatres for Kunqu?	Jiangsu Province Kun Opera
What type of troupe is Jiangsu Province Kun Opera considered to be?	a conservative and traditional troupe
What other types of operas are performed in Nanjing?	Yang, Yue (shaoxing), Xi and Jing
What other types of theater performance are seen in Nanjing?	Suzhou pingtan, spoken theatre and puppet theatre
What is the name of the largest art gallery in Jiangsu Province?	Jiangsu Art Gallery
What type of art does Jiangsu Art Gallery contain?	traditional and contemporary art pieces of China
What are two smaller galleries in Nanjing?	Red Chamber Art Garden and Jinling Stone Gallery
What type of exhibitions do Red Chamber Art Garden and Jinling Stone Gallery show?	their own special exhibitions
When was the festival of climbing on the city wall celebrated?	January 16
On March 3, what festival was celebrated in ancient times?	bathing in Qing Xi
What did citizens used to do on September 9?	hill hiking
Where can one find the dates of more old festivals?	Chinese lunar calendar
How many of these old festivals are still celebrated by residents of Nanjing?	Almost none of them
What city is considered to be a place that is popular with tourists?	Nanjing
Rather than host the old festivals, what type of events does Nanjing host each year?	a series of government-organised events
What area holds the largest collection of plum blossoms in all of China?	Plum Blossom Hill
Where do the tourists for the Plum Blossom Festival come from?	domestically and internationally
What festival involves kites and fruit trees?	Nanjing Baima Peach Blossom and Kite Festival
When was the Nanjing Library completed?	1907
What is the Nanjing Library's ranking in China?	the third largest library in China
How many volumes does the Nanjing Library have?	more than 10 million volumes
What is the name of the fifth largest library in China?	Nanjing University Library
Which university library is larger than Nanjing University Library?	Peking University Library
What city contains some of the finest and oldest museums in all of China?	Nanjing
What is the previous name of the Nanjing Museum?	National Central Museum
Which museum was the first modern one in China?	Nanjing Museum
What collections are the Nanjing Museum famous for?	Ming and Qing imperial porcelain
How many items does the Nanjing Museum contain?	400,000 items
What can most of Nanjing's multi-purpose theatres be used for?	convention halls, cinemas, musical halls and theatres
What are the two most prominent theatres in Nanjing?	the People's Convention Hall and the Nanjing Arts and Culture Center
What is the current purpose of The Capital Theatre?	a museum in theatre/film
What was the popularity of The Capital Theater, in the past?	well known
Where have Nanjing's after-hours activities typically been located?	around Nanjing Fuzimiao (Confucius Temple) area along the Qinhuai River
What three things were popular in the Nanjing Fuzimiao area?	night markets, restaurants and pubs
What was a major night attraction for Nanjing?	Boating at night in the river
What statues are near the ones of teachers and educators?	courtesans
What is another name for Nanjing Fuzimiao?	Confucius Temple
When did more commercial streets become built in Nanjing?	In the past 20 years
What has happened as the result of more commercial streets in Nanjing?	the nightlife has become more diverse
What area has lots of types of recreational outlets?	"Nanjing 1912"
Other than at "Nanjing 1912", where else are there a lot of bars?	along Shanghai road and its neighbourhood
The two areas with a lot of bars are popular with whom?	international residents of the city
What is considered to be a typical food for a Nanjing resident?	radish
Which area has the longest history of growing radish?	the southern suburb
What does the radish taste like in the spring?	very juicy and sweet
What are Nanjing people called by others?	'Nanjing big radish'
What does calling someone 'Nanjing big radish' mean they are like?	they are unsophisticated, passionate and conservative
Generally, what types of teams call Nanjing home?	many professional sports teams
What is the name of the football club in Nanjing?	Jiangsu Sainty
What building is home to Jiangsu Sainty?	Nanjing Olympic Sports Center
What is the name of the major basketball team in Nanjing?	Jiangsu Nangang Basketball Club
What is the name of China's highest level basketball league?	CBA
Which sports center started in 1952?	Wutaishan Sports Center
How many major sports centers are located in Nanjing?	two
What type of sports centers are Wutaishan Sports Center and Nanjing Olympic Sports Center considered to be?	comprehensive sports centers
What is special about Wutaishan Sports Center, from a historical perspective?	it was one of the oldest and most advanced stadiums in early time of People's Republic of China.
Both Wutaishan Sports Center and Nanjing Olympic Sports Center contain a stadium, gymnasium, natatorium, and what other facility?	tennis court
When was the Nanjing Olympic Sports Center built?	2005
Why was the Nanjing Olympic Sports Center built?	in order to host The 10th National Game of People's Republic of China
How many people can Nanjing Olympic Sports Center's stadium hold?	60,000
How many people can Nanjing Olympic Sports Center's gymnasium hold?	13,000
How many people can Nanjing Olympic Sports Center's natatorium hold?	3,000
When was Nanjing announced as the host city for the 2nd Summer Youth Olympic Games?	10 February 2010
What was the theme for the 2014 Youth Olympic Games?	“Share the Games, Share our Dreams”
How many types of sports were performed in the 2014 Youth Olympic Games?	28
What type of spirit does the Youth Olympic Games hope to spread?	the Olympic spirit
When was the 2014 Youth Olympic Games?	from 16 to 28 August
Nanjing is considered one of the most pretty cities in what region?	mainland China
How many tourists does Nanjing receive each year?	thousands
What type of buildings attract tourists to Nanjing?	historical buildings
List three natural attractions of Nanjing.	lush green parks, natural scenic lakes, small mountains
What was the designation of Nanjing?	the national capital
What happened around the time that Nanjing was designated as the capital?	many structures were built
Are any of the structures that were built at that time still around?	some of them still remain
The structures that still remain are open to whom?	tourists
How long has Nanjing been considered the education hub of southern China?	more than 1700 years
How many places of higher learning are in Nanjing?	75
What is Nanjing's nationwide ranking for National key laboratories?	third
What is Nanjing's nationwide ranking for National key disciplines?	third
What type of educational institutions are in the area, that Nanjing can brag about?	some of the most prominent
What city is the de facto capital of Switserland?	Berne
 What is the second most populous of Switzerland's cantons?	Canton of Bern
Which canton is Berne the capital?	Canton of Bern
How many municipalities are in the Berne agglomeration?	36 municipalities
What is the population of Berne?	140,634
Where is Bern located?	Switzerland
How many municiplaities are in Bern?	36
Bern is the capitol of which canton?	Canton of Bern
Where does Bern rank in population in Switzerland?	second
What is the official language of Bern?	German
What is the main language spoken in Bern?	Bernese German
What dialect is Bernese German?	Alemannic Swiss
What is the official language of Bern?	German
In what year did the historic old town in the center of Bern become a UNESCO World Heritage Site?	1983
What is Bern's ranking for the best quality of life?	the world’s top ten
Where is the UNESCO World Heritage Site located?	the centre of Bern
In what year was Bern ranked as one of the 10 best cities for their quality of life?	2010
Where is the UNESCO World Heritage Site?	centre of Bern
Where does Bern rank for top cities for the best quality of life?	top ten
When did the centre of Bern become the UNESCO World Heritage Site?	1983
Who was the founder of the city of Bern?	Berchtold V, Duke of Zähringen
What animal does legend say Bern is named after?	a bear
What is the earliest reference to keeping live bears in the Bärengraben?	the 1440s
What is the common assumption of what Bern was named after?	a pre-existing toponym of Celtic origin, possibly *berna "cleft"
Finding what in the 1980s changed the assumption as to what the city was named after?	the Bern zinc tablet
What animal is on the seal and coat of arms of Bern?	bear
What live animals did they keep in the Bärengraben?	bears
What is the earliest that they kept live bears in the Bärengraben?	1440s.
When was the earliest evidnce of settlement in the city centre?	12th century
What era was there a Gallo-Roman vicus on the same site?	Roman era
What is the name of the Bern zinc tablet?	Brenodor
When was the settlement in Bumpliz close to the medieval city?	Early Middle Ages
The medieval city is a foundation of what family?	Zähringer
When did the Zahringer ruling family rise to power?	12th century
Where did the Zahringer ruling family rise to power?	Upper Burgundy
What year was Bern founded?	1191
Who founded Bern?	Berthold V, Duke of Zähringen
what year did Bern join the Swiss Confederacy?	1353
How many cantons were there between 1353 to 1481?	8
What year did Bern invade Aargau?	1415
What is the largest city-state north of the Alps?	Bern
What river was the city near?	River Aare
What was the name of the tower that was the western boundary?	Zytglogge
What tower took over after Zytglogge?	Käfigturm
What did the big and small Schanze protect?	the whole area of the peninsula
What year was there a huge fire?	1405
What was destroyed in the fire?	the city's original wooden buildings
What year was Bern occupied by French troops?	1798
Why were French troops in Bern?	French Revolutionary Wars
When did Bern regain control of Bernese Oberland?	1802
What new territory was aquired in 1814?	Bernese Jura.
When did the canton of Jura seceed?	1979
What congresses were held in Bern?	First and Second Internationals
In World War I, what side was Switzerland on?	Switzerland was neutral
What percent of the populatin of Bern resident foreigners?	30%
Where is Bern located?	the Swiss plateau in the Canton of Bern
What helped form the Bern countryside?	glaciers
What is the tallest mountain closests to Bern?	Bantiger
What peninsula is Bern located on?	Aare
What was built to help Bern grow bigger than the peninula?	bridges
What century did Bern outgrow the peninsula?	19th century
What type of ground was Bern built on?	uneven ground.
What is the elevation difference between the inner cities and the other cities?	several metres
Which city is higher, Matte or Langgasse?	Länggasse
What is 33.6% of the land in Bern?	forested
When was the last time the area of Bern was measured?	2009
How does the government of Bern operate?	as a collegiate authority.
How many councilors are there?	five
Who is Bern's mayor, or Stadtprasident?	Alexander Tschäppät
How after are the elections?	every four years.
Where is the executive body held?	in the Erlacherhof
Who has the majority of the seats in Bern's City Council?	left parties
What party also had the mayor as of 2015?	Social Democratic Party
What is the Christian Democratic Party also known as?	CVP
Who holds the legislative power?	The City Parliament
How many members are part of the City Parliament?	80
How often are elections held for the City Parliament?	every four years.
Are the sessions of City Parliament private or public?	public
Which party has the absolute majority of the seats?	left parties
How many seats are there?	46
Which specific party has the most members in the City Parliament?	Social Democratic Party
What is the population of Bern?	140,634
What percent of the population are resident foreign nationals?	34%
What was the population change from 2000 and 2010?	.6%
What counted for more of the population change?	births and deaths
What is the main lanuage of Bern?	German
What is the second most common language?	Italian
What percent of the population speaks German?	81.2%
What did the city decide again?	having twinned cities
When did they have a temporary twinned city?	during the UEFA Euro 2008
What was the twinning city with Bern in 2008?	Salzburg
What country is Salzburg in?	Austrian
How many Swiss men live in Bern?	35.4%
What percent of the population is born somewhere else in Switzerland?	20.1%
What percent were born outside of Switzerland?	21.6%
What percent of the population are 19 years old and under?	15.1%
What percent of the population are between 20-64?	65%
What percent of the population are over 64 years old?	19.9%
What age group has most of the population included?	adults
How many people were single in Bern in 2000?	59,948
How many people were married in Bern in 2000?	49,873
How many people were widows or widowers in Bern in 2000?	9,468
Where there more married or single people in Bern in 2000?	single
What is the average of people per household in Bern?	1.8 persons
How many households have 5 or more people living in them?	1,592
What percentage of the apartment homes in Bern were occupied in 2000?	90.6%
What percent of apartments are seasonal apartments?	7.4%
What was the average price to rent an average apartment in Bern?	1108.92 Swiss francs
What was the vacancy rate for Bern in 2010?	.45%
What percent of the population were Roman Catholic?	24.5%
How much of the population is Jewish in Bern?	.25%
How many muslims were there in Bern in 2000?	4,907
How much of the population had no religion?	12.72%
The structure of Bern's city centre is mainly what type of buildings?	medieval
What does UNESCO recognised Bern's city center to be?	a Cultural World Heritage Site
What is Berns most famous site?	Zytglogge
What is the name of the 15th century cathedral?	Münster
What type of cathedral is Muster?	Gothic
What is the Barengraben?	a bear pit
Where is the Barengraben located?	the far end of the Nydeggbrücke
What are held at the Barengraben?	heraldic animals
Who gave Bern their bears?	the Russian president
What zoo are the bears of Bern kept?	Dählhölzli zoo
Where is the national parliment housed?	The Federal Palace
What is the Federal Palace called?	Bundeshaus
Where is Albert Einstein live?	the Kramgasse 49
What was published the same years?	Annus Mirabilis Papers
What is the flat that Einstein called?	Einsteinhaus
What is the Rose Garden also known as?	Rosengarten
What can you see from the Rose Garden?	view of the medieval town centre
What was the Rosarium converted into?	a park
What year was the Rosarium converted?	1913
Where are the statues at in the Old Town?	public fountains
Who does the Kindlifresserbrunnen scare?	disobedient children.
Who created all the statues except the Zahringer fountain?	Hans Hiltbrand
What does the UNESCO consider the entre Old Town?	a UNESCO World Heritage Site
When was the biggest cathedral in Switzerland built?	1421
What is the largest Swiss Reformed church in Switzerland?	Holy Ghost Church
Who is attributed to the 11 fountains in Old Town?	Hans Gieng
What subtitles are included in the movies?	German and French subtitles
What year was the Football World Cup Final in Bern?	1954
Who won the game?	West Germany
What football team is based in Bern?	BSC Young Boys
What is the major hockey league team of Bern?	SC Bern
Where do they play?	PostFinance Arena
What year was the IIHF Ice Hockey World Championship held in Bern?	2009
What year did Bern want to host the Winter Olympics?	2010
What year did they withdraw their bid?	2002
Where were the 2010 Winter Olympics held?	Vancouver, Canada
What was Berns unemployment rate in 2010?	3.3%
How many businesses are there in the primary sector?	59
How many businesses are there in the secondary sector?	950
How many businesses are there in the tertiary sector?	7,654
How many full time jobs were there in 2008?	125,037.
How many jobs in the primary sector were agrictulture?	184
How many jobs in the primary sector were in forestry or lumber production?	19
How many jobs are in the secondary sector?	15,476
How many jobs are in the tertiary secotr?	109,358
How many workers commute into the municipality?	94,367
How many workers had to commute away from the municipality?	16,424
How much of the working population uses public transportation?	50.6%
How many of the working population use private cars?	20.6%
Where are the majority of the buildings for the University of Bern?	Länggasse quarter
What percent of the population has completed non-mandatory upper secondary education?	39.2%
What percent of the population has completed additionaly higher education?	18.9%
The majority of the population to finish tertiary schooling in bern are what people?	Swiss men
Do you have to go to the one year of kindergarten?	non
What seperates the children in secondary school?	ability and aptitude
How many students were attending school during the 2009-2010 school year?	10,979
How many kindergarten classes were there?	89
How many primary classes were there?	266
How many lower secondary classes were there?	151
How many libraries are in Bern?	8
How many pupils lived in another municipality?	9,045
How many pupils attended school outside of the city?	1,185
What connects Marzili to Bundeshaus?	A funicular railway
How long is the Marzilibah funicular?	106 m
What is the second shortest public railway in Europe?	Marzilibahn
What is the shortest public railway in Europe?	Zagreb funicular
What is the name of Bern's airport?	Bern Airport
What is the name of the regional airport?	Bern-Belp or Belpmoos
What term is used interchangeably with daylight saving time?	summer time
What period of time do we set our clocks forward in DST?	one hour
What do we get an extra hour of because we set the clocks forward?	daylight
In what season do regions who practice DST set the clocks back one hour?	autumn
By setting the clocks forward, the normal time of what daily event is disrupted?	sunrise
Who first suggested daylight saving?	George Hudson
From what country did George Hudson hail?	New Zealand
In what year was modern daylight saving first proposed?	1895
Besides Austria-Hungary, what country first put DST into effect?	Germany
What used to be the main draw on electricity?	incandescent lighting
What industry having to do with shopping benefits from DST?	retailing
In addition to entertainment events that take place after working hours, what profession might suffer because of DST?	farming
Research on DST is uncertain because we aren't sure how it affects the use of what?	energy
What can be affected by DST that might disrupt plans for a vacation?	travel
When the clock on your laptop adjusts to DST without you resetting the clock, what is controlling the change?	Computer software
What do jurisdictions sometimes change that mixes up DST dates and times?	policy
What important part of daily life might be disturbed because of DST changing what time you go to bed?	sleep patterns
What kind of societies usually follow a regular daily schedule year-round?	Industrialized
What kind of societies rely on solar time and daylight that changes with the seasons?	agrarian
In what part of the world is daytime shorter in winter and longer in summer?	North and south of the tropics
What is the tilt of the Earth that causes solar time to change called?	axial tilt
How much earlier do people's routines happen because of daylight savings?	one hour
In which season is the policy of setting clocks ahead least practical?	winter
Does setting the clocks ahead add an hour of daylight before or after the normal workday?	after
What is the schedule of time called when it is not daylight savings time?	Standard Time
What two sources of energy use do DST proponents say are reduced by the time change?	lighting and heating
What word describes the approximate rates at which sunset and sunrise change with the seasons?	equal
Do those who favor DST say people would rather have an extra hour of daylight before or after their usual workday?	after
Is it the supporters or opponents of Daylight Saving Time who say it significantly reduces energy use?	Supporters
What latitudes see more extreme changes in the length of their days and nights throughout the year?	higher latitudes
What region of the earth sees little change in daylight from season to season?	near the equator
How much impact does the times of daylight and night have on areas like Iceland or Alaska?	little
Would observing Daylight Saving Time have a small or large effect on how light it is during the workday in areas at high latitudes?	small
As compared to areas with lower latitudes, what kind of change do areas with high latitudes see in the length of day through the seasons?	extreme
What kind of clocks did the Romans use?	water clocks
What did the Romans call the third hour before sunrise?	hora tertia
During the summer solstice, for how many minutes did hora tertia last for the Romans?	75
What type of religious ceremonies are still observed according to the traditional, unequal time settings?	Jewish
Who first published the proverb about waking up early and going to bed early to be "healthy, wealthy, and wise"?	Benjamin Franklin
Which group of people did Franklin say would save candles by waking up earlier?	Parisians
In what year did Ben Franklin write a satire suggesting firing cannons at sunrise to wake people up?	1784
What kind of transportation network helped encourage keeping more exact schedules?	rail
In addition to cannon fire, what did Franklin suggest to act as Parisians' alarm clock?	ringing church bells
What particular kind of scientist was George Hudson?	entomologist
What did George Hudson spend time collecting when he wasn't working?	insects
What year did Hudson first present his two-hour daylight saving theory to the Wellington Philosophical Society?	1895
Some people believe it wasn't Hudson who created DST, but an Englishman by what name?	William Willett
Who was the member of Parliament who brought a bill about Daylight Saving Time to the House of Commons in 1908?	Robert Pearce
What year did Germany decide to try DST?	1916
What is the German word for Daylight Saving Time?	Sommerzeit
What natural resource were Germany and Austria-Hungary trying to conserve by using DST?	coal
What year did the United States get on board with DST?	1918
What event in the 1970s led more regions of North America to use DST?	energy crisis
What country joined Canada, the UK, and Ireland in continuing to observe Daylight Saving Time after the war?	Ireland
Daylight Saving Time was used commonly during what war?	Second World War
Along with North America, what continent was affected heavily by the 1970s energy crisis?	Europe
Has the world seen many or few changes in the observation of DST?	many
Countries might change their DST policy by enactments, adjustments, and what other type of policy changes?	repeals
At what local time does the United States change the time?	02:00
Technically, how many hours does the day the time change happens have in the spring?	23
In the fall, DST means one hour is repeated, which means the day is actually how many hours long?	25
At the time change to DST, what will a digital clock read just after 01:59:59.9?	03:00:00.0
Daylight Saving Time is sometimes called summer time, but the clocks are actually moved forward in which season?	spring
During what part of the week is the time change most often scheduled?	weekend
What do we avoid disrupting by doing the time shift during days most people don't work?	weekday schedules
Which time zone in Europe always has a one-hour lead on Central European Time?	Eastern European Time
For one hour each spring, how far ahead of Pacific Time is Mountain Time in the United States?	two hours
In 2008, what month and day did Western Australia change their clocks?	October 26
At DST in the fall, how long does it stay the same time in both Pacific and Mountain time in the United States?	one hour
In addition to much of the state of Arizona, what U.S. state does not ever change their clocks for DST?	Hawaii
What year did the European Union standardize their Summer Time?	1996
European Summer Time begins in March and ends in what month?	October
What act in the U.S. brought about the 2007 change in DST policy?	the Energy Policy Act of 2005
What government body is allowed to change the DST policy in the United States back to the dates observed from 1987 to 2006?	Congress
Supporters of the November end to DST name what U.S. holiday as the justification for keeping the change through the end of October?	Halloween
In the southern hemisphere, what aspect of DST is about the reverse of that of the northern hemisphere?	Beginning and ending dates
At what local time does Chile change their clocks for DST?	24:00
What day of the week does DST begin and end in Chile?	Saturday
In the Northern hemisphere's summer, what is the time difference between the UK and Chile?	five hours
During what season in the Southern hemisphere is there a three-hour time difference between mainland Chile and the United Kingdom?	summer
Which part of Brazil observes Daylight Saving Time?	southern Brazil
What part of Brazil does not observe DST?	equatorial Brazil
Which two continents that comprise a majority of the population worldwide don't observe DST?	Asia and Africa
The lack of fluctuation in time for what daily event means regions of the world near the equator don't usually keep DST?	sunrise
What leader said daylight saving gives people more "opportunities for the pursuit of health and happiness"?	Winston Churchill
What nickname have people in opposition to DST given it?	Daylight Slaving Time
In addition to the evening entertainment industry, people from what industry often oppose daylight saving?	agricultural
Traditionally, retailing, tourism, and what other industry have been in favor of DST?	sports
Along with energy crisis, what other significant historical event led to countries adopting DST?	war
Which political supporter of Willett's proposal had already used the half-hour version of DST at Sandringham?	Edward VII
What was the name of the director of the Meteorological Office who opposed DST?	Napier Shaw
What year did Parliament first take a vote and decide against implementing daylight savings?	1909
Who was responsible for bringing a bill proposing DST to the U.S. House of Representatives?	Andrew Peters
What industrialist from Pittsburgh campaigned strongly in favor of DST?	Robert Garland
What year did the U.S. go to war, leading to wider acceptance of daylight savings?	1917
What year did the United States finally adopt Daylight Saving Time?	1918
Which country continued to observe DST nationwide despite the fact that the war had ended?	Britain
What spring holiday did Britain adjust its DST schedule around?	Easter
After what year was daylight savings repealed in the U.S.?	1919
What sport did President Wilson enjoy that made him not want to give up DST?	golf
What U.S. city kept observing DST to stay in sync with London, leading Chicago and Cleveland to follow along?	New York
What month and year were two neighboring cities in Minnesota on different time schedules?	May 1965
What state supported DST because it wanted to sell more potatoes?	Idaho
What company joined Clorox in funding the Daylight Saving Time Coalition in the 1980s?	7-Eleven
What year was the extension to U.S. daylight savings proposed by the DST Coalition?	1987
What year did the U.S. see standardization of DST outside of wartime for the first time?	1966
What percentage of Queensland voted against the daylight saving referendum in 1992?	54.5%
What was the name of Queensland's political party set up solely to support their particular DST arrangement?	Daylight Saving for South East Queensland
In Australia, were rural or urban areas generally more strongly opposed to DST?	rural
What member of Queensland Parliament was responsible for finally bringing the DST for South East Queensland referendum to a vote?	Peter Wellington
What was the name of the organization that supported adding an additional hour to their clocks all year?	the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents
Joining farmers, what other kind of workers opposed SDST?	postal workers
What regions of the United Kingdom were generally against SDST?	northern regions
What do Muslims call the month when they fast between sunup and sundown?	Ramadan
What would DST delay if observed during the Muslim holy month?	the evening dinner
What Muslim country continues to observe DST during Ramadan?	Iran
When was Ramadan in 2012?	July and August
What year did Russia decide to never turn its clocks back?	2011
What country other than Russia declared they'd stay in DST all year?	Belarus
Was Russia or Belarus first in their declaration?	Russia
Which season's dark mornings led to people complaining about the switch from DST?	winter
What year did Russia give up on the all-year DST and go back to Standard Time?	2014
Which group is more likely to support DST: urban workers or rural farmers?	urban workers
If people have more daylight in the evenings, what season might see a rise in outdoor activity?	summer
Would those in favor of DST argue that it causes people to use more electricity or saves energy?	saves energy
What major health risk do people who oppose DST say it increases?	heart attack
What profession is more likely to want to repeal DST: farmers or shopkeepers?	Farmers
What adjective would those against DST use to describe the energy savings touted by supporters?	inconclusive
What time of day do opponents of daylight savings believe is disrupted the most by the time shift?	morning
Most people agree that a standardized schedule by DST is more practical than trying to do what in the morning on our own?	get up earlier
What electronic device might people work their schedules around instead of paying close attention to DST?	television
During what season is DST usually not observed because of the detriments of dark mornings?	winter
What indirect benefit of DST might cause some areas to observe it even though they don't get any direct benefits like cost or energy savings?	coordination with others
What percentage of all electricity usage in the U.S. and Canada is from residential lighting?	3.5%
DST will reduce electricity use in the evening but increase it during what time of the day?	morning
When DST was first proposed, what type of lighting was consuming the most electricity?	incandescent
Along with geography and economics, what variable often affects how much electricity an area uses?	climate
Whose satire that was published in 1784 pointed out that daylight saving would only reduce electricity usage if the increase in the mornings was less than the savings in the evenings?	Franklin
Have studies shown DST generally increases or reduces gas consumption from cars?	increases
What year was the DOE report about fuel consumption published?	2008
What happened regarding DST in 2007 in the United States that probably led to the DOE investigation?	extension of DST
What category of goods that are used in outdoor activities benefit from the extra hour of daylight from DST?	sporting goods
What organization predicted a $100 million increase for the golf sector because of extended DST?	the National Golf Foundation
What year did Fortune magazine make predictions about the increased revenue an extended daylight savings would provide?	1984
According to a study in 1999, daylight savings has caused what approximate percentage of increase in leisure industry revenue in the European Union?	3%
How much extra money from DST did Fortune predict for 7-Eleven on account of DST?	$30 million
Is it better to harvest grain before or after the morning dew evaporates?	after
What animal on dairy farms is affected by timing?	cows
What does earlier milk delivery do to cows?	disrupts their systems
Some farmers oppose DST because their farm laborers arrive to work and leave later or earlier?	earlier
Besides farmers, what other group of people set their schedules by the sun?	parents of young children
What year did a change in DST policy cost North America somewhere between $500 million and $1 billion in extra work?	2007
Who is the economist who said there was about $1.7 billion in lost opportunity costs because of the 2007 changes?	William F. Shughart II
What have some people argued correlates with time shifts from daylight savings?	decreased economic efficiency
What do some call the effect that they say caused a one-day loss for stock exchanges of approximately $31 billion in the year 2000?	the daylight-saving effect
What factor determines the numbers people reach for estimates when studying DST?	methodology
In what year did the NBS revisit the DOT's 1975 study and find traffic fatalities unaffected?	1976
What organization made their own estimation in 1995 of a drop in traffic deaths by 1.2%?	the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
What's the abbreviation for Single/Double Summer Time?	SDST
In the two weeks following the time change ending British Summer Time, what percentage hike is there in traffic accidents?	11%
How much less, on average, do workers in the U.S. sleep on Mondays after switching to DST, according to the 2009 study?	40 minutes
What did the LEAA say was reduced 10% to 13% in Washington, DC during daylight savings?	violent crime rate
How many cities did the LEAA study before reaching their conclusion?	two
How many cities of those the LEAA studied showed any reduction in crime?	one
In what decade did the LEAA conduct their investigation of crime and DST?	1970s
There are more fires in the fall and winter because people burn more candles and turn what on to keep warm?	heating
In addition to smoke detectors, what do fire safety officials suggest people replace batteries in when they set their clocks twice a year?	carbon monoxide detectors
If your area doesn't observe DST, what can you use instead as a twice-yearly reminder?	the first days of spring and autumn
What part of your vehicle should you remember to check twice a year?	lights
What should you check storage spaces in your home for twice-yearly?	hazardous materials
What do societies with standardized work schedules have more time for because of the increase in afternoon daylight from DST?	outdoor exercise
What vitamin does sunlight help the human body absorb?	vitamin D
What chair of the Retinitis Pigmentosa Foundation Fighting Blindness lobbied for an extension to daylight savings in the U.S.?	Gordon Gund
What cancer can be caused by too much time in the sun?	skin cancer
Some people say DST can help sufferers of depression because it encourages them to do what?	rise earlier
What natural rhythm is disrupted by seasonal changes?	circadian rhythm
In 2005, what country used increased health risks as rationalization for getting rid of DST?	Kazakhstan
Which Russian president argued that the country should stay in DST year-round because of the stresses of time shifts?	Dmitri Medvedev
According to the Swedish study in 2008, for how many weekdays following the "spring forward" do you have a higher risk of heart attack?	three
Do emissions from vehicle exhaust cause lower or higher pollution before dawn?	higher
Does DST mean more rush hour traffic is on the road before dawn or after?	before dawn
What kind of pollution is caused by emissions from cars while they're sitting in traffic?	air pollution
During the fall time shift from 02:00 to 01:00, how many times will a clock show the times between 01:00:00 and 01:59:59?	twice
What might a clock showing the same times twice in one day lead to?	confusion
What do people often have trouble remembering to do for DST?	change their clocks
What added complexity do people working across time zones have to keep track of?	multiple DST rules
What year did an accident occur at a German facility with molten steel because of the change to DST?	1993
For how much more time was the molten steel supposed to cool when the computer mix-up happened in the German steel facility?	one hour
Who is responsible for testing and even making changing to computer programs when daylight saving rules change?	software developers
What time system do some computer systems use to avoid the issues of changes in local time?	Coordinated Universal Time
What type of computer systems use an internal clock based on UTC time?	Unix-based
Willett's first suggestion was to change clocks by 20 minutes how often?	weekly
What drawback would changing clocks gradually add to the process?	complexity
What could be avoided by changing clocks more gradually more often?	Some clock-shift problems
What does DST inherit from standard time?	disadvantages
Does daylight savings sometimes minimize or magnify the drawbacks of standard time?	magnify
Usually, it's recommended that we avoid the sun for how many hours before and after noon?	two
What kind of guidelines become less precise because of DST?	sun-exposure guidelines
When using a sundial, we must adjust the reading to reflect natural discrepancies and the effect of what other influence?	time zone
What author is credited with explaining the usage of daylight saving time and daylight savings time with an "s" in the English Journal of the (American) National Council of Teachers of English?	Richard Meade
In 1978, according to Meade, which form of the phrase was more commonly used: daylight saving time or daylight savings time?	daylight savings time
Which form of the phrase is more common in print publications?	daylight saving time
Joining Merriam-Webster's and the Oxford dictionary, the older form of the phrase without the "s" is still listed first in what dictionary?	American Heritage
Along with "daylight saving" and "daylight savings," what alternate form does Merriam-Webster's include?	daylight time
Which term did Willett use in his 1907 proposal to refer to DST?	daylight saving
What phrase had replaced daylight saving time by 1911 as Willett's proposal evolved into draft legislation?	summer time
What word do speakers of Dutch use for DST?	zomertijd
What term do Italians use for DST that literally translates as "legal time"?	ora legale
What does the Italian term for their winter time, ora solare, translate to in English?	solar time
What usually changes when a place observes DST?	The name of local time
What word does American English swap out for "daylight" when referring to time zones?	standard
In American English, what is the equivalent of Pacific Standard Time?	Pacific Daylight Time
When the UK changes their clocks forward in the spring, what do they call the time they're then observing?	British Summer Time
What word is often added to the names of time zones when used in British English?	summer
What phrase is often used in North America when speaking about DST?	spring forward, fall back
What is a language like "spring forward, fall back" that acts as a trigger for memory called?	mnemonic
What does "spring forward, fall back" help people remember?	which direction to shift clocks
What can cause issues with installed computer systems?	Changes to DST rules
What year did DST rules change in North America?	2007
What did many existing computer systems that relied on time zones need because of the DST rule changes?	upgrades
In addition to calendaring programs, what kind of programs were most impacted by the changes?	email
Which professionals bore the brunt of the effort to upgrade systems affected by time changes?	corporate information technologists
What system of time do some applications use so they won't have problems with time changes?	UTC
By using UTC, applications get out of adjusting to changes around clock shifts and what other factor?	time zone differences
In addition to individual applications, what modern systems that control the basic functions of a computer typically use UTC?	operating systems
Where do computers usually use UTC?	internally
What time would a computer probably use for the clock display?	local time
Where do most systems go to get the data they use to calculate local time?	the IANA time zone database
What two specific points of data do systems need to figure out to get local time?	date/time
What's another name for the IANA database?	zoneinfo
The IANA database works by connecting names to what information about the location?	historical and predicted clock shifts
IANA, or zoneinfo, updates are installed as a part of what ordinary function when changes to DST policy are made?	system maintenance
What environment variable defines a location's name?	TZ
What format is used to store internal time in systems that use zoneinfo?	timezone-independent epoch time
What's the name of the HP database that's similar to IANA but not compatible with it?	tztab
Less sophisticated systems might just support a TZ value with one start rule and how many end rules?	one
When must TZ values be changed on an older system?	whenever DST rules change
What does the TZ value EST5EDT,M3.2.0/02:00,M11.1.0/02:00 specify?	time for the eastern United States starting in 2007
What years will a new TZ value apply to?	all years
What's might a new TZ value mishandle when it changes with new DST rules?	older timestamps
Similar to systems using zoneinfo, Microsoft Windows calculates DST by doing what?	specifying the name of a location
When does the table of rule sets the Windows operating system uses have to be updated?	when DST rules change
If your computer runs Vista, what's the maximum number of start and end rules you can have for each time zone setting?	two
If located in Canada somewhere where DST is observed, a system running Vista might mishandle time stamps that are older than what year?	1987
On a system running Windows older than Vista, locations in Canada observing DST would only reliably support time stamps from after what year?	2006
What single year did Windows 95 use to apply rules to Israel's time changes?	1995
Because the schedule in Israel was always changing, what did Microsoft do with the release of Windows 98?	marked Israel as not having DST
How often would Israeli users running Windows 98 need to manually adjust the time on their machines to stay current?	twice a year
What law regulated the rules for time shifts in Israel according to the Jewish calendar?	The 2005 Israeli Daylight Saving Law
Although the schedule in Israel became predictable after 2005, there were still problems in Windows until Israel adjusted DST to what calendar in 2013?	the Gregorian calendar
What does Microsoft Windows use internally for its real-time clock?	local time
Not using UTC, Windows can't multi boot with different versions of itself like you'd need to do to use what kind of disk?	a rescue boot disk
As opposed to providing support for users to have unique time zone settings, Windows will only allow for what?	a single system-wide setting
In what year did Microsoft imply that they would be making changes to support RealTimeIsUniversal in a step towards compatibility with UTC?	2008
Since 2008, at least how many times has Microsoft released fixes for the RealTimeIsUniversal feature?	two
What file system do recent Windows versions use?	NTFS
Under NTFS, what does Windows use for file time stamps in storage?	UTC
What file system do most removable devices use?	FAT
What time will a file be set to if it's copied from the hard disk onto other media?	current local time
What phrase describes keeping adjusted summer hours year-round?	permanent daylight saving time
Proponents of permanent DST say it has all the advantages of regular DST without the issues some people have from what bi-annual occurrences?	time shifts
In year-round DST, would sunrise happen early or late compared to most places?	late
During what time period did Russia use permanent DST?	2011 to 2014
In what season in areas observing permanent daylight saving time will it stay dark the latest in the morning?	winter
In which direction do countries like Russia and Argentina shift their time zones that could be considered all-year DST?	westward
About how many minutes does Saskatoon, Saskatchewan stay ahead of mean solar time?	67
What time does Saskatoon observe all year long?	Central Standard Time
Places like northeast India that shift time zones to the east could be considered to be observing what kind of DST?	negative DST
What year did Ireland and the UK give up on their permanent DST experiment?	1971
Places like Spain and parts of France effectively go by DST in the winter but add what in the summer?	an extra hour
During the summer in Nome, about how many hours ahead of the sun do they set their clocks?	three
What term was used in Britain for double daylight saving time?	Double Summer Time
What's a third name for double daylight saving time or Double Summer Time used in Europe?	Central European Midsummer Time
What does RIBA stand for?	Royal Institute of British Architects
What is the goal of RIBA?	the advancement of architecture
When was RIBA founded?	1837
When was RIBA's founding document expanded?	1971
In what country does RIBA mainly operate?	United Kingdom
What was Riba's first name?	Institute of British Architects in London
In what year was the Institute of British Architects founded?	1834
In what city was the Institute of British Architects located?	London
In terms of profession, what were people like Philip Hardwick, William Adams Nicholson and Thomas de Grey?	Architects
What caused the change of the Institute's name?	the grant of the royal charter
What was removed from the Royal Institute's name?	the reference to London
When was the mention of London removed from the Royal Institute's name?	1892
Where is the Royal Institute of British Architects located?	Portland Place
Who opened the structure in which the Royal Institute is currently housed?	King George V and Queen Mary
When did the Royal Institute receive its charter?	1837
Who was responsible for giving the charter to the Royal Institute?	King William IV
In what years was the Royal Institute issued supplemental charters?	1887, 1909 and 1925
When were the various supplemental charters consolidated?	1971
What term characterizes the nature of changes to the charter after 1971?	minor amendments
What was the central aim of the Royal Institute?	the general advancement of Civil Architecture
What document set forth the goals of the Royal Institute?	The original Charter of 1837
What was the Royal Institute responsible for doing with regards to the development of knowledge related to architecture?	promoting and facilitating
What sets forth the standards by which the Royal Institute functions?	the Byelaws
What guidelines for the Royal Institute are updated most often?	the Byelaws
What is necessary to make any changes to either document which governs the operations of the Royal Institute?	the Privy Council's approval
What was the first Latin phrase used by the Royal Institute?	Usui civium decori urbium
Who is responsible for the use of 'usui civium decori urbium'?	Thomas Leverton Donaldson
What was Donaldson's role within the Royal Institute?	honorary secretary
Who reworked the Royal Institute's medal desgin in 1931?	Eric Gill
When did Joan Hassall redesign the Royal Institute's medal?	1960
What organization was the Royal Institute instrumental in establishing?	the Architects' Registration Council of the United Kingdom
Which items of legislation did the Royal Institute play a large role in promoting?	the Board of Architectural Education under the Architects (Registration) Acts, 1931 to 1938
Where did Lional Bailey Budden teach?	the Liverpool University School of Architecture
What major compendium did Budden help write an article for?	Encyclopædia Britannica
How many schools formed the Board of Architectural Education?	twenty
When did the Royal Institute celebrate its 100th anniversary?	1934
Who was the head of the Registration Committee in 1934?	Harry Barnes
In 1934, what percentage of architects were members of professional organizations?	80 per cent
Who did Barnes believe was best able to advance the interests of architects?	architectural associations
What specific institution did Barnes indicate could not be a rival of the Royal Institute?	ARCUK
When does the Royal Institute's Guide indicate the first RIBA Board was established?	1904
What school document had to meet the standards of the Board for admittance?	syllabus
What was necessary for testing in schools applying to the RIBA Board?	an approved external examiner
What body carried out on-site inspection of member schools of the RIBA Board?	Visiting Board
What organization's policies regarding acceptance of professional qualifications prompted thoughts of revamping ARCUK?	European Union
When did the name of ARCUK change?	1996
What was the name of the legistlation leading to the change in ARCUK's name?	the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act
What was shut down as a result of legislation changing the name of ARCUK?	the ARCUK Board of Architectural Education
What was the new name given to ARCUK in the '90s?	Architects Registration Board
What is the function of the Royal Institute's Visiting Boards?	to assess courses for exemption from the RIBA's examinations in architecture
When did the Royal Institute and ARB reach accord on a shared body of criteria?	2011
What does ARB stand for?	Architects Registration Board
What is a key difference between the ARB and Royal Institute?	RIBA also validates courses outside the UK
How many people have membership in the Royal Institute?	44,000
What can chartered members of RIBA add to their name to indicate their status?	RIBA
What type of Royal Institute members are not able to use the organization's acronym after their names?	Student Members
What is not provided by the Royal Institute anymore?	fellowships
Fellows of the Royal Institute can use what abbreviation with their names?	FRIBA
What is the Royal Institute of British Architects' street address?	66 Portland Place
Who designed RIBA's headquarters?	George Grey Wornum
What is one room in RIBA's headquarters that can be visited by the public?	the Library
For what purpose can rooms be rented at the Royal Institute's building?	events
How many satellite offices does the Royal Institute run in the UK?	a dozen
When was RIBA's first satellite office opened?	1966
In what city was the first RIBA branch office opened?	Cambridge
What territory did RIBA's Cambridge branch office cover?	the East of England
What is the name of the Royal Institute's business operation?	RIBA Enterprises
Where does RIBA's business group have its headquarters office?	15 Bonhill Street in London
How many people work for RIBA Enterprises?	over 250
How many of RIBA Enterprises' staff are located at the Newcastle office?	180
What are three divisions of RIBA Enterprises?	RIBA Insight, RIBA Appointments, and RIBA Publishing
What are two publications produced by RIBA Publishing?	RIBA Product Selector and RIBA Journal
What does NBS stand for?	National Building Specification
How many people work for the NBS?	130
Where is the NBS located?	Newcastle
What is another name for the Royal Institute Library?	The British Architectural Library
When was the RIBA library founded?	1834
How many materials are housed in the RIBA library?	over four million
The British Architectural Library is the biggest library of its kind in which continent?	Europe
In what institution are some materials from the RIBA collection located?	Victoria and Albert Museum
What was the RIBA Library's first address?	9 Conduit Street
Where did RIBA move its library?	66 Portland Place
In what year did RIBA move its library?	1934
Which architect's work was preserved throughout World War II by the Royal Institute's Library?	Adolf Loos
Where is the Royal Institute Library's Reading Room located?	66 Portland Place
Where are RIBA's Study Rooms located?	the Henry Cole Wing of the V&A
What art style was used inthe design of the Reading Room?	Art Deco
In what year did the Royal Institute's Reading Rooms open?	2004
Who is meant to benefit from teaching provided by the RIBA library?	students, education groups and families
When did the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Institute of British Architects start a formal relationship?	2004
What is the name of the joint venture involving the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Institute of British Architects?	the V&A + RIBA Architecture Partnership
What is the main goal of the V&A + RIBA partnership?	to promote the understanding and enjoyment of architecture
In what space at the V&A is the Architecture Gallery located?	Room 128
What is found at Room 128a of the Victoria & Albert Museum?	Architecture Exhibition Space
Who designed rooms 128 and 128a at the V&A Museum?	Gareth Hoskins Architects
Where was the Royal Institute's Drawing and Archives Collections located originally?	21 Portman Place
What part of the V&A was the Royal Institute's Drawing and Archives collection moved to?	the Henry Cole Wing
What does the Royal Institute of British Architects award the Stirling Prize for?	the best new building of the year
What was the first year in which RIBA's Royal Gold Medal was given?	1848
What is the Royal Gold Medal awarded for?	a distinguished body of work
What is the limit of how much can be spent on projects receiving the Stephen Lawrence Prize?	£500,000
What is the name of the RIBA awards given to students of architecture?	the President's Medals
What are events that a company can sponsor when it is planning a new construction project or redesigning an existing one?	Architectural design competitions
What is provided to guide entrants in an architectural competition?	Brief
What kinds of people generally make up the panels which judge architecture competitions?	design professionals and client representatives
What is necessary for the integrity of a design competition?	independence of the jury
What kind of artistic production can be supported by design competitions?	public realm artworks
Aside from the ARB, what other organization offers accreditation services for schools serving architects?	RIBA
What process does RIBA use in its accreditation system?	course validation
What kinds of courses does RIBA conduct accreditation services for apart from the Architects Registration Board?	international courses
What is the first step in the Royal Institute's guidelines for education?	three-year first degree
What is required by the second stage in the education provisions set out by RIBA?	a two-year post graduate diploma or masters
What does the third part of the Royal Institute's educational process contain?	professional exams
How long does it take, at the least, for a student to be eligible for the title of Chartered?	seven years
What occurs between the second and third parts of the education process prescribed by the Royal Institute?	A further year out
What did the Royal Institute support in order to keep up with housing in mainland Europe?	minimum space standards
When did the Royal Institute promote setting lower limits on the size of new homes in Britain?	2007
Who was the head of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 2007?	Jack Pringle
To what decade did Pringle unfavorably compare the size of modern British homes?	the 1920s
What country did Pringle cite as having homes with better proportions than those found in the UK?	Holland
NARA is responsible for what collection of archives?	National Archives
What independent agency preserves the original copy of executive orders?	National Archives and Records Administration
What is the official that oversees the operation of NARA?	The Archivist
What member of NARA has the ability to declare when the constitutional threshold of passage has ocurred?	The Archivist
What office publishes the Federal Register?	The Office of the Federal Register
What office administers the Electoral College?	The Office of the Federal Register
Which office publishes the Code of Federal Regulations?	The Office of the Federal Register
Which office publishes the United States Statutes at Large?	The Office of the Federal Register
Which arm of NARA handles grants?	The National Historical Publications and Records Commission
What year was The National Historical Publications and Records Commission established?	1964
About how many grants has the NHPRC awarded?	4,500
OGIS provides what resource for the government and public?	FOIA
What type of dispute does NARA typically resolve?	FOIA disputes
NARA is ordered by congress to review what type of policies?	FOIA policies
What types of recommendations does NARA provide to congress?	changes to FOIA
What year was the National Archives Establishment established in?	1934
In what year did NARA become an independent agency?	1985
In what year was The National Archives merged with GSA?	1949
Who was the first Archivist at the National Archives?	R.D.W. Connor
When did the first Archivist start at the National Archives?	1934
What branch of the US government established the National Archives?	Congress
What commission merged the National Archives with GSA?	Hoover Commission
The Archivist took on what role after the incorporation of the Nation Archives into GSA?	subordinate official
When was the reclassification program originally intended to end?	2007
How was the reclassification of documents in '06 revealed?	public hearing
What year was Executive Order 13526 created?	2010
What Executive order created the National Declassification Center?	Executive Order 13526
What was the aim of Executive Order 13526?	coordinate declassification practices
What types of groups are NARA's holdings classified into?	record groups
Each record group is classified based on what?	governmental department or agency
Besides films and other non-static media, what type of media is classified into a group?	documents
Besides the general media and motion picture categories, which category contains media that is not static?	microfilm
Where are archival descriptions of holdings under the custody of NARA stored?	Archival Research Catalog (ARC)
As of the end mid December of 2012, how many logical data records are stored at NARA?	10 billion
How many digital copies of previously digitized materials were there in December of 2012?	922,000
Archival descriptions include traditional paper holdings, electron records, and what?	artifacts
The 10 billion logical data records are linked to how many artifacts?	527,000
Most of NARA's holdings are available to sector?	public domain
Federal government works are excluded from what legal protection?	copyright
Some records at NARA are legally protected by what?	copyright
What executive order directs agencies to declassify documents before sending them to NARA?	Executive Order 13526
What office of NARA oversees the declassification of classified materials?	Information Security Oversight Office
Besides census records and passenger lists, what NARA documents are particularly useful to genealogists?	naturalization records
For what time period does NARA have census records available for?	1790 to 1930
What is the informal name of The National Archives Building?	Archives I
On what street is the The National Archives Building located?	Constitution Avenue
Where is the Declaration of Independence kept?	The National Archives Building
Where in the National Archives can you view a copy of the Magna Carta?	main chamber
Where is the Louisiana Purchase Treaty kept?	The National Archives Building
Since when has all filming and photography in the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom been banned?	February 25, 2010
For how long has the National Archives prohibited flash photography?	over 30 years
What is an aspect of a visit to the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom?	no lines
What has made the no photography rule hard to enforce in the Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom?	advent of cameras with automatic flashes
What is the second facility of NARA named?	Archives II
When was Archives II opened?	1994
What college is Archives II closest to?	University of Maryland
What college does NARA have cooperatives initiatives with?	University of Maryland
What campus of University of Maryland is listed on the National Register of Historic Places?	College Park campus
Where is The Washington National Records Center located?	Suitland, Maryland
What does The Washington National Records Center primarily store?	federal records
After staying at the WNRC, where are records transferred to?	the National Archives
What happens to temporary records at the WNRC if they are not retrieved by the end of the retention times?	destroyed
Beyond the storage of federal records, what service does the WNRC provide?	research
Where is the National Archives Building located?	downtown Washington
What proportion of the federal census records in existence does the National Archives Building house?	all
What's the latest war The National Archives Building has military unit records for?	Philippine–American War
What's the earliest war The National Archives Building has military unit records for	American Revolution
What do the facilities designated to each area of the US specialize in?	documents of federal agencies and courts pertinent to each region
Microfilms of documents from federal agencies can be found where?	facilities across the country
Where are some of the items relevant to JFKs medical treatments housed?	Federal Records Centers
Federal Records Centers are particularly unhelpful to what type of research?	public
Which Federal Records Center houses materials relevant to JFKs assassination?	FRC in Lenexa, Kansas
When was JFK shot?	1963
What agency maintains the Presidential Library system?	NARA
What is the system that preserves the documents of US Presidents?	Presidential Library system
Who is the earliest President that is represented in the archives of the Presidential Library system?	Herbert Hoover
In what area of the US can one find the Presidential Library system libraries?	nationwide
Libraries that are established for other presidents are operated by private foundations, historical societies, and what government entities?	state governments
What state operates the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library?	Illinois
What is the earliest President that NARA does not hold records for in its presidential library system?	Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln's Presidential Library and Museum is operated by what type of entity?	state
In what year did the National Archives make strides towards making its holdings more widely available?	2006
What large internet company has partnered with NARA to digitize records?	Google
What Archivist announced the partnership with Google?	Allen Weinstein
What is Google helping NARA with?	digitize and offer NARA video online
What is the aim of NARA in entering public-private partnerships?	to make its holdings more widely available
In January of 2007, what internet company did the National Archives partner with?	Fold3.com
What was the aim of the partnership with Fold3.com?	to digitize historic documents from the National Archives holdings
What Archivist announced the partnership with Fold3?	Allen Weinstein
Of all the benefits of the partnership with Fold3, what benefited the public at large the most?	much greater access
What direct benefit did NARA itself gain from the partnership with Fold3?	enhance NARA's efforts to preserve its original records
In what year did the National Archives announce that it would make its collection of Universal Newsreels available for purchase online?	2007
What company did the National Archives partner with make it's Universal Newsreels available online?	CreateSpace
Universal Newsreels dated from which year up to 1967 were made available through CreateSpace?	1929
What did the National Archives announce in May of 2008?	digitize selected records including the complete U.S. Federal Census Collection
Which genealogy website benefits by the May 2008 announcement?	Ancestry.com
What happens after the 5 year embargo that allows Ancestry.com exclusive use of digitized records?	turned over to the National Archives
Which Google affiliated website did the National Archives decide to use in 2009?	YouTube
What purpose does the National Archive YouTube channel serve?	showcase popular archived films
What online service did the National Archives decide to use to showcase its photographic holdings?	Flickr
The National Archives' educational team created a website in what year?	2010
In 2011, what sort of Wikipedia addition did the National Archives make?	Wikiproject
What was the purpose of creating a Wikiproject?	expand collaboration
Whose idea was it for the National Archives to work with Wikimedia?	National Archives
What benefit does public reap from the National Archives working with Wikimedia?	holdings widely available
Which language was the Wikiproject primarily created in?	English
what type of islands are the Tristan da Cunha	volcanic
where are the islands of Tristan da Cunha located?	south Atlantic Ocean
how many square kilometres  is the island?	98
what type of island group are the islands?	archipelago
what territory is Tristan da Cunha part of?	the British overseas territory of Saint Helena
What is the population of the island?	267
what other island is included in the territory?	Ascension Island
in what year were the islands first sighted?	1506
what was the name of the explorer that sighted them?	Tristão da Cunha
who was the main island named after?	Portuguese explorer Tristão da Cunha
what year was it said the first island landing was made?	1520
what was the name of the first long term settler?	Jonathan Lambert
what year did the first permanent settler arrive?	December 1810
what did one of the settlers rename the islands?	Islands of Refreshment
in what year did the UK annex the islands?	1816
where did the UK rule the islands from?	South Africa
in what year did Prince Alfred visit the island?	1867
what was the main settlement named?	Edinburgh of the Seven Seas
who is Lewis Carroll's youngest brother?	Reverend Edwin Heron Dodgson
what is one reason that caused the island to become less used?	the opening of the Suez Canal
what year were the islands declared dependent of saint helena?	1938
During what war was the island used as a Royal Navy station?	World War II
What was the islands codename during World War II?	HMS Atlantic Isle
Who was the administrator during World War II for the island?	Surgeon Lieutenant Commander E.J.S. Woolley
What year was an atomic bomb detonated near the island?	1958
What country test detonated an atomic bomb near the island?	United States
What year was the island evacuated due to an eruption?	1961
What year did most families return after being evacuated?	1963
What was the name of the settlement that was assessed after the evactuation?	Edinburgh of the Seven Seas
In what year was the island hit by an extratropical cyclone?	2001
Who provided aid for the extratropical cyclone?	the British government
what year was a virus induced flu reported?	2007
What year did a large fire destroy the fishing factory?	2008
When were the new generators installed to correct the power problems?	March 2008
what was the name of the ship that was a temporary fishing facility?	M/V Kelso
when was the new fishing factory ready for use?	July 2009
When did the freighter Nightingale run aground?	March 2011
What was spilled when the freighter ran aground?	heavy fuel oil
what animal was threatened with the fuel oil spill?	rockhopper penguins
where were the penguins transported for cleaning?	Tristan da Cunha
When did a boat arrive at the island with damage during a race?	November 2011
What was the name of the boat that was damaged during the race?	Puma's Mar Mostro
What was the name of the race the boat was damaged in?	Volvo Ocean Race
what was broken/damaged on the boat?	mast
What is the abbreviation by which the University of Kansas is known?	KU
Where is the main branch of the University of Kansas located?	Lawrence
What is the tallest point in Lawrence?	Mount Oread
Who authorized the opening of the University of Kansas?	the Kansas State Legislature
In what year was Kansas made a member of the United States?	1861
In what two cities are there satellite locations for KU's medical school?	Wichita and Salina
What organization does KU belong to?	the Association of American Universities
How many insititutions comprise the Association of American Universities' membership?	62
In what city can KU's hospital be found?	Kansas City
In what city can KU's Edwards campus be found?	Overland Park
How many people attended the University of Kansas at its Edwards and Lawrence locations in the fall semester of 2014?	23,597
In the autumn of 2014, how many people attended the University of Kansas's Medical Center?	3,371
How many students attended the University of Kansas combined in fall of 2014?	26,968
How many education professionals were working at KU in the fall of 2012?	2,663
On what date was KU's Lawrence campus made official?	February 20, 1863
How much money did Lawrence have to contribute to the University as terms of its charter?	$15,000
What was the minimum size of the land that Lawrence could provide for the university?	forty acres
What competing city was next in line if Lawrence would have been unable to meet the requirements necessary to get KU built in its city?	Emporia
On what geographic feature was KU built?	Mount Oread
Who did the site of KU's construction originally belong to?	Charles L. Robinson
Who provided the majority of the money needed to secure the site of the University of Kansas?	Amos Adams Lawrence
What was the governing body of KU?	Board of Regents
What was the year in which KU's first roster of students graduated?	1873
How many institutions participated in the V-12 program?	131
What did the V-12 program provide to interested pupils?	a path to a Navy commission
During what event did the V-12 program take place?	World War II
What part of KU serves students learning about government?	the Robert J. Dole Institute of Politics
What are two radio stations that broadcast from KU?	KJHK, 90.7 FM, and KANU, 91.5 FM
What is the name of a fine art institution on the campus of KU?	the Spencer Museum of Art
Which library is dedicated to a former student of the University of Kansas?	Anschutz Library
Whom is the Anschutz Library named for?	Philip Anschutz
How many campuses are run by KU?	five
What term describes the nature of how the university is partially funded?	state-sponsored
What are two parts of the University of Kansas house in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences?	the School of the Arts and the School of Public Affairs & Administration
At least how many different degree-granting programs exist at KU?	345
What program at the University of Kansas was rated highest among its peers?	city management and urban policy
What KU department was rated second in its field?	special education
Which publication provided rankings of college and university programs?	U.S. News & World Report
In what tier did a number of KU's programs rank in 2016?	the top 25
What KU school is abbreviated as SADP?	The University of Kansas School of Architecture, Design, and Planning
Where is the SADP housed?	Marvin Hall
What was the name of the school that served as the SADP's precursor?	the School of Architecture and Urban Design
With what two other programs was KU's architectural engineering curriculum joined in 2001?	civil and environmental engineering
In what year did the SADP assume its current form?	2009
What is the name of the publication that ranks schools engaged in architecture and design education?	DesignIntelligence
What is the name of the yearly ratings published by DesignIntelligence?	America's Best Architecture and Design Schools
What title did KU's architecture school receive in 2012?	best in the Midwest
In what place did the University of Kansas finish in national rankings for undergraduate architecture programs in 2012?	11th
What kind of institution is KU's School of Business?	public
Where is the business school at KU located?	Lawrence
When was the University of Kansas School of Business established?	1924
How many students attend the business school at KU?	1500
How many educators work at the KU School of Business?	more than 80
Who considered the business school of the University of Kansas among the best Midwestern business institutions?	Princeton Review
What organization provides oversight for business schools like KU's?	the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business
By what acronym is the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business known?	AACSB
What are two kinds of courses of study available at KU's business school?	business and accounting
In 2014, what issue of U.S. News & World Report provided rankins for law schools?	Best Graduate Schools
What was KU's national law school ranking in 2014?	68th
The University of Kansas had the highest rated law school in which state?	Kansas
In what building do law students attend classes at KU?	Green Hall
For whom is Green Hall named?	James Green
What is the acronym for an organization that serves as an accreditation body for engineering schools?	ABET
On what campus is the University of Kansas School of Engineering located?	main campus
When was KU's engineering school established?	1891
When did the University of Kansas start issuing degrees in engineering?	1873
What kind of institution is KU's engineering school?	public
Who published America's Best Colleges in 2016?	U.S. News & World Report
In what place did the engineering school at KU appear in 2016?	90th
Against what other kinds of institutions was KU's engineering school compared?	national universities
What former leader of a car manufacturing company attended KU?	Alan Mulally
Which person associated with web browsers was a student at KU?	Lou Montulli
What Google employee once studied at the University of Kansas?	Brian McClendon
What oil company leader is an alumnus of the University of Kansas?	Charles E. Spahr
For what company did Charles Spahr serve as CEO?	Standard Oil of Ohio
What is the full name of KU's journalism school?	The William Allen White School of Journalism and Mass Communications
What are the two different programs offered at KU's Schoold of Journalism?	News and Information and Strategic Communication
What three types of media are students taught to work with at KU's School of Journalism?	print, online and broadcast
What is the name of a magazine published at KU?	Jayplay magazine
Who sponsors a contest for journalistic writing?	Hearst Foundation
What are the three constituents of the medical center at KU?	the School of Medicine, School of Nursing, and School of Health Professions
What does each of the component schools of KU's Medical Center offer?	its own programs of graduate study
How many students attended the medical center at KU in fall of 2013?	3,349
At what other KU campus is a four year program available?	Wichita
What is the focus of the Salina location's medical program?	rural health care
In what city is the Edwards Campus located?	Overland Park
When was the Edwards Campus built?	1993
Who are the main kinds of students at the Edwards Campus?	adults
What is the average age of students on KU's Edwards Campus?	32
What can adult learners obtain through studying at the Edwards Campus of the University of Kansas?	college degrees
Who provides statistics on educational costs?	the College Board
What is a phrase that expresses the value of the education offered at KU with respect to its cost?	best buy
What was first instituted for first year students in the 2007-2008 school year?	fixed tuition rate
For how long does the fixed rate of tuition last?	48 months
What was the edict approved by the Board of Regents that provided for the fixed tuition program?	Four-Year Tuition Compact
How much did a student from outside of Kansas have to pay per course credit in 2014-15?	$828
What is charged at KU's specialized professional schools?	additional fees
What was launched in 1965 by the business school at KU?	interdisciplinary management science graduate studies in operations research
What kind of applications did the interdisciplinary program help shape?	decision science
Which government agency used the applications that were informed by KU's interdisciplinary management program?	NASA
What NASA program benefited from the use of decision science applications?	NASA Project Apollo Command Capsule Recovery Operations
In what year was a new interdisciplinary management program launched at KU's School of Business?	1965
What division of the University of Kansas contributed to the development of the internet?	academic computing
What kind of software is Lynx?	text based web browser
What was made possible by Lynx?	hypertext browsing and navigation
What colors are worn by KU's athletic teams?	crimson and royal blue
What is the name of KU athletic teams?	Kansas Jayhawks
How many times has the male basketball team from Kansas won a national title?	five
How many natioanl female outdoor track and field championships have been won by the University of Kansas?	one
Where does KU's cross country team run?	Rim Rock Farm
When did KU start fielding a football team?	1890
How many times has the team from the University of Kansas appeared in the Orange Bowl?	three
Who is the current head of KU's football program?	David Beaty
Who did KU defeat in the 2008 Orange Bowl?	Virginia Tech Hokies
What is the name of the facility that the KU football team plays in?	Memorial Stadium
What was the first year in which a men's team played basketball at the University of Kansas?	1898
Who is the head of men's basketball at KU?	Bill Self
How many times has the University of Kansas won a national championship in men's basketball?	five
Who is considered the most famous basketball alumnus of KU?	Wilt Chamberlain
In what year did the NABC hold its first and only men's basketball tournament?	1939
Who is in charge of all sports teams at KU?	Sheahon Zenger
Who did Zenger replace as athletic director at KU?	Lew Perkins
With what broadcasting company does KU have a contract?	ESPN Regional Television
What sportswear company has a deal with the University of Kansas?	Adidas
What sportswear company formerly held a contract with the University of Kansas?	Nike
How many times have KU teams appeared in the National Debate Tournament?	70
How many times has KU won the national debate championship?	5
How many times has KU been one of the last four teams competing at the National Debate Championships?	12
What school has won the most national debate championships?	Northwestern
What is the name of an honor given to collegiate debate teams?	Copeland Award
What are two events non-sports at which school songs are often heard?	commencement and convocation
What are two songs that reference the school's team colors in their titles?	"Crimson and the Blue", "Red and Blue"
What is the name of a song that references the state that KU serves?	"Kansas Song"
What is the name of a traditional American song that is associated with KU?	"Home on the Range"
What is the name of the newspaper printed every day by the University of Kansas?	University Daily Kansan
What high profile contest has the Daily Kansan won?	Intercollegiate Writing Competition
In what year did the Daily Kansan win the Intercollegiate Writing Competition?	2007
What is the name of an online resource that was created into provide a resource about KU?	KUpedia
What is the name of the poet who won the Nelson award in 2006?	Matthew Porubsky
In what two forms of media is the Daily Kansan available?	print and online
What institution houses the Daily Kansan?	William Allen White School of Journalism
How big is the Daily Kansan's audience?	at least 30,000
What are the call letters of the National Public Radio affiliate that broadcasts from KU?	KANU
What is the name of the station operated by KU students?	KJHK
When did KJHK first broadcast?	1952
What is the name of an independent radio broadcast run out of KU?	KUJH-LP
What kinds of programming appear on KUJH-LP?	public affairs
When was KU's first student union constructed?	1926
What was the role the union was intended serve?	campus community center
What is the name of the student union on the Edwards Campus of KU?	Jayhawk Central
What company runs the University of Kansas's bookstore?	KU Memorial Unions Corporation
What is the name of a potential recipient of funds from enterprises like the bookstore and dining centers at KU?	Student Union Activities
What is the name of the University of Kansas's foundation?	KU Endowment
When was the KU Endowment founded?	1891
To whom does the KU Endowment seek to connect with?	donors
What do donors offer to the University of Kansas?	philanthropic support
What is the name of a publicly-available resource of KU related to community health?	The Community Tool Box
What body is responsible for managing the Community Tool Box?	the Work Group for Community Health and Development
What kinds of groups around the world can benefit from the Community Tool Box?	professionals and grassroots groups engaged in the work of community health and development
How much content does the Community Tool Box offer?	more than 7,000 pages
Where can the Community Tool Box be found?	online
What do you call  government officials using power for illicit private gain?	political corruption
Who benefits from political corruption?	government officials
It is only considered political corruption if the act directly relates to what?	their official duties
Trading in what is considered political corruption?	influence
What is it called when government officials use their power for private gain?	Political corruption
Bribery and embezzelment are forms of what?	corruption
Drug trafficking and money laundering are considered what?	criminal enterprise
Repression of political opponants and police brutality are forms of political what?	corruption
One form of corruption involves the hiring of family members, which is called what?	nepotism
Another form of corruption, the practice of usury, is called what?	gombeenism
Three forms of corruption that can promote criminal activities include drugs, money laundering, and what?	human trafficking
The repression of what is also considered political corruption?	political opponents
What is considered political corruption is differnt in each what?	country or jurisdiction
Sometime sit is hard to tell if actions are legal or illegal because governement officials have what kind of power?	broad or ill-defined
How much money is involved in bribery in the world each year?	1 trillion US dollars
unrestrsined political corruption is known as what?	kleptocracy
What does kleptocracy mean?	rule by thieves
A sate of unrestrained political corruption is known as what?	kleptocracy
Which crime costs over one trillion U.S. dollars every year, world-wide?	bribery
What does kleptocracy mean?	rule by thieves
Another for of corruption is what?	institutional corruption
A form of corruption that does not involve personal gain is known as what?	institutional corruption
Bribery is an example of corruption that involves what type of gain?	personal gain
What are some forms of corruption now  called?	institutional corruption
Institutional corruption is distinguished from what type of corruption?	bribery
This type of problem happens in any organization where the interests of the people who financially support it conflicts with what?	the primary purpose of the institution
What does corruption undermine in politics?	democracy
What does corruption disregard in politics?	formal processes
Political corruption in legislature reduces what, overall?	accountability
Corruption in what compromises the rule of law?	judiciary
Corruption in what creates weak provision of services?	public administration
What two democratic values are soiled due to corruption?	trust and tolerance
Corruption disintegrates government capacity when public offices are what?	bought and sold
The level of corruption can vary in richer democracies in regards to the what of those officials making decisions?	accountability
Corruption raises the cost of business because of illegal payments in what sector?	private
Some people feel that corruption actually reduces costs because it cuts what?	bureaucracy
What process is better than allowing bribes to remain in place?	Openly removing costly and lengthy regulations
Corruption changes the playing field by allowing businesses with connections to be shielded by what?	competition
Economic distortion is created by corruption in the public sector by diverting what into capital projects?	public investment
What is more plentiful in capital projects?	bribes and kickbacks
Corruption can lower what with environmental regulations?	compliance
African dictators often have what kind of bank accounts?	Swiss
What form has corruption taken in Africa?	rent extraction
In Africa, the finances are often moved where?	overseas
Which researchers studied corruption from Sub-Saharan countries from 1970 to 1996?	University of Massachusetts Amherst
The 187 billion exceeded what in these countries?	external debts
What was one of the factors for this behavior in Africa?	political instability
Where is corruption most noticeable?	countries with the smallest per capita incomes
These countries rely on foreign aid for what?	health services
In Sub-Saharan African countries, what level of government is corruption especially prevalent at?	Local
Which report described this corruption?	the 2006 World Bank Report
How many funds did not reach their intended recipients who needed medical attention?	about half
What kind of employees received payments?	ghost employees
Where were drugs siphoned off to?	the black market
In addition to ghost employees and the black market receiving drugs, what other way was money expended?	counterfeit drugs
If local corruption did not exist, there would be enough what to help the people in these countries needing medical help?	money
Corruption aids what as far as the environment is concerned?	environmental destruction
Formal legislation cannot be regulated when officials are what?	bribed
Bribes also halt unions, the protection of children in labor, and what?	social rights worker protection
When these laws are broken, corrupt countries gain what in the international market?	illegitimate economic advantage
Who has stated that apolitical food problems do not exist?	Amartya Sen
What can trigger famine conditions?	drought
While natural occurrences can cause famine, what determines the severity of it?	government action or inaction
Even if a harvest is good, food security can be crippled when a government has tendencies toward what?	kleptocracy
Along with food aid, what is most at risk in these countries?	construction
How is food aid usually directly redirected from the people it should go to?	physically diverted
Food aid can also be indirectly diverted from its intended recipients through the manipulation of what?	assessments
Substandard what is often one way for corruption to enter the construction field?	workmanship
What happens with contracts to aid corruption?	kickbacks
Recipients of aid are concerned about what?	exclusion
Those receiving aid may have connections, pay bribes or what?	forced to give sexual favors
Corrupt people may manipulate what to receive more assistance?	statistics
These types of corruption can harm what?	the public health
Along with institutions, this type of corruption can discredit what?	social relationships
Corruption can determine certain things in what kind of activities?	sports
Medical staff can affect what aspect of sports?	anti-doping controls
The difference between corruption that is public or private looks like what?	artificial
What needs to stay away from loopholes?	national anti-corruption initiatives
What do you call paying government officials to use their position in their office?	a bribe
What is the minimum amount of people that can be involved in a bribe?	two
What is it called when corruption is part of all public life?	culture of corruption
Beyond getting money, bribes are also used to cause what to others?	harm
What two types of bribery is the international community trying to get prosecuted as separate?	active and passive bribery
In some countries there is no formal deal but what that makes prosecuting bribes difficult?	mutual understanding
A bribe can include requesting, offering, giving or what of favors or money?	accepting
Bribes can be direct or what?	indirect
Selling or trading government position influence is called what?	influence peddling
Selling influence can involve third-parties and this is called what type of relation?	tri-lateral
In some situations the third-party in an influence peddling crime may be not involved or may be what?	an accessory
Where lobbying is controlled, what does it provide for consideration to determine improper influencing?	distinctive criteria
What article of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption contains distinctive criteria to determine improper influence?	article 12
Giving government jobs to supporters is called what?	Patronage
What country quickly changes most people working in government position when a new government comes into power?	Romania
What is it called when relatives are favored over other people?	nepotism
What is it called when friends are favored over other people?	cronyism
Cronyism is also when people are selected from a closed and exclusive social network, which is called what?	old boy network
Corruption also occurs when an official wants to cause some form of harm to who?	enemies
False charges can be brought against a journalist who writes about what?	politically sensitive issues
What is it called when a person is dishonest or corrupt for his own gain?	Gombeenism
Parish pump politics is also called what?	parochialism
Which crisis in Ireland involved bribery, cronyism and collusion?	Irish Banking crisis
Politicians who were at the end of their political careers were offered what kind of position with companies they were involved with politically?	senior management or committee position
Illegal interference with an election is called what?	Electoral fraud
Another term for electoral fraud is what?	voter fraud
Illegal voter registration, the miscounting of votes, and what at polls is considered voter fraud?	intimidation
When entrusted funds are stolen, it is called what?	Embezzlement
It is considered political when it involves what kind of money?	public
One form of political embezzlement is when a politician uses government resources for what use?	personal
What is the public official's share called when involved in corrupt bidding?	kickback
A contract can be given to someone who is not the best what?	bidder
What is not limited to just government officials?	Kickbacks
When groups that are antagonistic to each other form a coalition for hidden gain, it is called what?	unholy alliance
While not illegal, an unholy alliance can be more dangerous to the public than what?	patronage
When was Jinrong a police chief in this area?	1920s and 1930s
Who was a local gang ringleader in the same area?	Du Yuesheng
In addition to being a police chief, Jinrong was also what?	a gang boss
What was Noriega's government accused of being?	narcokleptocracy
What country did Noriega rule?	Panama
What country invaded Panama to capture Noriega?	United States
What is a narcokleptocracy?	government profiting on illegal drug trade
What is Noriega's first name?	Manuel
According to Thomas Jefferson, when the media is free and people are literate they are what?	safe
Who found evidence that where the media had freedom there was less political corruption?	Brunetti and Weder
Who discovered that more people reading newspapers resulted in higher political accountability?	Adserà, Boix, and Payne
About 100 countries and what else was information gathered from to show that more people reading newspapers had higher political accountability?	different states in the US.
Who discovered the correlation that congressman who have less local press coverage work less for the people who elected them?	Snyder and Strömberg
What newspaper stopped publishing in 2007?	Cincinnati Post
Who was most likely to get reelected after the Post shut down?	incumbents
Campaign spending and what fell after the Post stopped publishing?	voter turnout
What did the analysis show mixed results for?	growth of the Internet
What was disrupted by Internet growth for the press?	traditional sources of funding
How much has new types of Internet journalism replaced what has been lost in the press?	a tiny fraction
How many measures does Transparency International publish right now?	three
What is the measure that Transparency International publishes that looks at the willingness of a foreign company to pay a bribe?	Bribe Payers Index
What is the measure that it publishes that involves polling to determine the public's take on how corrupt various countries are?	CPI
When was the CPI first released?	1995
Which index studies the correlation of corruption and military in a country?	Government Defence Anti-corruption Index
How many firms throughout the world have been surveyed by the World Bank in regards to its corruption study?	over 100,000
How many dimensions of governance are measured by the Worldwide Governance Indicators?	six
One of the dimensions is the extent to which power is exercised for personal gain, which is called what?	Control of Corruption
Which organization is most notable for adopting the global coverage of these studies?	Millennium Challenge Corporation
A second set of corruption metrics has been compiled by Global Integrity and what other organization?	International Budget Partnership
When was the Global Integrity Index first published?	2004
Both companies no longer use what means of collecting of data?	public surveys
Instead of public surveys, the organizations use what to study corruption?	in-country experts
The second wave of metrics focuses on what level of corruption?	local
Unlike the first wave, the second wave does not offer what type of coverage?	worldwide
What is the British aid agency's research called?	Drivers of Change
What does Drivers of Change skip?	numbers
What does Drivers of Change promote?	understanding corruption
Public spending has risks of kickbacks, embezzlement and what?	cronyism
What type of regulations make corruption worse for public spending?	Complicated
The potential for corruption in public spending are one of the arguments that favor what?	privatization and deregulation
What countries have big public sectors but low corruption?	Nordic
What do the low corruption countries have solidly established?	rule of law
Selling government property is highly at risk for what?	cronyism
What type of people got wealthy from the sale of state-owned companies?	Those with political connections
Where is corruption even more prevalent?	non-privatized sectors
Countries that what have more extralegal and unofficial things going on?	privatized less
Providing a government service from the lowest form of local government that can adequately provide the service is called what?	principle of subsidiarity
What does distributing money into multiple instances discourage?	embezzlement
Even small amounts of public money can be a lot in what type of authority?	centralized
What is it called when higher ups in government embezzle from the government's treasury?	kleptocracy
What examples of natural resources do some corrupt officials in government take?	diamonds and oil
Some corrupt governments use what type of money coming in?	foreign aid
Foreign aid money is sometimes used to build fancy structures and to buy what?	armaments
In their pursuit of more money and power, corrupt dictators often ignore what?	economic and social problems
Who was the dictator in Zaire from 1965 to 1997?	Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko
What did Zaire used to be known as?	Democratic Republic of the Congo
What term became more popular as Mobutu ruled?	kleptocracy
Who ruled Nigeria until he died in 1998?	General Sani Abacha
What magazine had articles about Castro benefiting from corruption?	Forbes
The $900 million Forbes said Castro took may only be what of his total assets?	a portion
What is Fidel Castro's official title?	General Secretary of the Republic of Cuba
What is OAS?	Organization of American States
Additional conventions were adopted at the regional level by OAS and who?	the African Union
What organization joined at the universal level?	the United Nations Convention against Corruption
When did the United Nations Convention against Corruption join?	2003
Why is it difficult to measure corruption?	imprecise definitions of corruption
When did indices on corruption first appear?	1995
What was the first index on corruption, in 1995?	the Corruption Perceptions Index CPI
How many methods of judiciary corruption are there?	two
What part of the government controls the judiciary budget in many developing countries?	executive
What does executive branch control over judiciary money undermine?	separation of powers
What type of corruption is hard to get rid of even in developed countries?	judiciary
Radio broadcasts and what help deter corruption?	Mobile telecommunications
What country is used as an example for limited forms of communications?	Africa
Who works against corruption in India?	the anti-corruption bureau
What new ombudsman bill is being readied in India?	Jan Lokpal Bill
What decade saw international initiatives to combat corruption?	1990s
Who started the Programme of Action?	Ministers of the Council of Europe
What did the Programme of Action issue?	a series of anti-corruption standard-setting instruments
What does GRECO stand for?	Group of States Against Corruption
What is the name of the French equivalent of GRECO?	Groupe d'Etats contre la corruption
The instruments used to point out the different corrupt forms looked to see if they were rigidly domestic or what?	transnational
What language is the word dialectus from?	Latin
From what language does the word diálektos come?	Greek
What does diálektos mean in English?	discourse
How many different types of linguistic phenomena is the term dialect used to describe?	two
How many distinct ways is the term dialect used?	two
What is the common definition of dialect?	a variety of a language that is a characteristic of a particular group of the language's speakers
What is the term dialect most often applied to?	regional speech patterns
Aside from region, what is an example of a factor that may influence dialect?	social class
What is a term for a dialect particular to a social class?	sociolect
What do you call a dialect particular to a certain ethnicity?	ethnolect
What is the other definition of the term dialect?	a language that is socially subordinated to a regional or national standard language
How does a dialect stand in relation to the standard language?	subordinate to the standard language
The regional Romance languages in what country are sometimes referred to as dialects?	Italy
What are 20th century variations on standard Italian called?	regional Italian
From what language did the regional Romance languages of Italy derive?	Latin
Along with grammar and pronunciation, what distinguishes a dialect?	vocabulary
If only the pronunciation differs from the standard language, what term is sometimes used?	accent
What term is sometimes used for dialects that only differ in vocabulary?	jargons
Along with slangs, patois and pidgins, what is another type of smiilar speech variety?	argots
What is another term for a standard or standardized dialect?	standard language
The support of what groups results in a dialect being standardized?	institutions
Along with grammars and dictionaries, what publications help a dialect to become standardized?	textbooks
Standard Philippine English is a standard dialect of of what language?	English
Recognition from what body may help a dialect to become standardized?	government
What does a nonstandard dialect usually not have compared to a standard dialect?	institutional support
What language is Scouse a dialect of?	English
What was created for the sake of comparing English dialects?	The Dialect Test
Who came up with the Dialect Test?	Joseph Wright
Along with a syntax and grammar, what attribute does a dialect possess?	vocabulary
In what country is Limón Creole English spoken?	Costa Rica
On what coast of Costa Rica is Limón Creole English spoken?	Caribbean
Speakers of Limón Creole English are descended from people of what nationality?	Jamaican
What trait is the most common way of determining if languages are dialects?	mutual intelligibility
What is the term for when dialects A and B are mutually intelligible, dialect B and C are mutually intelligible, but dialects A and C are not mutually intelligible?	dialect continua
What is the definition of mutual intelligibility?	if being a speaker of one variety confers sufficient knowledge to understand and be understood by a speaker of the other
What term refers to another way in which dialects are distinguished from languages?	linguistic authority
Under the linguistic authority criteria, what is a dialect of German along with Bavarian German?	East Franconian German
Of what group of languages is Yiddish a member?	Middle High German
Why is Yiddish not a dialect of German?	a Yiddish speaker would not consult a German dictionary
According to most linguistics, who speaks a dialect?	everybody
Who developed the abstand and ausbau languages framework?	Heinz Kloss
In what year was the abstand and ausbau framework developed?	1967
What sort of unification in speech communities did the abstand and ausbau framework discuss?	politically and/or culturally
The language of the Pennsylvania Dutch is a dialect of what language?	German
What term avoids distinguishing between languages and dialects?	languoid
What is the most common way of referring to a language without making the determination of whether it's a dialect or independent language?	variety
Along with variety and languoid, what is another term used for a language without determining its independent status?	lect
With what social class it the standard dialect commonly associated?	the elite class
What social status is the term "dialect" sometimes associated with?	low
What is another term for language varieties?	dialects
What non-linguistic developments influence the status of a language?	historical and political
What dialect is the language Romansh similar to?	Lombardic alpine
What language are Mandarin and Cantonese sometimes considered dialects of?	Chinese
Why might Mandarin and Cantonese not be regarded as dialects?	mutual unintelligibility
What event is regarded as a landmark in the development of modern nationalism?	the French Revolution
If possessing a language leads to a group being regarded as a separate people, what political arrangement presumably follows?	its own independent state
What political arrangement is associated with being a dialect-speaking sub-group?	regional autonomy
Along with political controversy, what can the distinction between a language and dialect sometimes lead to?	armed conflict
Max Weinreich is a linguist of what language?	Yiddish
What does "A shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot" mean in English?	A language is a dialect with an army and navy
When did Max Weinrich write "A shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot"?	1945
When is the term 'German dialects' used in regard to the German language?	traditional regional varieties
What are traditional region varieties of German distinguished from?	the regional varieties of modern standard German
After what entities are German dialects traditionally named?	Germanic tribes
In what geographic part of Germany are dialects more common?	South
In what geographic part of Germany are dialects less frequently seen?	Northern Germany
Dialects are more frequently seen in the countryside as compared to what population centers?	cities
In what environment are dialects less common?	public
In what environment are dialects more frequently heard?	familiar
What dialect of German is spoken in Switzerland?	Swiss German
What dialect of German is rarely heard in Switzerland?	standard German
Aside from Switzerland, what country speaks a dialect related to Swiss German?	Liechtenstein
What type of language was Low German in the Middle Ages?	an ausbau language
Why are Low German varieties regarded as dialects of standard German?	they are roofed by standard German
What are Italian dialects termed in the Italian language?	dialetti
What language are many Italian dialects derived from?	Vulgar Latin
What does 'dialetti' mean in Italian?	dialects
Why might Italian dialects be regarded as independent languages rather than dialects of standard Italian?	they are not derived from modern standard Italian
What is a major reason why the Latin-based regional Romance languages of Italy should be regarded as independent languages rather than dialects of each other?	they lack mutual intelligibility
From what region of Italy does the Eastern Lombard dialect hail?	Lombardy
What language family does Eastern Lombard belong to?	Gallo-Italic
What type of language is Sicilian?	Neapolitan
What language was spoken by Lombard immigrants to Sicily?	Sicilian Gallo-Italic
What language is modern standard Italian derived from?	Florentine Tuscan
What language is Florentine Tuscan based on?	Latin
During what century did Florentine Tuscan begin to be used in poetry?	12th
What socioeconomic class used the Florentine Tuscan language in Dante's time?	upper class
From what region of Italy did Florentine Tuscan derive?	Tuscany
What Italian nationalist spoke of the importance of a national Italian language?	Alessandro Manzoni
During what period was the importance of having an Italian national language raised?	the Risorgimento
In what decade was Italy unified?	1860s
What percentage of Italians spoke standard Italian when Italy was first unified?	2.5%
When Italy was unified, what was named the official national language?	standard Italian
During what war did a large number of Italian men first learn standard Italian?	World War I
Along with radio and public education, what invention helped to diffuse standard Italian among the Italian population?	television
In modern Italy, what class of people are regional languages sometimes associated with?	lower
Along with formal settings, where do some Italians avoid speaking their regional language?	outside of one's region
Aside from when they're speaking to Italians from their same town or region, where is a common place where Italians speak their regional language?	at home with family
Regional Italian dialects are often influenced by regional languages and what other language?	standard Italian
What language family do most of the languages of Italy belong to?	Italo-Dalmatian
What language are most languages of Italy derived from?	Latin
Aside from Italo-Dalmatian, what is another term for the group that Italian languages belong to?	Romance
Campidanese Sardinian is a variant of what language?	The Sardinian language
What language is Sassarese closely related to?	Italian Tuscan
What language family does Gallurese belong to?	Italo-Dalmatian
What language family does Ligurian belong to?	Gallo-Romance
Where is the Catalan Algherese dialect spoken?	Sardinian
Along with British English, what is the major variant of the English language?	American English
What are the two major variants of Serbo-Croatian?	Serbian and Croatian
Are British and American English regarded as distinct languages, or dialects of a single language?	dialects of a single language
Do regional linguists treat Serbian and Croation as distinct languages or as dialects of a single language?	distinct languages
Why are Serbian and Croatian often treated like distinct languages?	the two countries oscillate from being brotherly to being bitter enemies
Along with Serbian, with what language is Macedonian mutually intelligible?	Bulgarian
What dialect continuum does Macedonian belong to?	South Slavic
What do Bulgarian linguists regard the Macedonian language as?	a Bulgarian dialect
In what year was a Macedonian literary standard established?	1944
In what country is Macedonian most commonly spoken?	Republic of Macedonia
Lebanese people of what religion sometimes consider Lebanese to be a distinct language?	Christian
In what language are Lebanese laws written?	Arabic
During the Lebanese Civil War, what language did Lebanese Christians sometimes use officially?	Lebanese Arabic
What language is Lebanese closely related to?	Arabic
What script did Lebanese Christians sometimes use to write Lebanese Arabic during the civil war?	Latin
Along with Morocco and Tunisia, in what country are the Darijas spoken?	Algeria
What is the liturgical language of Islam?	Literary Arabic
In what language is the Qur'an written?	Literary Arabic
What does the term Dariajs refer to?	spoken North African languages
What is the dominant religion of North Africa?	Islam
During what century did the Russian government claim that Ukrainian was a Russian dialect?	19th
What Russian government claimed that Ukrainian was not a distinct language?	the Tsarist Government
The conquest of western Ukraine by what country altered the language of Ukraine?	Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
What nation conquered Ukraine during the First World War?	The German Empire
What alliance defeated the German Empire in World War I?	the Entente
What Ukrainian political group was involved in the defeat of the German Empire?	Bolsheviks
Who did the Ukrainian Bolsheviks conquer the Ukraine from?	Whites
After what war did Moscow begin to repress the Ukrainian language?	World War II
Why did Moscow begin to repress the Ukrainian language?	Ukrainian collaborationism with the Axis powers
Why did Ukrainians collaborate with the Axis?	to gain independence
In what country is the Surzhyk dialect spoken?	Ukraine
Surzhyk is a dialect intermediate between the Ukrainian language and what other language?	Russian
Who was the president of Moldova in 1996?	Mircea Snegur
In what year was a Moldovan-Romanian dictionary published?	2003
Fear of what caused the Moldovan parliament to reject changing the name of the country's language to Romanian in 1996?	Romanian expansionism
Who was the head of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova?	Ion Bărbuţă
From what did Chinese characters derive?	logograms
What is another name for the Yue language?	Cantonese
Hakka is a language from what geographic part of China?	the south
From the time of the Ming dynasty, what city was the capital of China?	Beijing
At its founding. what was the official language of the Republic of China?	Standard Mandarin
From the perspective of historical linguists, what are Romance languages dialects of?	Latin
What do many historical linguists consider modern Greek to be a dialect of?	Ancient Greek
From what language is North Germanic derived?	Old Norse
Tok Pisin might be regarded as a dialect of what language?	English
Italian is significantly mutually comprehensible with what other Romance language?	Spanish
With what romance language does Spanish not have a high degree of mutual comprehensibility?	French
What is the reason for French and Italian not being very mutually comprehensible?	French having undergone more rapid and more pervasive phonological change
What Italian word is similar to the French word "avoir"?	avere
What French word is similar to the Italian word "essere"?	être
What two languages have the possibility for significant mutual intelligibility?	Italian and Spanish
Along with foods and family relationships, what sorts of words are similar in French and Italian?	body parts
When forming compound tenses in Spanish, what auxiliary is no longer used?	sere
What language could all Western languages be considered dialects of?	Interlingua
Researchers at what organization study and develop Interlingua?	International Auxiliary Language Association
What was the nationality of high school students who learned Interlingua in a notable linguistic experiment?	Swedish
Along with Italian and Spanish, what language could Swedish Interlingua learners translate?	Portuguese
Along with Standard Average European, from what concept was Interlingua derived?	the international scientific vocabulary
What term is used to refer to the period from 1750 to 1820?	the Classical period
What years are termed the Renaissance period?	1400–1600
What years are termed the Baroque period?	1600–1750
From 1804-1910 was called what era?	Romantic
Classical music is rooted in what kind of tradition?	Western music
Classical music is rooted the the traditions of what kind of music?	Western
What is the period from 1750 to 1820 called?	the Classical period
What time period is known at the common practice period?	between 1550 and 1900
When was the Renaissance era?	1400–1600
When was the modern era?	1890–1930
How is European art music distinguished from non-European and popular music?	its system of staff notation
What method is used by composers to prescribe to the performer the pitches, tempo, meter and rhythms for a piece of music?	Western staff notation
What popular styles practice improvisation and ad libitum ornamentation?	jazz and blues
Since it is written down, classical music can attain a high level of what?	complexity
How is European art music distinguished from many other musical forms?	its system of staff notation
How long has the system of staff notation been in use?	since about the 16th century
Jazz and blues use ad libitum and what other ornamentation?	improvisation
Classic music can a attain a high level of what?	complexity
When did the term "classical music" appear?	the early 19th century
What period is referred to as a "golden age"?	the period from Johann Sebastian Bach to Beethoven
What year is the earliest reference to 'classical music'?	1836
What book holds the earliest reference to 'classical music'?	Oxford English Dictionary
What term did not appear until the early 19th century?	classical music
What 'age' is the period from Johann Sebastian Bach to Beethoven referred to as?	golden age
What year was the earliest reference to classical music?	1836
In what book was the earliest reference to classical music?	Oxford English Dictionary
Who sang Medieval plainchant?	monks
Avant-garde atonal compositions were written for what instrument?	solo piano
What two characteristics of classical music can not be attributed to other genres?	use of a printed score and the performance of very complex instrumental works
Through what period did the symphony not exist?	the entire classical music period
What has become a defining feature of classical music?	the symphony ensemble
What did not exist through the entire classical music period?	the symphony
The use of a printed score and the performance of very complex instrumental works are characteristics of what?	classical music
Who sang medieval plainchant?	monks
J.S. Bach's fugues create a coherent harmonic logic that would be impossible for what other style of music?	live improvisation
The score determines how various parts are coordinated, pitch, and what other detail?	rhythm
What has allowed Classical musicians to perform music from many centuries ago?	written notation
Who's fugues achieve a remarkable marriage of boldly distinctive melodic lines?	J.S. Bach's
The score does not provide complete and exact instruction on how to do what?	perform a historical work
In what era were many works designed for basso continuo accompaniment?	the Baroque era
Vibrato and glissando are possible on stringed, brass, woodwind and what other style instrument?	the human voice
What are fermatas?	held notes
Classical music in the 2000s has lost most of its tradition for musical what?	improvisation
In the Baroque era, who would improvise preludes?	organ performers
Who would improvise musical ornaments in the Baroque era?	instrumental performers
Who was noted for his complex improvisations?	J.S. Bach
What was Mozart noted for?	his ability to improvise melodies in different styles
Instrument currently used in most classical music where invented before what period?	the mid-19th century
What is the most widely known medium for classical music?	The symphony orchestra
A symphony orchestra includes members of the string, woodwind, percussion and what other family of instruments?	brass
What does a symphony orchestra have that is missing from a concert band?	a string section
What practice has changed a great deal over the classical period?	vocal
What was the medieval flute made from?	wood
What was an early version of the fiddle called?	vielle
What was an early version of the trombone called?	sackbut
Medieval instrument in Europe were commonly used how?	singly
Loud, shrill, and outdoor instruments were referred to as 'haut', while quieter, more intimate instruments were referred to as what?	bas
What genre was predominately Gregorian chant during the earlier medieval period?	liturgical
What genre uses multiple independent vocal melodies?	Polyphonic vocal genres
When did the Polyphonic vocal genre begin to develop?	during the high medieval era
What word means using a single unaccompanied vocal melody line?	monophonic
Many instruments originated during what era?	the Renaissance
What has disappeared, then been recreated in order to perform music of the period?	authentic instruments
Modern day instrument may be classified as brass, string, woodwind and what other classification?	percussion
Brass instruments were traditionally played by profession guild members during what era?	the Renaissance
Stringed instruments during the Renaissance included the viol, the lyre, the cittern, the lute and what other instrument?	the hurdy-gurdy
The virginal is what type of instrument?	Keyboard instruments with strings
The tambourine, bells and rumble-pot are all what type of instrument?	Percussion
The reed pipe and recorder are what type of instrument?	Woodwind
Vocal music in the Renaissance is noted for an increasingly elaborate what?	polyphonic style
What liturgical form besides motets endured throughout the entire Renaissance period?	masses
Monody, the madrigal comedy, and intermedio are all precursors to what?	opera
The cello, contrabrass and fortepiano were new instruments during what period?	Baroque
What happened to the shawn and the wooden cornet during the Baroque period?	fell into disuse
The timpani ans castanets are what type of instrument?	Percussion
The serpent is what type of instrument?	Brass
Which string instrument often played the basso continuo parts?	theorbo
What was less standardized during the Baroque era?	the types of instruments used in ensembles
Two violins, a viola, and a cello make up what type of group?	a classical era string quartet
Keyboard instruments included the pip organ, harpsichord and what other instrument?	clavichord
What is an example of a stringed chordal instrument during the Baroque period?	a lute
From the 1750's to the early 1830's is the era of Mozart and what other composer?	Haydn
Classical music can mean all Western art music or more specifically from the 1750's to when?	the early 1830s
The broad meaning of classical music stretches back from today to what era?	the Medieval era
Classical musicians continued to use many instruments from what era?	Baroque
The theorbo and what other Baroque instrument fell into disuse?	rackett
The Baroque violin became what modern instrument?	the violin
What did the Baroque trumpet become?	the regular valved trumpet
The violin, cello, contrabass and what other instrument form the string section of the orchestra?	viola
The flute, oboe and bassoon are all what type of instrument?	Woodwinds
What instrument fell out of use after the 1760s?	the harpsichord
What instrument was the precursor of the tuba?	the ophicleide
To whom is the "standard complement" attributed to?	Beethoven
PIccolo, contrabassoon, and trombones add to the triumphal finales of what piece by Beethoven?	Symphony No. 5
How long was symphonic instrumentation faithful to Beethoven's after he died?	several decades
What did Beethoven expand in his Symphonies, 3, 5, 6 and 9?	timbral "palette"
A Piccolo and trombones provides the illusion of storm and what in Beethoven's Sixth Symphony?	sunshine
What instrument did the modern piano take over for in the Romantic era?	fortepiano
How many double bass players were typically used in the Baroque orchestra?	two
What wasn't rich enough for many Romantic composers?	the standard orchestral palette
Classical sections were expanded in the Romantic era for a fuller and bigger what?	sound
What is a celestes?	a bell-like keyboard instrument
When do saxophones first appear in scores?	the late 19th century
Saxophone was featured as a solo instrument in what Sergei Rachmaninoff piece?	Symphonic Dances
How is the saxophone features in Ravel's Bolero?	as a member of the orchestral ensemble
The euphonium usually played parts marked as what?	"tenor tuba"
Who wrote The Planets?	Gustav Holst
What is the name of the modified member of the horn family appearing in several works by Strauss?	The Wagner tuba
Which symphony of Anton Bruckner's does the Wagner tuba have a prominent role in?	Symphony No. 7 in E Major
Who wrote the ballet Swan Lake?	Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
What will orchestras use to augment their regular rosters?	freelance musicians
What Debussy piece features a cornet?	La Mer
What type of instrument appears occasionally in the 20th and 21st century styles of classical music?	Electric
What type of musicians besides classical have experimented with electronic instruments?	popular
What type of instrument is the gamelan?	electronic
In what did the bagpipe fill an important role?	early classical music,
What instrument gained prominence in the 19th and 20th century?	the acoustic guitar
Vihuelas and hurdy-gurdies are currently associated with what type of music?	popular
What type of temperament became accepted during the 18th century?	equal temperament
When did equal temperament become accepted as the dominant musical temperament?	the 18th century
What temperament is the English Renaissance performed in?	meantone temperament
What have classical trained performers done extensively?	studied classical music
What does a B.mus. or M.mus. degree include?	individual lessons from professors
To what level is training for classical music often required?	postgraduate
Performance of classical music requires proficiency in what type of reading?	sight-reading
Performance of classical music requires proficiency in what type of principles?	harmonic
Familiarty with the style expected for any given composer is required for what kind of performance?	classical music
What brothers have had significant classical training?	Van Halen brothers
Billy Joel and Elton John have both had what type of training?	classical
Rock and pop musicians may have degrees in what type of music?	commercial
What gender of musician has historically made up a large amount of professional orchestras?	male
Women were first hired in professional orchestras for what position?	harpist
What year did the Vienna Philharmonic first accept women?	1997
Which major orchestra was the last to appoint a woman to a permanent position?	the Berlin Philharmonic
Who was the principal flute for the Vienna Philharmonic in 1996?	Dieter Flury
In what year did the Vienna Philharmonic face protests in the US?	1997
Who was the first woman admitted to the Vienna Philharmonic?	Anna Lelkes
What instrument did Anna Lelkes play?	harp
How many female members were part of the Vienna Philharmonic in 2013?	six
Who was the Vienna Philharmonic's first female concertmaster?	Albena Danailova
The National Symphony Orchestra is led by what gender of violinist?	female
The double bass, brass and percussion sections are predominately what gender?	male
What type of audition are expected to eliminator gender or racial prejudice?	'blind' auditions
In what section of the New York Philharmonic do women outnumber men?	violin
Works of classical repertoire exhibit what in their use of orchestration and harmony, and form?	complexity
What is usually written in song forms?	popular styles
The concerto, symphony, sonata and opera are examples of what type of musical forms?	sophisticated
What are self-contained pieces in longer works called?	movements
How many movements are symphonies written in the Classical period usually divided into?	four
What, typically, is the speed of the second movement in a classical piece?	slow
A movement broken up further is called what?	sections
The final movement of a classical piece is usually called what?	Allegro
What period was from 500-1400?	Medieval
What years dictate the Baroque period?	1600–1750
How have periods been reckoned Since 1900?	by calendar century
What era has the 21st century has been characterized by?	the contemporary/postmodern musical era
The years 1804-1910 marked what era?	Romantic
What composer continued the counterpoint and fugue?	Haydn
Haydn is classified as typical of what era?	Classical
Who is described as a founder of the Romantic era?	Beethoven
Who is classified as Romantic, but also uses counterpoint and fugue?	Brahms
Some authorities reverse terminologies to refer to the common practice period as a what?	era
A Contemporary composition written in the style of an earlier era is described with what prefix?	neo
What century were Neoclassical compositions written in?	20th-century
Who wrote Pulcinella?	Stravinsky's
What era is Pulcinella similar to?	Classical
When does the Egyptian orchestra date to?	2695 BC
Who suggested that Western classical music is rooted to ancient Egyptian art music?	Burgh
What music followed ancient Egyptian art music?	early Christian liturgical music,
Which ancient society developed individual tones and scales?	ancient Greeks
Who helped codify musical notation?	Pythagoras
The Medieval period begins with the fall of what city?	Rome
What can Plainsong or Gregorian chant also be called?	Monophonic chant
What does Polyphonic mean?	multi-voiced
When did Monophonic chant stop being the dominant form?	1100
Polyphonic music included more complex voicing of what?	motets
When was the Renaissance era?	from 1400 to 1600
What era was from 1400 to 1600?	Renaissance
The use of the first ass instruments occurred in what era?	Renaissance
What became widespread in the Renaissance era?	Social dancing
Musical forms for dance began to standardize during what era?	Renaissance
The notation of music on a what began to take shape at this time?	staff
How was music transmitted before the invention of musical notation?	oral
What was oral music subject to every time is was transmitted?	change
What can a musical scored be performed without?	the composer's presence
When was the movable-type printing press invented?	the 15th century
The record is part of what wind family?	the flute family
The sahwm was an early family member of what instrument?	the oboe
Where were the first pipe organs confined to?	churches
When had the viol emerged by?	the 16th century
What enabled descriptions and specification of instruments?	Printing
When did many of the ideas that make up western classical music take shape?	The common practice period
What began with the Baroque era?	The common practice period
What era did the classical era follow?	Baroque era
When did the classical era end?	around 1820
When did the romantic era end?	about 1910
Basso continuo and complex tonal counterpoint characterize what type of music?	Baroque
What does basso continuo mean?	a continuous bass line
What did music become during the Baroque era  in comparison with earlier periods?	more complex
What form began to take shape during the Baroque era?	the sonata form
Major and minor what are means for managing dissonance and chromaticism?	tonalities
Keyboard music became popular during what era?	Baroque
The violin family is what type of instrument?	stringed
Opera began to differentiate itself from earlier forms as what?	staged musical drama
What became more common during the Baroque era?	vocal forms
What did vocalist add to melodies beginning in the Baroque era?	embellishments
What theories began to be put in wider practice?	equal temperament
What does equal temperament enabled in hard to tune keyboard instruments?	a wider range of chromatic possibilities
What did Bach not use?	equal temperament
A modern piano is generally what?	tuned
What system of temperaments was common during Bach's time?	meantone
When was the Classical era?	1750 to 1820
What instrument became the predominant keyboard during the classical era?	the piano
What became more standardized during the classical era?	The basic forces required for an orchestra
How many muscians, at most, could make up a chamber ensemble during the classical period?	10
What is an opera buffa?	a form of comic opera
What type of instrument became more refined during the classical era?	Wind
What is the single reed family called?	the clarinet family
What type of instrument was somewhat standardized int eh Baroque era?	double reeded
Who expanded the single reeds role?	Mozart
Increased attention to extended melodic lines characterized what era?	Romantic
When did the Romantic era end?	the early 20th century
Free-form pieces like nocturnes and preludes were a break from what era?	Classical
Tensions about what increased during the Romantic era?	key signatures
What is a name for an art song?	Lied
Who controlled musical institutions before the 19th century?	wealthy patrons
Composers and musicians began to construct lives independent of what in the 19th century?	the nobility
What class increased it's interest in music during the 19th century?	middle classes
What instrument became widely popular in the middle class in the 19th century?	The piano
The 19th century marks the foundation of many what?	symphony orchestras
To what number did the size of the orchestra grow to?	100
What size of choirs have performed Gustav Mahler's 1906 Symphony No. 8?	over 400
What size orchestras have performed Gustav Mahler's 1906 Symphony No. 8?	over 150
What allowed Brass instruments to play a wider range of notes?	rotary valves
What array of instrument grew wider?	percussion
What did European cultural ideas follow?	colonial expansion
What type of music rose toward the end of the era?	nationalism
What did nationalism in music sometime echo?	political sentiments of the time
Edvard Grieg and Antonin Dvorak used what kind of music in their compositions?	traditional music of their homelands
What style does 20th century classical music encompass?	post-Romantic
When did modernism take place?	1890–1930
Composers rejected the traditions of the common practice period during what era?	Modernism
Neo-classical music emerged during what era?	high-modern era
Postmodern music is also know as what?	contemporary music
What gender are most composers described in music textbooks?	male
Who asked why is music composed by women so marginal to the standard 'classical' repertoire?	Musicologist Marcia Citron
Why were women composers deemed not notable?	did not write many symphonies
Who is one of the only female composers mentioned?	Clara Shumann
What type of music did women composers typically write?	art songs
What type of view is that classical music is primarily written musical tradition?	modernist
Musical notation is effective for what?	transmitting classical music
Why is written musical notation effective?	contains the technical instructions for performing the work
Did student who actively listen to classical music before studying have higher or lower scores?	higher
What happened to the scores of students who listened to rock and roll or country?	moderately lower
Who experience a significant leap in their academic performance?	students who used classical during the course of study
Who conducted the research study?	University of Colorado
What years was the study conducted in?	1996–1997
Which composer had an effect named after him?	Mozart
Who wrote a book on the Mozart effect?	Don Campbell
Where was the experiment originally published?	Nature
How many IQ points of a students' does the Mozart effect temporarily boost?	8 to 9 points
How much did the Governor of Georgia budget per year to provide every child with a CD of classical music?	$105,000
What harmed the music industry in the 20th century according to Shawn Vancour?	the commercialization of classical music
Who argued that the commercialization of classical music was harmful to the music industry?	Shawn Vancour
Why was the commercialization of classical music harmful to the music industry according the Shawn Vancour?	inadequate representation.
Works from the Golden Age of music matches action to what?	classical music
Who produced Fantasia?	Walt Disney
Who starred in Johann Mouse?	Tom and Jerry
Who produced Rabbit of Seville?	Warner Bros
Who produced What's Opera, Doc?	Warner Bros
What does classical music convey in movies and television?	refinement or opulence
What piece by Vivaldi is used as a cliche to convey opulence?	Four Seasons
What piece by Mozart is used as a cliche to convey refinement?	Eine kleine Nachtmusik
Who wrote William Tell Overture?	Rossini
Who wrote Night on Bald Mountain?	Mussorgsky
What does the written score not usually contain explicitly?	instructions
Interpretations of written score is left to whom?	performers
Performers can use their knowledge of what to help interpret a written score?	the work's idiom
Improvisation is integral before what took a high significance?	the score
When did oral tradition disappear?	the 20th century
There is still controversy about how to perform works, even though scores provide what?	key elements of the music
A score-centric approach strictly emphasizes what?	block-rhythms
What once played an important role in classical music?	Improvisation
Where can a remnant of improvisation tradition be found?	cadenza
What can solo performers exhibit during a cadenza?	their virtuoso skills on the instrument
What type of performances of Baroque ear Operas require improvisation?	authentic performances
An example of improvisation in an opera is Beverly Sills variation of what movement of Handel's Giulio Cesare?	Da tempeste il legno infranto
How are staples of classical music often used?	commercially
TV commercials using Richard Strauss' Also sprach Zarathustra have now become what?	clichéd
What piece is often used in the horror genre?	"O Fortuna" of Carl Orff's Carmina Burana
Who wrote Ride of the Valkyries?	Wagner
Who wrote in the Hall of the Mountain King?	Edvard Grieg
Folk musicians are not commonly what?	classically trained
What music comes from those commonly trained by oral tradition?	folk music
Dovrak has used what type of themes to impart a nationalist flavor?	folk
Who used specific themes lifted from folk-music?	Bartók
How are performers expected to play a work due to written transmission?	in a way that realizes in detail the original intentions of the composer
When did details that composers put in their scores increase?	the 19th century
Admiration of performers for new interpretations can be seen when composers feel the performer achieve what?	a better realization of the original intent than the composer
What do classical performers often achieve?	high reputations for their musicianship
When was improvisation in classical music performance common?	the Baroque and early romantic eras
When did improvisation begin to lessened strongly?	the second half of the 19th and in the 20th centuries
What part did Mozart and Beethoven often improvise?	the cadenzas to their piano concertos
What is the name for the practice of singing strictly by the score in opera?	come scritto
Who strongly supposed ome scritto?	soprano Maria Callas
Popular music from the composer's time was incorporation into what?	Classical music
What did Brahms sometimes use in his Academic Festival Overture?	student drinking songs
What type of music was Maurice Ravel influenced by?	jazz
Who wrote The Threepenny Opera?	Kurt Weill
What type of music do certain composers acknowledge a debt to?	popular
Pachelbel's Canon has influenced popular songs since what decade?	the 1970s
What phenomenon sees classical musicians achieving success in popular music?	the musical crossover phenomenon
Baroque or Classical era influence can be seen in what modern musical style?	heavy metal
Ritchie Blackmore and Randy Rhoads play what instrument?	electric guitar
What is the largest Indo-European ethno-linguistic group in Europe?	Slavs are the largest Indo-European ethno-linguistic group in Europe.
What areas of the world do Slavs inhabit?	They inhabit Central Europe, Eastern Europe, Southeast Europe, North Asia and Central Asia.
What was colonised by the East Slavs?	The East Slavs colonised Siberia and Central Asia.
What portion of Europe's territory is inhabited by Slavic-speaking communities?	Presently over half of Europe's territory is inhabited by Slavic-speaking communities
Slavic mercenaries settled where?	Slavic mercenaries fighting for the Byzantines and Arabs settled Asia Minor and even as far as Syria.
West Slavic people consist of which nationalities?	Poles, Czechs and Slovaks
East Slavic people consist of which nationalities?	Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians
South Slavic people consist of which nationalities?	Serbs, Bulgarians, Croats, Bosniaks, Macedonians, Slovenes, and Montenegrins
West and East Slavs are sometimes combined into a single group called what?	North Slavs
*Slověninъ, plural *Slověne, is the Slavic autonym reconstructed in what?	Proto-Slavic
Old 9th century documents describing Slavs were written in what language?	Old Church Slavonic
Who wrote about the Slavs in Byzantine Greek in the 6th century?	Procopius
Procopius' contemporary Jordanes referred to the Slavs in what language?	Latin
What slavic word denotes "people who speak the same language?"	slovo
What slavic word denotes "foreign people?"	němci
Who considered *Slověninъ do be a derivation from slovo?	Roman Jakobson
Slovo, slava, and slukh all originate from what Proto-Indo-European root?	*ḱlew
The Ancient Greek κλῆς (klês - "famous") helped create what famous name?	Pericles
What three words originated from the Proto-Indo-European root *ḱlew- ("be spoken of, fame")?	he word slovo ("word") and the related slava ("fame") and slukh ("hearing")
The word Slav could be derived from what Middle English word?	sclave
The origin of what Byzantine term is disputed?	Sklavinoi
The Byzantine Greek σκλάβος sklábos "slave," which was in turn apparently derived from what?	misunderstanding of the Slavic autonym
The Byzantine term Sklavinoi was loaned into Arabic as Saqaliba by who?	medieval Arab historiographers
Who argues that the word *slava once had the meaning of worshipper?	Lozinski
Who speculates that *slava derives from a reconstructed Proto-Indo-European *(s)lawos?	S.B. Bernstein
The suffix -enin indicates what?	a man from a certain place
Who argued that the Old East Slavic Slavuta for the Dnieper River was derived from slova?	Henrich Bartek
The earliest mentions of Slavic raids are across what river?	River Danube
The earliest mentions of what may be dated to the first half of the 6th century?	Slavic raids
No archaeological evidence of a Slavic settlement in the Balkans could be securely dated before when?	c. 600 AD
There is no evidence of a Slavic settlement where before c. 600 AD?	the Balkans
The Slavs make their first appearance in Byzantine records when?	in the early 6th century
The Slavs were under what name in the early 6th century?	the Antes and the Sclaveni
According to Byzantine historiographers, tribes of Slavs emerged from what areas?	the Carpathian Mountains, the lower Danube and the Black Sea
Tribes of Slavs were invading what provinces of the Eastern Empire?	the Danubian provinces
Under whose reign did Byzantine historiographers describe Slavic tribes?	under Justinian I
Who wrote in 545 that "the Sclaveni and the Antae actually had a single name in the remote past; for they were both called Spori in olden times."?	Procopius
When did Procopius write that "the Sclaveni and the Antae actually had a single name in the remote past; for they were both called Spori in olden times."?	545
Procopius said Sclaveni and Antae were both called what?	Spori
What does Procopius describe in his writings of the Sclaveni and Antae?	their social structure and beliefs
Who did Procopius write about in 545?	the Sclaveni and the Antae
Who tells us that the Sclaveni had swamps and forests for their cities?	Jordanes
Who had swamps and forests for their cities?	the Sclaveni
A 6th-century source refers to the Sclaveni as living where?	among nearly impenetrable forests, rivers, lakes, and marshes
Who mentions a Daurentius (577–579) that slew an Avar envoy of Khagan Bayan I?	Menander Protector
Who slew an envoy of Khagan Bayan I?	Daurentius
The Slavs were asked to accept the suzerainty of whom?	the Avars
Who said, "Others do not conquer our land, we conquer theirs – so it shall always be for us."?	Daurentius
Whose envoy was slaughtered by Daurentius?	Khagan Bayan I
An uncertain relationship was held between the Slavs and who?	the Veneti
The Veneti tribe was located where?	east of the River Vistula
What name may refer both to Balts and Slavs?	Veneti
When was the relationship between the Slavs and Veneti uncertain?	in the Roman period
Slavic-speaking tribes were part of what prior to becoming known to the Roman world?	multi-ethnic confederacies of Eurasia
What were some of the multi-ethnic confederacies of Eurasia?	the Sarmatian, Hun and Gothic empires
Who started the great migration of the Slavs?	Germans
Some Slavs migrated with the movement of the Vandals to where?	Iberia and north Africa
Who were the Germanic tribes fleeing?	the Huns and their allies
When did Slavs appear on Byzantine borders?	Around the 6th century
The Slavs appeared on whose borders around the 6th century?	Byzantine borders
Where else reported Slavic settlements?	Peloponnese and Asia Minor
Where had the Slavs settled by the end of the 6th century?	the Eastern Alps
When had the Slavs settled the Eastern Alps?	By the end of the 6th century
What appeared among the Slavs when their migratory movements ended?	the first rudiments of state organizations
When did the first rudiments of state organizations appear among the Slavs?	When their migratory movements ended
Early state organizations where headed by what?	a prince with a treasury and a defense force
Noble Slavs pledged allegiance to whom?	the Frankish/ Holy Roman Emperors or the Byzantine Emperors
When did Samo become the ruler of the first known Slav state?	the 7th century
What Frankish merchant was the ruler of the first Slav state in Central Europe?	Samo
What is the oldest Slav state in Central Europe?	Carantania
When was the first Bulgarian Empire founded?	681
Bulgaria was instrumental in the spread of what to the rest of the Slavic world?	Slavic literacy and Christianity
What three free Slavic states were in the world as of 1878?	the Russian Empire, Serbia and Montenegro
When were the Russian Empire, Serbia, and Montenegro the only free Slavic states in the world?	1878
Whose official independence was declared in 1908?	Bulgaria
When were independent states as Czechoslovakia, the Second Polish Republic, and the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs established?	In 1918
Whose plan for the East entailed killing, deporting, or enslaving the Slavs?	Hitler's
What would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union?	The Nazi Hunger Plan and Generalplan Ost
The Nazi Hunger Plan and Generalplan Ost resulted in the death and imprisonment of how many people?	19.3 million civilians
What is the German word for living space?	Lebensraum
The first half of the 20th century was marked by what in Russia and the Soviet Union?	succession of wars, famines and other disasters
Who estimated the Russian population was 90 million fewer than it could have been in 1945?	Stephen J. Lee
When was the Russian population estimated to be about 90 million fewer than it could have been?	1945
What was marked by succession of wars, famines, and other disasters in the 20th century?	Russia and the Soviet Union
When did Pan-Slavism develop as a movement?	In the 19th century
Pan-Slavism became compromised when what empire started to use it as an ideology justifying its territorial conquests?	Russian Empire
The Russian Empire used what as justification for its territorial conquests?	Pan-Slavism
What notable political union of the 20th century covered most South Slavs?	Yugoslavia
When did Yugoslavia break apart?	1990s
When was the word "Slavs" used in the national anthem of the Slovak Republic?	1939–1945
When was the word "Slavs" used in the national anthem of Yugoslavia?	1943–1992
When was the word "Slavs" used in the national anthem of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia?	1992–2003
When was the word "Slavs" used in the national anthem of Serbia and Montenegro?	2003–2006
Many Slavic populations that were part of the Warsaw Pact are originally from where?	the Russian SFSR, Ukrainian SSR and Byelorussian SSR
What is the largest Slavic minority?	Russians
Where is the largest Slavic minority located?	Kazakhstan
What other Slavic minorities are in Kazakhstan?	Ukrainians, Belarusians and Poles
What movement came into prominence in the mid-19th century that emphasized the common heritage and unity of all the Slavic peoples?	Pan-Slavism
Where was the main focus of Pan-Slavism?	the Byzantine Empire, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and Venice
Who used Pan-Slavism as a political tool?	The Russian Empire
When did the Soviet Union gain political-military influence and control over most Slavic-majority nations?	between 1945 and 1948
How long did the Soviet Union retain a hegemonic role?	until the period 1989–1991
What began as an almost exclusively linguistic and philological enterprise?	Slavic studies
When were Slavic languages recognized as Indo-European?	As early as 1833
What languages were recognized as Indo-European?	Slavic languages
In 1833, Slavic languages were recognized as what?	Indo-European
What depends on what religion is usual for the respective Slavic ethnic groups?	The alphabet
Who uses the Cyrillic alphabet?	The Orthodox
Who uses the Latin alphabet?	the Roman Catholics
Other than the Roman Catholics, who else uses Latin?	the Bosniaks
What is a Latin script to write in Belarusian?	the Lacinka alphabet
What is the supposed ancestor of all Slavic languages?	Proto-Slavic
Proto-Slavic developed numerous lexical and morphophonological isoglosses with what languages?	Baltic languages
The Indo-Europeans who remained after the migrations became speakers of what?	Balto-Slavic
Who became speakers of Balto-Slavic?	Indo-Europeans
Proto-Slavic is a descendant of what?	Proto-Indo-European
Proto-Slavic is sometimes referred to as what?	Common Slavic or Late Proto-Slavic
What is defined as the last stage of the language preceding the geographical split of the historical Slavic languages?	Proto-Slavic
Old Church Slavonic manuscripts were based on the local Slavic speech of what?	Thessaloniki
What could still serve the purpose of the first common Slavic literary language?	Old Church Slavonic manuscripts
When were pagan Slavic populations Christianized?	between the 6th and 10th centuries
What religion is predominant in the East and South Slavs?	Orthodox Christianity
What religion is predominant in the West and western South Slavs?	Roman Catholicism
When did the East-West Schism begin?	11th century
The majority of contemporary Slavic populations who profess a religion are what?	Orthodox
Who is customarily divided along geographical lines into tree major subgroups?	Slavs
What three major subgroups are Slavs divided into?	West Slavs, East Slavs, and South Slavs
The Slav subgroups have had notable cultural contact with what kind of civilisations?	non-Slavic Bronze- and Iron Age
Ethnic affiliation of who has become an ideological conflict?	the Lemkos
The idea of "Carpatho-Ruthenian" nation is supported only by Lemkos residing where?	Transcarpathia and abroad
Most inhabitants of historic Moravia considered themselves as what?	Czechs
What group is considered part of the Poles?	Silesians
Most Slavic Muslims now opt for what ethnicity?	Bosniak
What two groups are considered two ethnonyms for a single ethnicity and the terms may even be used interchangeably?	Bosniak and Muslim
A small number of people declare themselves Bosniak but are not necessarily Muslim by faith within what regions?	Bosnia and Herzegovina
This identity continues to be used by a minority throughout the what former republics?	Yugoslav republics
The nationality is also declared by diasporans living where?	USA and Canada
Where are Bunjevci located?	Bačka
Where are Šokci located?	Slavonia and Vojvodina
Where are Janjevci located?	Kosovo
Where are Burgenland Croats located?	Austria
Where are Krashovans located?	Romania
What sub-groups of Slovenes are extinct?	Carantanians and Somogy Slovenes
What are the current sub-groups of Slovenes?	Prekmurians, Hungarian Slovenes, Carinthian Slovenes, Venetian Slovenes, Resians
Serbs of Croatia are mostly descendants of who?	the Grenzers
Where are Zagorci located?	northern Croatia
Where are Istrijani located?	westernmost Croatia
Where are Boduli located?	Adriatic islands
Where are Vlaji located?	hinterland of Dalmatia
What two DNA haplogroups predominate in modern Slavic peoples?	R1a1a [M17] and I2a2a
What is the frequency of Haplogroup R1a in the Sorbs?	63.39%
What is the frequency of Haplogroup R1a in Poland?	56.4%
What is the frequency of Haplogroup R1a in Ukraine?	54%
What is the frequency of Haplogroup R1a in Russia?	52%
When did Rębała and colleagues studied several Slavic populations with the aim of localizing the Proto-Slavic homeland?	2007
Who studied several Slavic populations with the aim of localizing the Proto-Slavic homeland?	Rębała
In 2007 Rębała and colleagues studied several Slavic populations with the aim of localizing what?	the Proto-Slavic homeland
Who searched for specifically Slavic sub-group of R1a1a [M17]?	Marcin Woźniak and colleagues
When did Marcin Woźniak search specifically for Slavic sub-group of R1a1a [M17]?	2010
The team that discovered M458 was led by who?	Peter Underhill
What is distinguished by the presence of Y Haplogroup N?	Pomors
Pomors are distinguished by the presence of what?	Y Haplogroup N
Y Haplogroup N are found at high rates in who?	Uralic peoples
Russians are generally similar to populations in what region?	central-eastern Europe
Pomors are also known as what?	Northern Russians
I2a1b1 is typical of what populations?	South Slavic populations
I2a1b1 is found being highest where?	Bosnia-Herzegovina
Haplogroup I2a2 is commonly found in what group of people?	north-eastern Italians
Hg I2a2 was believed to have arisen where?	west Balkans
Who has split I2a2 into two clades?	Ken Nordtvedt
When did Boris Arkadievich Malyarchuk use a sample of Czech individuals to determine the frequency of "Monigoloid" "mtDNA lineages"?	2008
Who used a sample of Czech individuals to determine the frequency of "Monigoloid" "mtDNA lineages"?	Boris Arkadievich Malyarchuk
Malyarchuk found Czech mtDNA lineages were typical of what populations?	Slavic populations
Malyarchuk said the Mongoloid component of Slavic people was partially added before the split of "Balto-Slavics" in what time period?	Malyarchuk said that other Slavs "Mongoloid component" was increased during the waves of migration from "steppe populations
Malyarchuk said that other Slavs "Mongoloid component" was increased during the waves of migration from what populations?	steppe populations
DNA from how many Russians show that the Y chromosomes fall into seven major haplogroups all characteristic to West Eurasian populations?	1228
DNA samples from 1228 Russians show that the Y chromosomes analyzed, all except 20 (1.6%) fall into seven major haplogroups all characteristic to what populations?	West Eurasian
Taken together, they account for what percentage of the total Russian Y chromosomal pool?	95%
What percentage fell into haplogroups that are specific to East and South Asian populations?	0.7%
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) examined in Poles and Russians revealed the presence of what major haplogroups?	European
What is the posulated homeland region of the Slavs?	Ukraine
Who did the Slavs have contact with in Ukraine?	Iranic Sarmatians and the Germanic Goths
After their subsequent spread, they began assimilating who?	non-Slavic peoples
What peoples where in the Balkans?	Paleo-Balkan peoples
Who vanished from the population of the Balkans?	The Thracians and Illyrians
Where did South Slavs and Germanic Gepids intermarried with Avar invaders?	In the Western Balkans
In the Western Balkans, South Slavs and Germanic Gepids intermarried with who?	Avar invaders
In Central Europe, the Slavs intermixed with who?	Germanic and Celtic
The eastern Slavs intermixed with who?	Uralic and Scandinavian peoples
Scandinavians (Varangians) and Finnic peoples were involved in the early formation of what state?	the Rus' state
Who settled in parts of England?	Polabian Slavs (Wends)
Where did Polabian Slavs (Wends) settle?	parts of England (Danelaw)
Polabian-Pomeranian Slavs are also known to have even settled where?	Norse age Iceland
What refers to the Slavic mercenaries and slaves in the medieval Arab world in North Africa, Sicily and Al-Andalus?	Saqaliba
Saqaliba served as what?	caliph's guards
Cossacks came from what backgrounds?	Tatars and other Turks
Many early members of the Terek Cossacks were what?	Ossetians
What religious affiliation did the Cossacks have?	Orthodox Christians
Where did the Gorals reside?	southern Poland and northern Slovakia
Who descended from Romance-speaking Vlachs?	Gorals
When did the Vlachs migrate into the region?	14th to 17th centuries
What population descended from the Vlachs?	Moravian Wallachia
Slavs that remained in the Carpathian basin were assimilated into who?	the Magyar or Romanian population
There is a large number of river names and other placenames of Slavic origin in what country?	Romania
Majority of Slavs continued south to the riches of the territory that became what country?	Bulgaria
Where did the Slavs that assimilated into the Magyar or Romanian population remain?	Carpathian basin
What's the estimated population of Southampton?	253,651
What could you call someone who lives in Southampton?	Sotonian
In what ceremonial county is Southampton located?	Hampshire
How many miles away from London is Southampton?	75
In which direction would you travel from Portsmouth to reach Southampton?	north-west
What is the big retail shopping center in Southampton called?	WestQuay
In what month of 2014 did Southampton's City Council give the go-ahead for WestQuay Watermark?	October
What war is Southampton often associated with?	World War II
What company owns WestQuay Watermark?	Hammerson
By the end of 2016, how many people are projected to be working onsite at WestQuay Watermark?	1,550
What other city merged with Southampton after the 2001 census?	Portsmouth
What's the other name for South Hampshire?	Solent City
In the 2011 census, what was the population of Southampton after it merged with Portsmouth?	855,569
What metropolitan area is Portsmouth a part of?	South Hampshire
What is the estimated minimum population of South Hampshire?	1.5 million
What year did the Romans invade Britain?	AD 43
What ancient settlement was established after Rome invaded and the Britons were conquered?	Clausentum
According to evidence found, in what archaeological age were there first inhabitants in the area of Southampton?	stone age
What is the site of Clausentum called now?	Bitterne Manor
In addition to two ditches, what was Clausentum's defense from invaders?	a wall
What people established a settlement in what is now the St. Mary's area of Southampton?	Anglo-Saxons
What name did the Anglo-Saxons give their settlement first?	Hamwic
What name did Hamwic have in the interim as it was evolving into Hampton?	Hamtun
What county in England was named after Hampton?	Hampshire
What river separated Hamwic from the home of previous settlers?	Itchen
What kind of raids disturbed Hamwic in the 9th century?	Viking
What year did the Vikings start attacking Hamwic?	840
In what century was a new settlement set up at the site of Hamwic?	10th
What was the name of the 10th-century fortified settlement that took Hamwic's place?	Southampton
In what year did the Norman Conquest take place?	1066
What was the capital of England during the time of the Norman Conquest?	Winchester
Southampton was important to transit between Winchester and what other region in England in the 11th century?	Normandy
In what century was Southampton Castle built?	12th
During the 13th century, what did Southampton get in trade for English cloth and wool?	French wine
Ruins of merchants' homes that survive today are evidence that Southampton had rich people in what century?	12th
What plague made it to England because of all the ships visiting Southampton in the 14th century?	Black Death
What year did the Black Death arrive in England for the first time?	1348
In addition to King John's House, what's the name of another rich merchant's dwelling that still partly remains?	Canute's Palace
Who led the invasion of Southampton in the 14th century by the French and others?	Charles Grimaldi
What principality did Grimaldi set up with the profits from plundering Southampton?	Monaco
What year did Edward III show up in Southampton and tell them to build walls?	1339
How many of the original towers from Southampton's walls are still standing?	13
The oldest section of the original wall around the town dates from what year?	1175
What's the name of the wall tower that was the first of its kind in England built for artillery purposes?	God's House Tower
In what year was the God's House Tower built?	1417
What museum was located in God's House Tower until 2011?	Museum of Archaeology
Which king of England directed new fortifications that helped Southampton rely less on its wall?	Henry VIII
In what century did Southampton complete construction of the wall around the city?	15th
The only remaining piece of the motte and bailey castle can be seen near what modern Southampton street?	Castle Way
About what year was the Franciscan friary established in Southampton?	1233
What year did Southampton's Franciscan friary shut down?	1538
In what decade were the leftovers of the Southampton friary destroyed?	1940s
What landmark now sits on the site of the Franciscan friary in Southampton?	Friary House
In what year was the friars' water supply system built in Southampton?	1290
Where was the water brought from by the friars' supply system?	Conduit Head
What year did the friars start letting the rest of Southampton use the water from their system?	1310
When was ownership of the medieval water supply system given to the town of Southampton?	1420
What's the name of the landmark on Commercial Road where remains of the friars' water system can be seen?	Conduit House
What war was taking place in the 1640s in England?	English Civil War
What year did a Parliamentary garrison enter Southampton?	1642
What is the furthest town the Royalists reached during their advance into Southampton in 1644?	Redbridge
In what month of 1644 did the Royalists fail to take Redbridge?	March
What skilled trade was a central industry for Southampton in the Middle Ages?	shipbuilding
What's the name of the famed warship built in Southampton for Henry V?	HMS Grace Dieu
What was the name of the man who overhauled block-making to mechanize the process?	Walter Taylor
Between 1904 and 2004, what shipbuilding company employed a large portion of Southampton?	Thornycroft
In what historical period did Walter Taylor's improvements on block-making play an important role?	Industrial Revolution
What battle did King Henry leave for in 1415?	Battle of Agincourt
What group did the men accused of high treason, including Henry Scrope and Sir Thomas Grey, lead?	Southampton Plot
What is the public house where the men from Southampton Plot were tried called now?	Red Lion
What was the Earl of Cambridge's first name?	Richard
Outside of what structure did the execution of the Southampton Plot leaders take place?	the Bargate
What did the military use Southampton for during wars in the 18th century?	embarkation
In addition to wars with the French and the Boer War, in which notable war in the 18th century did Southampton play a role?	the Crimean war
What war won Southampton the title of No. 1 Military Embarkation port?	the Great War
What group of people in addition to wounded soldiers from the Great War often were brought to Southampton for treatment?	POWs
In what year did Southampton lead preparations for the Invasion of Europe?	1944
When did Southampton turn into a spa town?	1740
Despite not having a good beach, what decade saw  Southampton become popular for sea bathing?	1760s
Where in Southampton were special baths filled by seawater constructed?	West Quay
What change in flow of the sea controlled the innovative baths at West Quay?	the tide
In what historical period did Southampton expand greatly?	Victorian era
What year was the Southampton Docks company created?	1835
In what month of 1838 was stone laid for the foundation of the Southampton docks?	October
What year did the railroad to London from Southampton open fully?	1840
What name did Southampton earn for its importance in creating a link to London?	The Gateway to the Empire
Who wrote "The Cruise of the Steam Yacht North Star"?	John Choules
What town did Choules say had the only Main Street more beautiful than Southampton's?	Oxford
How long was Southampton's High Street as described by Choules?	one mile and a half
What adjective did Choules use to describe the shops of Southampton's High Street?	elegant
Choules complimented the streets of Southampton for being kept in what condition?	clean
What famous ship left Southampton's port carrying the Pilgrim Fathers?	Mayflower
What year did the Mayflower set sail from Southampton?	1620
How many crew members out of every five on the RMS Titanic were Sotonians?	Four
What company operated passenger ships across the Atlantic, including the RMS Queen Elizabeth?	Cunard
In what year did Southampton Container Terminals open?	1968
Who designed the Supermarine Spitfire?	R J Mitchell
What area of Southampton did Mitchell hail from?	Portswood
What color is the plaque that marks the Spitfire designer's house?	blue
In what month of 1940 did bombs destroy the factory that made Mitchell's seaplanes?	September
Which forces did Southampton supply after D-Day that made it a target for many Luftwaffe air raids?	Allied forces
How many people died because of the bombs dropped on Southampton?	630
In addition to casualties, about how many people were wounded by air raids on Southampton?	2,000
Was it hundreds or thousands of buildings in Southampton that sustained damage from air raids?	thousands
What style of architecture partially survived the war?	Georgian
Southampton has been redeveloped almost entirely in the years since which war?	World War II
In which decade did there start to be a lot of traffic in Southampton?	1920s
Some of the walls around which landmark were demolished in the 1930s?	the Bargate
What document declared the upgrade of University College at Highfield?	Royal Charter
What is the new name of University College at Highfield?	University of Southampton
When did Southampton officially become a city?	1964
In what year did the Royal Charter give the University of Southampton its name?	1952
In what year did an act establish the Hampshire County Council?	1888
What organization did the new county council share governance of Southampton with?	the Corporation in Southampton
What year was the county of Hampshire officially named?	1959
Even before it was official, Hampshire was often called Hampshire or what ancient variation of the name?	Hantscire
What designation was Southampton given in 1974?	non-metropolitan district
Southampton's history of administrative independence dates back to the reign of which king?	King John
What was the annual fee paid by the burgesses of Southampton for the rights of custom and toll laid out in the charter of 1199?	£200
In the 1100s, the port of Southampton included everything between Lymington and what area?	Langstone
Under what king was a charter granted in 1446/7 that separated Southampton and Portsmouth from Hampshire?	Henry VI
What date was the charter regarding Southampton's tax farm signed at Orival?	29 June 1199
What king's charter recognized Southampton as its own county?	Charles I
What year did Southampton receive the charter naming it 'The Town and County of the Town of Southampton'?	1640
What era in history saw local government begin setting up County Councils in the area?	Victorian period
After 1888, which Council took over some governance of Southampton Town?	Hampshire County Council
What was the year that Queen Elizabeth II's charter created the City and County of the City of Southampton?	1964
What county did the city of Southampton become administratively independent of in April of 1997?	Hampshire County
What official designation did Southampton receive in the April 1997 local government reorganization?	unitary authority
What act was responsible for the reorganization of local government on April 1, 1997?	1992 Local Government Act
What ceremonial county does Southampton still belong to?	Hampshire
How many concillors sit on Southampton's City Council?	48
How man wards are there in Southampton?	16
How many councillors are assigned to each ward in Southampton?	3
In what month are council elections held?	May
In how many years of every four is a council election held in Southampton?	three
How many representatives does Southampton have in parliament?	three
What is Royston Smith's constituency?	Southampton Itchen
Who is Southampton Test's member of parliament?	Dr. Alan Whitehead
To what political party does Caroline Nokes belong?	Conservative
Which directional area of Southampton does Dr. Alan Whitehead represent?	west
How many cities or towns are there in all of England and Wales with a ceremonial sheriff acting as the Mayor's deputy?	16
Who's the current Mayor of Southampton?	Linda Norris
What's the name of the 578th sheriff of Southampton?	Catherine McEwing
When did John Melody, the town crier of Southampton, pass away?	2014
How many decibels was John Melody able to reach in his cry?	104
What city in France does Southampton City Council have a twinning link with?	Le Havre
Which Italian city did Southampton City Council establish a twinning link with in 2002?	Trieste
What's the only city in the USA with a twinning link to Southampton City Council?	Hampton, Virginia
What year did Southampton City Council link with Busan, South Korea?	1978
In what country does Southampton City Council have a twinning link with Rems-Murr-Kreis?	Germany
At which tip of Southampton Water is Southampton located?	northern
What river converges with the Test?	Itchen
Which river is excellent for salmon fishing?	Test
Which river splits the city of Southampton into an east section and a west section?	Itchen
What Southampton area is located between the Itchen and Test rivers?	The city centre
What's the name of the public quay that's been in Southampton since the 13th century?	Town Quay
In what decade were the Eastern Docks that can be seen today created?	1830s
What company commissioned the program that created the Western Docks?	Southern Railway Company
What body of water was dredged for the material used for reclamation?	Southampton Water
In what decade did the Southern Railway Company commission the program that created the Western Docks?	1930s
How many high tide peaks does Southampton Water get?	two
What island do many people think causes the double high tide in Southampton Water?	Isle of Wight
What body of water is actually responsible for the unusual double high tide?	English Channel
What size ships can move through Southampton Water more easily because of the double high tide?	large
In addition to its shape, what property of the English Channel affects water flow in Southampton Water?	depth
Along which border of Southampton does the River Test run?	western
What forest is on the opposite bank of the River Test from Southampton?	New Forest
What motorway crosses the River Test to the North?	the M27
Where was the first bridge built across the River Itchen?	Mansbridge
What bridge at Swaythling crosses at the point between the tidal and non-tidal sections of the River Itchen?	Woodmill Bridge
What's the largest park in Southampton?	Southampton Common
How many hectares is Southampton Common?	148
What wildlife center is located in Southampton Common?	Hawthorns Urban Wildlife Centre
What related attraction was at the same site before the Urban Wildlife Centre?	Southampton Zoo
How many Local Authorities are there in England?	354
In addition to the Thornhill and Townhill Park districts, what other district has a council estate?	Weston
What's Southampton's ranking on the list of most deprived Local Authorities in England?	96th
What kind of climate does Southampton have?	oceanic
For what month does Southampton hold the UK's record high temperature?	June
What was the record high temperature for June in degrees Celsius?	35.6
What year did Southampton set the record high temperature for June?	1976
What does the record-setting 35.6 degrees Celsius convert to in degrees Fahrenheit?	96.1
What source of geothermal power sits below Southampton's center?	hot water aquifer
In what region of Southampton is the geothermal power station for the aquifer?	West Quay
Which section of the city receives hot water from geothermal power through the West Quay plant?	Southampton District Energy Scheme
What utility company sponsored a carbon emissions survey in 2006?	British Gas
In the 2006 study, Southampton was discovered to be one of the lowest carbon emitters out of major cities in what large geographical area?	United Kingdom
What race makes up the vast majority of Southampton's population?	White
What percentage of the population of Southampton is Black, according to the 2001 Census?	1.0
Going by the 2001 Census, what percentage of Southampton's population is of mixed race?	1.5
What percentage of the white population did the 2001 Census show were White Irish?	one
According to the 2001 Census, what race comprises 3.8% of people living in Southampton?	South Asian
In 2011, what was the estimated population of Southampton inside city limits?	236,900
What nationality of people makes up a large portion of Southampton residents?	Polish
What's the highest estimate of the Polish population of the city of Southampton?	20,000
Are there more males or females in Southampton?	males
What age range contains the most people from Southampton?	20–24
How many people between the ages of 30 and 34 live in Southampton?	17,800
How many women live in Southampton?	117,400
What's the only monocentric city on the South Coast larger than Southampton?	Plymouth
By what percentage did the population of Southampton increase from 1996 to 2004?	4.9
What's the only other city in England besides Portsmouth more densely populated than Southampton?	London
What organization anticipated an additional 2% population growth from 2006 to 2013?	Hampshire County Council
What age segment of the population of Southampton is projected to increase the most?	the elderly
How many more residents would Southampton have if the population grew by 2%, as the council expected?	4,200
How many jobs were there in Southampton in March of 2007?	120,305
How many Southampton residents were claiming job seeker's allowance in March, 2007?	3,570
In March 2007, what percentage of Southampton residents claimed job seeker's allowance?	2.4
What England's average percentage for people claiming job seeker's allowance?	2.5
What sector provides about a quarter of Southampton's available jobs?	health and education
What percentage of available jobs in Southampton are in the property/other business sector?	19
What's the third largest sector providing jobs in Southampton?	wholesale and retail
By what percentage did available jobs increase in Southampton between 1995 and 2004?	18.5
What percentage of available jobs in Southampton are in wholesale and retail industries?	16.2
What was Southampton's average annual salary in January of 2007?	£22,267
How far below the national average is the average annual salary in Southampton?	£1,700
How far below England's South East region is Southampton's average annual salary?	£3,800
About how much of UK's passenger traffic did Southampton handle during the inter-war period?	half
What kind of passenger ships make up a lot of the traffic in the port of Southampton?	cruise ships
Going by what unit of measurement makes Southampton the fourth largest port in the UK?	tonnage
In what year did Southampton's fourth cruise terminal open in the western docklands?	2009
What branch of the Department for Transport has its headquarters in Southampton?	Marine Accident Investigation Branch
What century saw more diverse industries come to Southampton?	20th
Southampton's range of industries includes the manufacture of cars and what other transport?	aircraft
What kind of engineering does industry in Southampton support?	electrical
Along with the docks and grain mills, what crop has been processed in Southampton for a long time?	tobacco
How many people in the Southampton area receive hospital services from University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust?	500,000
How many people in the South of England rely on the NHS Foundation Trust's specialist services?	3 million
What type of service does the NHS Foundation Trust provide at the Countess Mountbatten House?	palliative care
What hospital is the Countess Mountbatten House a part of?	Moorgreen Hospital
In what village is Moorgreen Hospital located?	West End
What's the name of the UK's national mapping agency?	Ordnance Survey
What year did Ordnance Survey's new headquarters open in Southampton?	2011
What company said it is planning to move marine operations to the University of Southampton?	Lloyd's Register Group
What area of Southampton holds a Ford assembly plant?	Swaythling
Which model does Ford manufacture in their Southampton plant?	Transit
What's the largest retail center in Southampton?	WestQuay Shopping Centre
What's WestQuay's ranking among the largest retail centers in the UK?	35th
What was the name of the third phase of West Quay development that got put on hold because of the recession?	Watermark Westquay
What year did work resume on the development of Watermark Westquay?	2015
What popular Swedish company opened a new store in the West Quay site in 2009?	IKEA
What type of tall buildings are being planned on Southampton's waterfront?	skyscrapers
How many stories tall will each of the three proposed towers be?	23
What marina in Southampton may get a 15-story high hotel?	Ocean Village
What factor is very strong in Southampton that encourages redevelopment of the city?	economy
What's the projected budget of the development plan that includes the new hotels?	£100m
Going by 2004 calculations, how much does Southampton contribute to the region's economy each year?	£4.2 bn
What sector puts up most of Southampton's economic contribution?	the service sector
In 2004, Southampton's contribution to the regional economy had almost doubled from what it was in what year?	1995
What museum reopened on July 30th, 2011 after a huge renovation?	Tudor House Museum
What's the name of the museum located in one of Southampton's tower walls?	God's House Tower
What's the name of the aviation museum in Southampton?	Solent Sky
What's the impressive budget of the SeaCity Museum?	£28 million
What organization invested half a million pounds in the SeaCity Museum?	the National Lottery
In what month each year is the Southampton Boat Show held?	September
What waterfront park hosts the Boat Show?	Mayflower Park
When was the Boat Show first held in Mayflower Park?	1968
What Southampton festival culminates in the Boat Show?	Sea City
Attendees of the Boat Show can expect to see at least how many exhibitors?	600
What's the biggest theatre in Southampton?	Mayflower Theatre
How many people can the Mayflower Theatre hold?	2,300
What was the former name of the Mayflower Theatre?	the Gaumont
What famous ballet company has performed at the Mayflower?	English National Ballet
Which Southampton theatre won The Stage Award for Best Regional Theatre for 2015?	Nuffield Theatre
What gallery in Southampton houses a Designated Collection?	The Southampton City Art Gallery
What's the all-lowercase named arts organization in charge of the art gallery in Southampton's Bargate?	a space
What project, also run by a space, showcases art in Southampton's medieval buildings?	Art Vaults
What art gallery is a part of Southampton Solent University?	The Millais Gallery
In addition to the Mayflower Theatre, what's Southampton's other big venue for live music?	the Guildhall
What legendary band with a color in its name has played at the Guildhall?	Pink Floyd
What orchestra with a name that starts with "B" has played at the Guildhall?	Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra
What choir from the area has sung at the Guildhall?	Southampton Philharmonic Choir
What nightclub in Southampton was nominated for the UK's best small nightclub?	Junk
What genre of music is featured at Junk?	dance
What small music venue in Southampton is named after an aquatic mammal?	the Dolphin
What popular RnB singer hails from Southampton?	Craig David
What's the name of the Coldplay drummer from Southampton?	Will Champion
What group did Southampton's Rob Skipper sing for?	Holloways
What band that broke up in 2014 was formed in Southampton?	Kids Can't Fly
What genre of music is James Zabiela known for?	dance
What program with a direction in its name does the BBC broadcast from Southampton?	South Today
What's the name of the local ITV division?	Meridian
Where is the Meridian headquarters located?	Whiteley
What is the local television channel for Southampton called?	That's Solent
Towards the end of what year did That's Solent begin broadcasting?	2014
How many community FM radio stations are there in Southampton?	2
What local FM station won the Queens Award?	Unity 101 Community Radio
What's the new name of the station formerly known as The Saint?	The Breeze
What genre of music is played on The Breeze?	Hot adult contemporary
What was the old name of Heart Hampshire?	Ocean FM
What's Southampton University's radio station called?	SURGE
What kind of music does Wave 105 play?	adult contemporary
What's the nickname of the Southampton Football Club?	The Saints
What stadium has been home to The Saints since 2001?	St Mary's Stadium
What year did Southampton Football Club first reach the top level of English football?	1966
Who did The Saints beat in 1976 to win the FA Cup?	Manchester United
What league did Southampton Football Club become founding members of in 1992?	the Premier League
Local Southampton football leagues have what day of the week in their names?	Sunday
How many local Sunday football leagues does Southampton have?	two
What's the name of the local league with "City" in its name?	City of Southampton Sunday Football League
What's the name of the the local league with "District" in its name?	Southampton and District Sunday Football League
At what venue does the Hampshire County Cricket Club play?	the Rose Bowl
What part of the city is the Rose Bowl in?	West End
Besides the County Cricket Ground, at what other cricket ground did the Hampshire County Cricket Club used to play?	the Antelope Ground
Besides the Hampshire County Cricket Club, what's the name of the other cricket league in Southampton?	the Southampton Evening Cricket League
What's Southampton's hockey club named?	Southampton Hockey Club
What year was Southampton Hockey Club founded?	1938
How many senior men's teams does the hockey club field each week?	7
Weekly, how many senior ladies teams does Southampton Hockey Club field?	5
How old do kids need to be to play in the hockey club?	6
What's the oldest rugby team in Southampton?	Trojans RFC
What division was Trojans RFC promoted to in 2008-9?	London South West 2
What famous player from Trojans RFC also played for the Leicester Tigers?	Anthony Allen
What position did Allen play for the Leicester Tigers?	centre
What division do the Tottonians belong to?	London South West division 2
What feature does Southampton have plenty of that provides for water sports and yachting?	marinas
What race named after a car company used to be hosted in Southampton?	the Volvo Ocean Race
What was the former name of the Volvo Ocean Race?	the Whitbread Around the World Yacht Race
Which marina in Southampton hosted the yacht race from 1977 too 2001?	Ocean Village marina
What facility is the center of Southampton's public sports and outdoor activities?	Southampton Sports Centre
How many additional leisure venues are run by Council executives?	11
What company did the Council leisure executives sell operating rights to?	Park Wood Leisure
What magazine awarded Southampton "fittest city in the UK" in 2006?	Men's Fitness
How many spots did Southampton lose in the "fittest city" rankings for 2007?	one
Who was the "fittest city in the UK" ahead of Southampton in 2007?	London
During the pre-war period, where was speedway racing held?	Banister Court Stadium
What year did Banister Court Stadium close its doors for good?	1963
What College American Football team calls Southampton home?	Southampton Stags
At what sports venue do the Southampton Stags play?	Wide Lane Sports Facility
Where is the Wide Lane Sports Facility located?	Eastleigh
Who is responsible for policing Southampton?	Hampshire Constabulary
How much did it cost to build the operations base of Southampton's police service?	£30 million
On what street in Southampton is the police headquarters for the city?	Southern Road
What year did the brand new, eight-story police headquarters open?	2011
What train station is close to the police force's building?	Southampton Central
Who handles fires in Southampton?	Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service
How many fire stations are there in Southampton city limits?	three
Along with Hightown and Redbridge, what's the third fire station in Southampton?	St Mary's
How many crimes overall are reported for each 1,000 people in Southampton?	202
Did Hampshire Constabulary record fewer or more crime incidents in 2009/10 than the year before?	fewer
For how many consecutive years has violent crime in Southampton decreased?	three
Is Southampton's crime rate higher or lower than the national average?	higher
Which statistics are debated because of the different ways various police forces record crime?	comparative crime statisitics
Is Southampton's higher education sector weak or strong?	strong
What's the combined student population of the two major universities in Southampton?	over 40,000
What's the name of the institution of higher learning with "Solent" in its name?	Southampton Solent University
What year was the University of Southampton founded?	1862
When did the University of Southampton receive university designation by official Royal Charter?	1952
The University of Southampton has more than what number of students attending?	22,000
What research centre at the University of Southampton is abbreviated NOCS?	National Oceanography Centre, Southampton
What organization ranked the University of Southampton in the top 80 universities worldwide in 2010?	THES - QS World University Rankings
How many students attend Southampton Solent University?	17,000
What specialized academy does Southampton Solent University host?	Warsash Maritime Academy
In addition to international shipping, what other industry does the Warsash Maritime Academy prepare students for?	off-shore oil
How many standalone sixth form colleges are there in Southampton?	two
What college of further education offers vocational courses and ESOL programs?	Southampton City College
What courses does Southampton City College offer to adult students?	Access courses
What college with the initials BPC is outside of the city but still popular with students from Southampton?	Barton Peveril College
What's the sixth form college named after a person?	Richard Taunton Sixth Form College
More than what percentage of the students surveyed said they'd been bullied?	40
About how many pupils took the bullying survey?	2,000
What specific form of bullying did the survey show was most common?	verbal
What was the second most common form of bullying experienced by boys who took the survey?	physical
Which level of schools in Southampton are the worst behaved in the UK?	secondary
How many times the national average are the suspension rates at Southampton's secondary schools?	three
Out of about every 14 students, how many will be suspended from school?	1
In addition to physical attacks, what other kind of assault do Southampton's students commit against staff more than anywhere else in the country?	verbal
Which motorway located north of Southampton links up England's south coast?	M27
Which motorway connects Southampton to London?	M3
What city is located on the A34 where the M3 connects to the North and Midlands?	Winchester
What spur of the M27 connects it to Southampton's city centre and Western Docks?	M271
Are Southampton's transport routes around the UK good or bad?	good
Southampton's railways provide freight services and what other important services?	passenger services
What's the name of the main train station in Southampton?	Southampton Central
Heading east from Southampton, what city is connected by rail?	Portsmouth
In which direction do trains run from Southampton to Winchester?	north
In what year did the rail route from Southampton to London open?	1840
In addition to the southern and eastern sections of Southampton, what other section has local train service?	central
What company operates Southampton's local train service?	South West Trains
What organization announced plans for rail expansion in Southampton in July of 2009?	Hampshire County Council
In what year did a proposal to expand light rail service to Portsmouth and Gosport fail?	2005
What's the current destination of the freight-only line the Hampshire County Council wants to use to expand passenger service?	Fawley
What competing railway company tried to open a rail route in the 1880s?	Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway
In which direction did the Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway want to expand?	North
What feature survives in the Hill Lane area as evidence of the Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway's work?	embankment
In what town is Southampton Airport located?	Eastleigh
What direction would one travel from Southampton to get to the airport in Eastleigh?	north
If passengers don't want to take a train to the airport, what other transport is available?	bus
To take a train to Southampton Airport, what railway station would you need to go through?	Southampton Airport (Parkway)
What cruise line has its headquarters in Southampton?	Carnival Corporation & plc
Besides Carnival, what other major cruise line parks its record-breaking cruise ships in Southampton Water?	Royal Caribbean
In addition to P&O Cruises and Cunard Line, what other brand does Carnival Corporation own?	Princess Cruises
What brand of cruise ships has a special importance to Southampton?	Cunard Line
What was the name of the liner that left Southampton on its final journey on November 11, 2008?	RMS Queen Elizabeth 2
Who christened the Cunard ship Queen Victoria in December 2007?	HRH The Duchess of Cornwall
In what year did the Queen Elizabeth receive its name from the Queen?	2011
What ship did the Duchess of Cambridge christen on June 13, 2013?	Royal Princess
What does Southampton call the event when three ships named after queens all visit the city?	Arrival of the Three Queens
Which of the "Three Queens" has a number in its name?	Queen Mary 2
Along with the Queen Mary 2 and Queen Victoria, which third ship must be present for the 'Arrival of the Three Queens'?	Queen Elizabeth
What cruise line celebrated a landmark anniversary in Southampton in July of 2012?	P&O Cruises
Which anniversary did P&O celebrate in Southampton?	175th
How many P&O liners visited Southampton on the day of the 175th anniversary celebrations?	seven
Which of the seven P&O cruise liners has a name that begins with "V"?	Ventura
Along with the Oriana, what's the other P&O liner with a name that starts with the same letter?	Oceana
How many internal ferry services does Southampton serve?	three
What is the name of the quay where all three ferries have their terminals?	Town Quay
How many of the ferries connect to the Isle of Wight?	Two
What company operates the ferries to East Cowes and Cowes?	Red Funnel
What body of water does the Hythe Ferry cross to reach Hythe from Southampton?	Southampton Water
In what decade was the ferry port built in Southampton to carry people to exotic destinations on the continent?	1960s
By what year did car ferries finish operating from Southampton, other than the one to the Isle of Wight?	1996
What was built on the site where the Southampton Ferry Port used to be?	a retail and housing development
What has the Princess Alexandra Dock become?	a marina
What location that was once filled with passengers, dry docks, and trains is now a holding area for new cars?	Eastern Docks
What form of public transport do most people in Southampton use now?	Buses
Along with First Southampton, what is the other main bus operator in Southampton?	Bluestar
What bus service did the University of Southampton commission to carry people between the city and the university?	Uni-link
What time does Uni-link stop service to the university each night?	midnight
What operator ran Uni-link before Bluestar?	Enterprise
What road does First use stops around to leave a terminal available for other buses?	Pound Tree Road
Which bus service passes West Quay going in both directions?	Uni-link
What operator drops off and picks up passengers at West Quay?	Wilts & Dorset
When did the tram system stop operating in Southampton?	1949
Where do buses that loop around West Quay stop?	Hanover Buildings
Who are the actors in international law?	sovereign states and international organizations
What is an agreement entered into by actors in international law?	A treaty
How are different forms of agreements treated under international law compared to treaties?	equally
How would you compare the rules of a treaty and a covenant under international law?	the rules are the same
What must a party to a treaty do to prevent being held liable under international law?	live up to their obligations
What is comparable in domestic law to a treaty in international law?	contracts
Under what will a party to a treaty be held liable for failing to uphold their obligations?	international law
What must be the attitude of a party towards assuming the legal obligations of the treaty?	willing
What do we call the willingly-assumed burdens placed upon parties to both treaties and contracts?	obligations
How are the agreements in a treaty expressed?	in words
How are states that enter into a treaty bound?	legally
What is an official document which expresses an agreement between two states?	A treaty
What is an objective outcome of a ceremonial occasion which acknowledges the defined relationships of its parties?	A treaty
Who is responsible for the legally-bound obligations of the parties to a treaty?	themselves
What is shared by most treaties since the late 19th century?	a fairly consistent format
What is the beginning of a typical treaty called?	a preamble
Why are long sentences in a modern preamble formatted into multiple paragraphs?	readability
Each paragraph of a modern preamble typically begins with which part of speech?	a verb
In addition to describing the parties and their joint objectives, what else does a modern preamble typically summarize?	any underlying events (such as a war)
What term describes a common clause in a treaty stating that the representatives of the parties have communicated their full powers?	boilerplate
What are the official documents appointing a party's representative to act on their behalf?	full powers
In addition to their full names, what else is included in the preamble that identifies the parties to a treaty?	sovereign titles
How must the full powers of a parties' representatives be found in order to enter into a treaty?	in good or proper form.
Who else besides the parties themselves is typically identified in the preamble to a treaty?	their representatives
What follows the preamble in a treaty?	numbered articles
What is contained in the numbered articles of a treaty?	the substance of the parties' actual agreement
What does each article heading usually encompass?	a paragraph
How might the articles in a long treaty be grouped?	under chapter headings
The numbered articles of a treaty may be grouped by chapter heading in what kind of treaty?	A long treaty
What type of resolution to disputes is typically outlined in a treaty?	peaceful
Which section of a treaty typically contains information about the whereabouts of the final authentic copies of a treaty?	articles
Parties to a treaty might have disputes about what aspect of the articles of a treaty?	their interpretation
Which copies of a treaty have their locations outlined in most modern treaties?	the final authentic copies
Modern treaties typically outline the procedures for the peaceful resolution of what?	disputes
What is the formal name for the closing protocol of a treaty?	the eschatocol
What typically follows the signatures in a treaty?	the site(s) of the treaty's execution and the date(s)
How is the date typically written in a treaty?	its most formal, longest possible form
What is the nature of the different versions of a treaty executed in multiple languages?	equally authentic
A clause like "in witness whereof" or "in faith whereof" typically signals what in a treaty?	The end
Whose signatures appear at the very end of a treaty?	the parties' representatives
Where might the text of a treaty be reprinted?	in a collection of treaties currently in effect
Who, upon reprinting, will often append the dates on which the treaty was ratified and came into effect?	an editor
Each party must have done what in order for the treaty to come into effect?	ratified the treaty
Even if signed  and ratified on the same date, the treaty might have done what on different dates?	came into effect
Bilateral treaties are concluded between how many states or entities?	two
Is it possible for a bilateral treaty to have more than two parties?	It is possible
The bilateral treaties between Switzerland and the European Union followed the Swiss rejection of what?	the European Economic Area agreement
Does the bilateral treaty between Switzerland and the European Union establish rights or obligations amongst the EU and its member states?	it does not
The treaty between Switzerland and the European Union is an example of what kind of treaty?	bilateral
What is a treaty concluded among several countries?	A multilateral treaty
Between which parties does a multilateral treaty establish rights and obligations?	each party and every other party
The Treaty of Locarno guarantees each signatory against what from another signatory?	attack
What type of treaty is a mutual guarantee?	international compacts
Multilateral treaties are often entered into by countries that share the same what?	region
What are caveats to a state's acceptance of a treaty?	Reservations
What are unilateral statements purporting to exclude or to modify the legal obligation and its effects on a state?	Reservations
When must reservations be included in a treaty?	at the time of signing or ratification
What are parties to a treaty forbidden to do after they have already joined a treaty?	add a reservation
A reserving party to a treaty may include a statement that attempts to do what to its legal obligations or their effects?	exclude or to modify
A more permissive rule regarding what emerged to encourage the largest number of states to join treaties?	reservations
Reservations are generally permitted so long as they are not what?	inconsistent with the goals and purposes of the treaty
How did international law originally respond to treaty reservations?	rejecting them
Originally reservations were rejected under international law unless which parties of the treaty accepted them?	all parties
Because they are generally accepted under international law, a treaty must forbid reservations in what manner to prevent their adoption?	expressly
When a state adds reservations to a treaty, other parties to the treaty can respond to those reservations in what ways?	accept those reservations, object to them, or object and oppose them
Who remains unaffected when a party's reservation is accepted by a second party?	other parties to the treaty
What happens to the parts of the treaty affected by a rejected reservation as they concern the reserving and rejecting parties?	drop out completely
What legal obligations exist between two state parties if one objects and opposes the other's reservations?	no legal obligations
If a state party objects and opposes another state's reservations it essentially refuses to acknowledge what?	the reserving state is a party to the treaty
How many ways are there to amend an existing treaty?	three
What must state parties to a treaty repeat to adopt a formal amendment to the treaty?	the ratification process
What amendment process is generally reserved for changes that rectify obvious errors in the text?	a procès-verbal
Parties to an original treaty and an amended treaty are bound to what terms?	the terms they both agreed upon
In addition to the often long and protracted nature of treaty renegotiation, what negative outcome might result from the process?	some parties to the original treaty will not become parties to the amended treaty
What is a treaty that supplements a previous treaty in international law?	a protocol
A protocol may either amend a previous treaty or do what?	add additional provisions
Do parties to a treaty have an obligation to adopt a later protocol?	not required
What do we sometimes call an agreement that supplements a treaty especially when few parties to the treaty support the protocol?	an "optional protocol"
A protocol may add additional provisions to a treaty or else do what?	amend the previous treaty
The Kyoto Protocol is associated with what treaty?	United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was supplemented by what protocol?	the Kyoto Protocol
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change established a framework for the development of what?	binding greenhouse gas emission limits
While the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change established a framework for developing greenhouse gas emission limits, the Kyoto Protocol contained what?	the specific provisions and regulations later agreed upon
The agreement that contained specific provisions related to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is an example of what agreement that supplements a treaty?	Protocol
A treaty that puts all of its obligations in action simply by becoming a party to it is known as what?	self-executing
What do non-self-executing treaties typically require from a party to enable it to fulfill its obligations?	implementing legislation
What is "implementing legislation" that is required by a party to a treaty to enable it to fulfill its obligations under the treaty?	a change in the domestic law of a state party
A treaty requiring local prosecution by a party for particular crimes is an example of which type of treaty?	non-self-executing
Signing a self-executing treaty automatically does what for a party?	puts the treaty and all of its obligations in action
What type of treaty cannot be acted on without the proper change in domestic law?	a non-self-executing treaty
A state party may be in default of its obligations under a non-self-executing treaty if its legislature fails to do what?	pass the necessary domestic laws
What institution of a party to a treaty must act to fulfill the party's obligations under a non-self-executing treaty?	its legislature
The often unclear division between a self-executing treaty and a non-self-executing treaty can lead to a treaty being what if disagreements exist within a party?	politicized
A treaty may be politicized due to disagreements within a party because the division between a self-executing treaty and a non-self-executing treaty can often be described as what?	not clear
What principle is often invoked by legal experts when interpreting the language of treaties?	principle of maximum effectiveness
The principle of maximum effectiveness interprets the language of treaties as having what effect to establish obligations between parties?	the fullest force and effect
What states that treaties are to be interpreted "in good faith" according to the "ordinary meaning given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose?"	The Vienna Convention
What property of treaties must often be interpreted when it's not clear?	The language
Besides unclear language what might also arise that necessitates the interpretation of the language of a treaty?	a perhaps unforeseen circumstance
No one party to a treaty can do what to the other parties?	impose its particular interpretation of the treaty
What may be implied of other parties fail to explicitly disavow a party's initially unilateral interpretation of a treaty?	Consent
Consent for a party's unilateral interpretation of a treaty may be implied if that state has acted upon its view of the treat without what from another party?	complaint
Consent by all parties to a treaty to a particular interpretation of the treaty has what legal effect?	adding another clause to the treaty
The legal effect of adding another clause to a treaty that occurs when all parties to a treaty consent to a particular interpretation of the treaty is commonly known as what?	an 'authentic interpretation'
What are international tribunals and arbiters often called upon to resolve in regards to treaties?	substantial disputes over treaty interpretations
What judicial bodies might be called upon to resolve disputes pertaining to the interpretation of treaties?	International tribunals and arbiters
In addition to the final, signed treaty what else might arbiters review to establish the meaning of a treaty in context?	the preparatory work from the negotiation and drafting of the treaty
For what purpose might an international tribunal review the preparatory work from the negotiation and drafting of a treaty?	To establish the meaning in context
In addition to the preparatory work from the drafting and negotiation of a treaty, what might arbiters review when resolving a dispute over the interpretation of a treaty?	the final, signed treaty itself
What are agreements between states within the United States called?	compacts
What are agreements between states and the federal government called within the United States?	memoranda of understanding
In the United States, what are agreements between agencies of the federal government called?	memoranda of understanding
Nations can be careful about terming an agreement a treaty because it has the effect of recognizing that the other side is a what?	a sovereign state
Under what do all parties to a treaty recognize the provisions of the treaty are enforceable?	international law
Parties to a treaty may disagree over a desire to create an obligation under what?	international law
Discussions between what two countries have been influence by one party's desire to create an obligation under international law?	North Korea and the United States
Discussion between North Korea and the United States have been influenced by one party's desire to create obligations under international law with respect to what two topics?	security guarantees and nuclear proliferation
North Korea and the United States have been characterized by a disagreement over one parties desire to create what with respect to security guarantees and nuclear proliferation?	to create an obligation under international law
What is the Treaty of Waitangi internationally considered to be?	documents under domestic law
What other terms might be used to refer to a treaty?	convention, protocol, or simply agreement
What common terminological problem can sometimes lead to confusion surrounding a treaty?	named something other than a treaty,
What's an example of a treaty that is considered internationally to be documents under domestic law?	the Treaty of Waitangi
Convention, protocol, and agreement are examples of examples of different kinds of what that can create confusion about a treaty?	terminology
Traditionally, what must a state do in order for an obligation to arise in international law?	consent
What is the only barrier to withdrawal contained in many treaties?	procedures of notification
Are treaties permanently binding upon the signatory parties?	not necessarily
What treaty will terminate if the number of parties falls below 40 as a result of denunciations?	the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
Which article of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties provides that there is a presumption that treaties cannot be unilaterally denounced?	Article 56
What is an example of a treaty from which it is not possible to withdraw?	the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
What state declared its intention to withdraw from the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights?	North Korea
Who, acting as registrar, informed North Korea that withdrawal was deliberately precluded by the original signatories of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights?	the Secretary-General of the United Nations
What two factors determine whether it is possible to withdraw from a treaty?	the terms of the treaty and its travaux preparatoire
The terms and travaux preparatoire of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights were both factors in determining what aspect of the treaty as it relates to North Korea's stated intentions?	The possibility of withdrawal
What factor, in practice, allows a state to withdraw from any treaty at any time?	sovereignty
What really determines whether withdrawal from a treaty is permitted?	how other states will react
What might a state do in response to another state's withdrawal from a treaty?	impose sanctions or go to war
Although withdrawal from a treaty may not be possible in theory, when might it be possible anyway?	In practice
Because of sovereignty when may a state withdrawal from a treaty?	at any time
What happens to a state's obligations under a treaty upon its withdrawal from the treaty?	terminated
What kind of treaty is terminated by the withdrawal of just one party?	a bilateral treaty
What happens to a multilateral treaty's rights and obligations among the other parties when just one party withdraws?	remain in force
After what action by a state are its obligations under a treaty considered terminated?	withdrawal
Under what conditions could a single state's withdrawal result in the termination of a multilateral treaty?	agreed upon between the remaining states parties
What may be invoked as grounds for permanently terminating a treaty?	A material breach
In addition to terminating the treaty itself, what actions by the other parties might result from one party materially violating or beaching its obligations?	temporarily suspending their obligations to that party
In addition to suspending their obligations under a treaty to the violating party, what may result from a material breach of treaty obligations?	terminating the treaty itself
Who may invoke a material breach committed by a party to a treaty to suspend their obligations to that party?	the other parties
What temporary actions can parties of a treaty take in response to a material violation of a party's obligations?	suspending their obligations to that party
What might a tribunal or an arbiter be asked to determine regarding a breach of a treaty?	the seriousness of a breach
Using what to determine the seriousness of a breach can prevent a party from prematurely suspending its obligations due to another party's alleged material breach?	a tribunal or other independent arbiter
Does a material breach necessarily suspend or terminate treaty relations?	does not
What determines whether a breach automatically suspends or terminates treaty relations?	how the other parties regard the breach and how they resolve to respond to it
 A treaty breach does not necessarily affect treaty relations depending on how serious the other parties view the breach and what other factor?	how they resolve to respond to it
Some treaties contains provisions for what to happen if certain defined conditions are met?	self-termination
What provision might a treaty include if it's meant to be only temporarily binding?	set to expire on a given date
In addition to passing an expiration date, what might cause a treaty to self-terminate?	certain defined conditions are met
What happens to a treaty that was designed to terminate under certain conditions when those conditions are actually met?	automatically terminated
What may we assume the parties to a treaty intended the treaty's obligations to be if the treaty included an expiration date?	temporarily binding
What might result in a party to a treaty claiming a treaty should be terminated even absent an express provision for its termination?	a fundamental change in circumstances
A party cannot base its claim of a fundamental change in circumstances if the change was brought about by what?	its own breach of the treaty
The claim of a fundamental change in circumstances cannot be used to invalidate treaties that established or redrew what?	political boundaries
The radical transformation of what aspect of the obligations between the parties is a necessary condition for a claim of a fundamental change in circumstances to terminate a treaty?	the extent of obligations
In order to be considered a fundamental change, a change in circumstances must have been what at the time of the adoption of the treaty?	unforeseen
The Islamic Prophet Muhammad carried out a siege against what tribe in February 624?	the Banu Qaynuqa tribe
Muhammad ordered his followers to attack the Banu Qaynuqa Jews for allegedly breaking what treaty?	the Constitution of Medina
Who's insistence led the Prophet Muhammad to expel the Banu Qaynuqa Jews instead of kill them?	Abdullah ibn Ubayy
Pinning the clothes of a Muslim woman, which led to her being what, was the action that allegedly violated the Constitution of Medina?	stripped naked
What chained actions resulted from the alleged violation of the Constitution of Medina by the Banu Qaynuqa Jews?	revenge killings
What angel, according to Muslim tradition, ordered Muhammad to order a siege on the Banu Qurayza?	Gabriel
Who claims Muhammad had a treaty with the Banu Qurayza that was torn apart?	Al-Waqidi
How many members of the Banu Qurayza were beheaded after surrendering to Muhammad and his followers according to Tabari and Ibn Hisham?	600-900
According to Sunni Hadith which members of the Banu Qurayza were beheaded after surrendering to Muhammad and his followers?	all Males and 1 woman
How many Muslims were killed during the invasion of Banu Qurayza?	Two
When are most of the problems created that might result in an otherwise valid treaty being rejected as a binding international agreement?	at the formation of the treaty
What treaties between Japan and Korea are examples of treaties that were declared null and void?	the serial Japan-Korea treaties of 1905, 1907 and 1910
In what treaty were the serial Japan-Korea treaties of 1905, 1907, and 1910 confirmed as "already null and void?"	the 1965 Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea
Which two states signed a treaty that declared previous treaties between the two from 1905, 1907, and 1910 to be already void?	Japan and the Republic of Korea
An otherwise valid and agreed upon treaty may be rejected as what for several reasons most of which involve problems created at the formation of a treaty?	a binding international agreement
A party's consent to a treaty is invalid if it had been given by an agent or body without power to do so under what?	that state's domestic law
For what does a strong presumption exist internationally that a head of state has acted within in entering into a treaty?	his proper authority
What is required to invalidate a party's consent due to a reluctance to inquire into the internal affairs and processes of other states?	a "manifest violation"
A manifest violation is required to invalidate a party's consent to a treaty due to a reluctance internationally to inquire into what aspects of other states?	the internal affairs and processes
What might a party's consent to a treaty be considered if it has been given by an agent without the power under the state's domestic law to do so?	invalid
If a state's representative ignored restrictions he is subject to by his sovereign, what might that state's consent to a treaty be considered to be?	invalid
Who might place restrictions on a representative during negotiation of a treaty?	his sovereign
What must be true of the ignored restrictions placed on a representative by his sovereign in order for a state's consent to a treaty to be considered invalid?	the other parties to the treaty were notified of those restrictions prior to his signing
Who must have been notified of the ignored restrictions placed by a sovereign on his representative prior to the signing of a treaty in order for a state's consent to be considered invalid?	the other parties
The preamble of what states that treaties are a source of international law?	The Law of Treaties
Which will prevail in a conflict between international and domestic law?	international law
What are started to be a source of international law in the preamble in The Law of Treaties?	treaties
Approval under what law will not make an act or lack thereof legal if condemned under international law?	internal law
An act or lack thereof cannot be made legal under what law even if made legal under internal law?	international law
Which articles of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties set out the ways that treaties can be invalidated?	Articles 46–53
In addition to the circumstances by which a state party joined a treaty, why might a treaty be invalidated?	the content of the treaty itself
In addition to the content of the treaty itself, why might a treated by invalidated?	the circumstances by which a state party joined the treaty
A treaty might be considered what if it's considered unenforceable and void under international law?	invalidated
Which processes simply alter the consent given by parties to a previously valid treaty rather than invalidating the consent completely?	withdrawal, suspension, or termination
What on behalf of a state cannot invalidate that state's consent to a treaty?	own conduct
Consent to a treaty will not be invalidated if what should have been evident?	the truth
What may be invalidated if there was an erroneous understanding of a fact or situation at the time of conclusion of a treaty?	A state's consent
An erroneous understanding of a fact or situation may only invalidate a state's consent to a treaty if what is also true about the erroneous understanding?	formed the "essential basis" of the state's consent
What, if it formed the "essential basis" of a state's consent to a treaty, may invalidate that consent?	an erroneous understanding of a fact or situation
What type of conduct of a party to a treaty can invalidate the consent of another party?	fraudulent conduct
What type of action, either direct or indirect, of a state's representative by another type of party to a treaty can invalidate a state's consent?	corruption
Coercion of a representative or a state itself will result in what happening to its consent to a treaty?	invalidate that consent
Coercion of a state or its what through the threat or use of force, if used to obtain the consent of that state to a treaty, will invalidate that consent?	representative
What must  be true of coercion through the threat or use of force of a party to treaty for it to invalidate the state's consent to a treaty?	used to obtain the consent of that state to a treaty
What will a treaty be if it is in violation of a peremptory norm?	null and void
What type of norm is recognized as permitting no violations and so cannot be altered through treaty obligations?	peremptory norm
What is true of acts such as genocide and piracy in regard to treaty law?	no state can legally assume an obligation to commit or permit such acts
What distinguishes peremptory norms from other principles of customary law?	permitting no violations and so cannot be altered through treaty obligations
What is an example of a type of universally prohibited action that no state can legally assume an obligation to commit or permit through a treaty?	genocide
What is the judiciary organ of the United Nations?	the International Court of Justice
What document states that treaties must be registered with the United Nations to be invoked before it or enforced in the International Court of Justice?	The United Nations Charter
Why does the United Nations Charter state that treaties must be registered with the United Nations?	to prevent the proliferation of secret treaties
In which centuries did a proliferation of secret treaties occur that led the United Nations Charter to include an obligation to register treaties to be invoked before it?	19th and 20th century
What section of the United Nations Charter states that its members' obligation under the charter outweigh any competing obligations under other treaties?	Section 103
Treaties and their amendments must follow the official legal procedures of what body after their adoption?	the United Nations
Which office of the United Nations is in charge of applying its official legal procedures?	the Office of Legal Affairs
When must all treaties and their amendments follow the official legal procedures of the United Nations?	After their adoption
In addition to signature and ratification, what legal procedure of the United Nations must all treaties follow after their adoption?	entry into force
What are three official legal procedures of the United Nations that all treaties must follow after their adoption?	signature, ratification and entry into force
The United Nations has been compared to what government in function and effectiveness?	the pre-Constitutional United States Federal government
In which aspects has the United Nations been compared to the pre-Constitutional United States Federal government?	function and effectiveness
The comparison of the United Nations to the pre-Constitutional United States Federal government gives us a comparison between what modern and historical legal topics of interest?	modern treaty law and the historical Articles of Confederation
Modern treaty law can be compared in function and effectiveness to the historical Articles of Confederation by comparing the pre-Constitutional United States Federal government with what modern institution?	the UN
What legal document formed the basis of the pre-Constitutional Federal government of the United States?	Articles of Confederation
What part of the Brazilian federal consitution states that the power to enter into treaties is vested in the president and that such treaties must be approved by Congress?	articles 84, clause VIII, and 49, clause I
In practice the Brazilian president must get the prior approval of what body in order to negotiate and sign a treaty?	Congress
What Brazilian institution has ruled that a treaty must be incorporated into domestic law by means of a presidential decree?	the Federal Supreme Court
In order for a treaty to be valid in Brazil, a presidential decree incorporating the treaty into domestic law must be published where in order to be valid?	the federal register
In what office is the power to enter into treaties vested according to the Brazilian federal constitution?	president
The Brazilian Federal Supreme Court has ruled that treaties enjoy what position relative to ordinary legislation?	same hierarchical position
In what year did the Brazilian Supreme Court rule that treaties containing human rights provisions enjoy a status above ordinary legislation?	2008
What amendment to the Brazilian constitution states that human rights treaties approved by means of a special procedure by Congress enjoy the same position as a constitutional amendment?	the 45th amendment
The hierarchical position of treaties relative to domestic legislation in Brazil determines whether the latter can do what to the former and vice versa?	abrogate
What is the Portuguese term for ordinary laws?	leis ordinárias
What kind of clause does the United States constitution have that the Brazilian constitution does not have with the same effects?	supremacy clause
A supremacy clause in a federal constitution is relevant to the discussion on the relation between treaties and what other type of legislation?	state legislation
What clause of the United States Constitution is relevant to the discussion of the relation between treaties and U.S. legislation?	supremacy clause
The Brazilian constitution does not have a supremacy clause that would be of interest to the relation between state legislation and what other legal agreements?	treaties
Treaties, executive agreements, congressional-executive agreements, and sole executive agreements are the same under international law but different with respect to what?	internal American law
Under US law, what primarily distinguishes treaties, executive agreements, congressional-executive agreements, and sole executive agreements?	their method of approval
What percentage of United States Senators must give advice and consent in order for the US to enter a treaty?	two-thirds
What type of agreement may a US president enter by acting alone?	sole executive agreements
What type of agreement requires majority approval by both the House and the Senate before or after a treaty is signed by the United States president?	congressional-executive agreements
In the United States, what is the ratio of executive agreements to treaties?	10:1
What is it about the approval process of executive agreements might lead a US president to prefer them over treaties?	the relative ease
The president of the United States might prefer the formal treaty process on matters that require Congress to do what?	pass implementing legislation or appropriate funds
The president of the United States might prefer the formal treaty process for agreements that impose what type of legal obligations on the US?	long-term, complex
The international deal between the US, other countries, and what controversial nation is not a treaty?	Iran
In what cases did the US Supreme Court rule that treaties do not have a privileged position over Acts of Congress?	Head Money Cases
The US Supreme Court ruled that treaties can be repealed or modified by what for the purposes of US law?	Act of Congress
What Supreme Court case ruled that a treaty provision that conflicts with the US Constitution is null and void under US law?	Reid v. Covert
The US Supreme Court ruled that treaties can be repealed or modified for the purposes of US law just like what by any subsequent Act of Congress?	any other regular law
Any treaty provision that conflicts with the US Constitution is considered what under US law?	null and void
Into what 3 lists are legislation subjects divided in India?	Union List, State List and Concurrent List
What type of legislative subjects can both the central legislative body and state legislatures make laws?	Concurrent subjects
What is the central legislative body in India?	Parliament of India
In order to implement international treaties, for what subjects can the Parliament of India legislate to override the general division of subject lists?	any subject
What subjects can only be legislated by the central legislative body in India?	the subjects in Union list
What formed an important part of European colonization?	Treaties
With whom did Europeans attempt to sign treaties in order to legitimize their sovereignty during colonization?	indigenous peoples
What terms in relation to Europeans did most indigenous people enjoy under treaties?	extremely disadvantageous terms
What aspect of the treaties that indigenous people signed with Europeans did the indigenous people typically not understand?	the implications
What did Europeans try to legitimize all over the world by signing treaties with indigenous people?	their sovereignty
In what two rare cases were local governments able to mitigate the impact of of European colonization through treaties?	Ethiopia and Qing Dynasty China
What did Ethiopians learn in order to use treaties to prevent a European power from overstepping their agreement?	the intricacies of European diplomatic customs
Both Ethiopia and Qing Dynasty China learned the intricacies of European diplomatic customs to mitigate what through treaties?	the impact of European colonization
In addition to preventing a power from overstepping their agreement, how was Ethiopia able to mitigate the impact of European colonization?	by playing different powers against each other
Ethiopia and Qing Dynasty China were both able to prevent European powers from doing what to their agreements?	overstepping
What were native peoples able to maintain a minimum amount of through treaties?	autonomy
What indigenous people of New Zealand entered into a treaty entitling Europeans to land ownership?	Māori
What doctrine was overturned by Mabo v Queensland establishing the concept of native title?	terra nullius
The concept of native title was established by what court case?	Mabo v Queensland
Treaties between indigenous peoples and what other groups formed an important part of political discourse in the late 20th and early 21st century?	colonizers
What legislative act provided that no Indian nation shall be acknowledged as an independent nation with whom the United States may contract by treaty?	Indian Appropriations Act of March 3, 1871
By what did the US federal government provide contractual relations with Indian tribes following the Indian Appropriations Act of March 3, 1871?	agreements, statutes, and executive orders
Prior to what year did the United States regularly enter into treaties with Native Americans?	1871
A rider to the Indian Appropriations Act of 1871 provided that no Indian nation shall be acknowledged as what?	an independent nation, tribe, or power
A rider to the Indian Appropriations Act of 1871 provided that the US government could not do what with an Indian nation?	contract by treaty
In what year did Josip Broz Tito die?	1980
During World War II what resistance movement did he lead?	the Partisans,
For what country is Tito viewed as  unifying figure?	Yugoslavia
In the Non-Aligned Movement, which Egyptian leader did Tito work with?	Gamal Abdel Nasser
In the Non-Aligned Movement, which Indonesian leader did Tito work with?	Sukarno
What position in the League of Communists of Yugoslavia was Tito?	General Secretary
What position in Yugoslavia's government did Tito hold from 1944-63?	Prime Minister
How many foreign decorations did he receive?	98
What foreign decorations did Tito recieve?	Legion of Honour and the Order of the Bath
During what years did Tito lead the Partisans?	1941–45
What ethnicity was Tito's mother?	Slovene
What ethnicity was Tito's father?	Croat
Who captured him during World War I?	the Imperial Russians
Tito joined which unit in Omsk?	Red Guard
What party in Yugoslavia did he join?	Communist Party
When did the second Yugoslavia start?	1943
What group did Tito found?	Cominform
When did Tito implement a self-management system that differentiated Yugoslavia from other socialist coutnries?	1951
When did Tito die?	1980
When did Yugoslavia disintegrate?	1991
Where was Josip Broz born?	Kumrovec
In what year was Broz born?	1892
What ethnicity was Broz's father?	Croat
What ethnicity was Broz's mother?	Slovene
What grade did he fail?	2nd
When was he conscripted into the army?	1913
What position in the army did he become after office school?	sergeant
What competition did he win a silver medal in?	fencing
For what crime was he arrested?	anti-war propaganda
Where was Tito serioiusly wounded and captured by the Russians at?	Bukovina
How long was Broz in the hospital?	13 months
Where was Broz's work camp?	Ural Mountains
What position was he selected for at work camp?	camp leader
Where did Broz flee to after a White counteroffensive?	Kirgiziya
Where did Broz marry Belousova?	Omsk
How many seats did the Communists win in 1920 Yugoslavia?	59
Who was elected mayor of Zagreb after the Communists won 59 parliamentary seats?	Svetozar Delić
Where did Broz move in 1921?	Veliko Trojstvo
How long was he in prison at Lepoglava for?	five years
Who became his ideological mentor in prison?	Moša Pijade,
When was Tito sent to Vienna?	1934
Who did Stalin have murdered in 1937?	Milan Gorkić
Where was the Secretary-General of the CPY murdered?	Moscow
Who became Secretary-General of the CPY after the prior one was murdered?	Tito
Who is known as "Comrade Walter"?	Tito
When did German forces launch an invasion of Yugoslavia?	6 April 1941
Which king fled the country in 1941?	King Peter II
What did Tito use to get the people to unit in a battle against the occupation in 1941?	pamphlet
What position was Tito appointed to in 1941 by the Central Committee?	Chief of all project national liberation military forces.
In 1941, where did representatives of the government and military meet with German officials?	Belgrade
Who succeeded in liberating territory despite conflicts?	Partisans
Who did the Partisans have conflicts with?	Chetnik movement
Which Chetnik leader did Tito hold talks with?	Draža Mihailović
Which group did Tito order his forces to assist?	escaping Jews,
2000 of what group fought directly for Tito?	Jews
When did the Partisans create the First Proletarian Brigade?	1941
When did Tito create the Second Proletarian Brigade?	1942
What position was Tito named to for the National Committee of LIberation?	President
Where was the 67-member "presidency" located?	Jajce
How many members were in the "presidency" in Jajce?	67
Who diverted resources to the destruction of the Partisans?	Axis
Who was the opponent of the Allies?	Axis
Which group of people wanted to capture Tito personally?	German
In 1944 where did Tito manage to avoid the Germans?	Drvar
What type of assault was there in Bosnia?	airborne
Who was attacking the Partisans in 1943?	Axis
From whom did Allied leaders switch their support from to Tito?	Draža Mihailović
Who was the Soviet Premier who recognized Tito?	Stalin
At what event was Tito recognized by Stalin?	Tehran Conference
When was the Balkan air force formed?	1944
Who was Tito considered loyal to?	Moscow
Who was Tito considered second to in the Eastern bloc?	Stalin
With whom did Tito have an uneasy alliance form the start?	Stalin
Who considered Tito too independent?	Stalin
Who was considered loyal to Moscow?	Tito
In 1944 who called on all Yuboslavs to come together under Tito's leadership?	King Peter II
With whom did Tito sign an agreement on September 28 1944?	Soviet Union
Who were allowed "temporary entry" into Yugoslav territory?	Soviet troops
Who assisted in operations in ortheastern areas of Yugoslavia?	Red Army
Who executed a massive offensive and succeeded in breaking through German lines?	the Partisans
Who offered amnesty to the retreatig column?	Tito
Who dispatched a telegram to the supreme headquarters prohibiting the execution of prisoners of war?	Tito
In the final days of WWII in Yugoslavia, who were responsible for atrocities?	Partisans
What did Tito offer to the retreating column?	amnesty
Where were possible suspects transferred to?	military court.
Where was the provisional government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia assembled?	Belgrade
When was the provisional government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia assembled?	7 March 1945
Who Where assembled the provisional government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia?	Tito
Who was seen as the liberator of Yugoslavia?	Tito
Who was formally deposed by the Yugoslav Constitutent Assembly on November 29, 1945?	King Peter II
What was formed as the new secret police?	The State Security Administration
Who was charged with brining to trial large numbers of Nazi collaborators?	Yugoslav intelligence
Who were controversial among those brought to trial for Nazi collaboration?	Catholic clergymen
Who was found guilty of collaboration, high treason?	Draža Mihailović
How was Draza executed?	firing squad
Who was the president of the Bishops' Conference of Yugoslavia?	Aloysius Stepinac
How long after his release from imprisonment did TIto attend the Bishops' Conference of Yugoslavia?	two days
What topic was a sticking point at the Bishops' Conference?	Catholic Church
Under whose leadership did the bishops' conference release a letter condemning alleged Partisan war crimes?	Stepinac
What was Stepinac's sentence shortened to?	house-arrest
Who had a leading role in liberating Yugoslavia?	Tito
Who was Tito formally an ally of after WWII?	Stalin
Who set up a spy ring in the Yugoslav party?	Soviets
As early as what year was a spy ring set up in the Yugoslav party?	1945
From what domination did Yugoslavia liberate itself?	Axis
What Italian territory did Yugoslavia acquire after the war?	Istria
What territory did Yugoslavia leadership want to incorporate?	Trieste
At least how many American aircraft were shot down between 1945 and 1948?	four
Who openly supported the Communist side in the Greek Civil War?	Tito
In what year did Tito model his economic development plan independently from Moscow?	1948
Tito did not attend the second meeting of this.	Cominform
In what year did the crisis nearly escalate into armed conflict?	1949
What was the name of those purged in other socialist states in Eastern Europe?	Titoists
Who made several assasination attempts on Tito?	Stalin
Whose methods did Tito use to fight Yugoslav Stalinists?	Stalin
Who used inhumane methods against oponents through the UBDA?	Ranković
Until what year did the repression of the UBDA last?	1956
The work of the UBDA was due to tension between Yugoslavia and what country?	Soviet Union
What is another name for the UBDA?	State Security Service
Which country gave Yugoslavia aid when Tito became estranged from the USSR?	US
What agency distributed aid to Yugoslavia?	ECA
What plan was also administered by the ECA?	Marshall Plan
Which leader feared that accepting American aid meant aligning with the West?	Tito
In what year did Stalin die?	1953
What name refers to the period of instability during the rift between Tito and the USSR?	Informbiro
What was Tito's form of communism called?	Titoism
Who encouraged purges against Titoites?	Moscow
Throughout what area did purges of Titoites occur?	Eastern bloc
Who became the first leader to defy Stalin's leadership?	Tito
In what year did the National Assembly support a crucial bill about "self Management"?	1950
Who wrote the bill with Tito about "self management"?	Milovan Đilas
Tito succeeded who as the President of Yugoslavia?	Ribar
Whose invitation did Tito reject after Stalin's death?	USSR
When did Tito visit the USSR to signal that his country's animosity was decreasing?	1956
How many high-level Communists were purged in the Slansky trial?	14
How many Communists were executed at the Slansky trial?	11
What country had pressure put on it by Stalin to conduct purges?	Czechoslovakia
Who espoused the "national path to socialism"?	Tito
Who put pressure on Checkoslovakia to conduct purges?	Stalin
Under whose leadership did Yugoslavia become a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement?	Tito
In what year did Tito co-found the Non-Aligned Movement?	1961
Nasser led which country in 1961?	Egypt
Which Indonesian leader co-founded the Non-Aligned movement with Tito?	Nehru
Who became the first Secretary General of the Non-Aligned Movement?	Tito
When did Tito first visit Emperor Haile Selassie?	1954
When did Tito last visit Emperor Selassie?	1956
What country does Emperor Selassie rule?	Ethiopia
In what country does Tito have a street named in his honor?	Ethiopia
Who is the Emperor of Ethiopia in 1954?	Selassie
During what period did Tito pursue a policy of neutrality?	Cold War
With whom did Tito's belief in self-determination cause a rift?	Stalin
What type of countries did Tito develop relations with?	developing
Who had a strong belief in self-determination and was opposed to Stalin because of this?	Tito
Tito had cordial relations with the United States and what other Western area?	Western European nations
Nasser was a leader of what country?	Egypt
Nehru was a leader of what country?	Indian
Gandhi was a leader of what country?	Indian
Eisenhower was a president of what country?	U.S.
Nixon was a president of what country?	U.S.
When did Tito first visit India?	1954
When did Tito leave India?	1955
After his return from where did Tito remove many restrictions on churches in Yugoslavia?	India
Where did Tito visit from 1954 to 1955?	India
After returning from India, Tito removed restrictions on what type of institutions?	spiritual
What country did U Nu lead?	Burma
Who was the leader of Burma in 1955?	U Nu
Who succeeded U Nu in Burma?	Ne Win
Ne Win led what country?	Burma
Who led Burma in 1959?	Ne Win
What was the only Communist country allowed to have an embassy in Stroessner's Paraguay?	Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia was the only communist country to have an embassy where?	Alfredo Stroessner's Paraguay
Pinochet ruled what country?	Chile
Who did Pinochet overthrow?	Allende
What country did Kjell Eugenio Laugerud Garcia lead?	Guatemala
When did Yugoslavia change its name to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia?	7 April 1963
Two government ministers resigned over Tito's visit to what region?	Americas
Eisenhower met Tito where in 1960?	United Nations General Assembly meeting.
Who said that neutralism did not imply passivity but mean "not taking sides"?	Tito
When did Tito meet Eisenhower at the U.N.?	1960
What anti-communist archbisoph died in 1960?	Stepinac
Stepinac's death gave new freedom to what branch of the Roman Catholic Church?	Yugoslav
What agency had its staff reduced to 5000 after Lenninist orthodoxy was abandoned?	UDBA
What acronym describes the State Security Administration?	UDBA
What ideology did Tito abandon as part of his new socialism?	Leninist
Who was the first communist country to open its borders to all foreign visitors?	Yugoslavia
In what year did the first communist country open its borders to all foreign visitors?	1967
When did Tito start promoting a peaceful resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict?	1967
Whose plan called for Arabs to recognize the state of Israel in exchange for territories Israel gained?	Tito
In what year did Tito start working in Arab Israeli peace processes?	1967
What country did Dubcek lead?	Czechoslovak
How much time did Tito give Dubcek to fly to Prague?	three hours
Where did Tito send Dubcek in 1968?	Prague
Who removed generals Gosnjak and Hamovic?	Tito
What army was unprepared for the invasion of Czechoslovakia?	Yugoslavia
In what year was Tito reelected president of Yugoslavia for the sixth time?	1971
Who elected Tito president in 1971?	Federal Assembly
How many sweeping constitutional amendments did Tito introduce in 1971?	20
Who was chosen as a premier in 1971 in Yugoslavia?	Bijedić
What branch of the Yugoslav government would retain control over foreign affairs, defense and internal security?	federal
What person's calls for unity is credited by western communists of holding together Yugoslavia?	Tito
What was referred to as the "Mass Movement"?	the Croatian Spring
When was the new Yugoslavian constitution passed?	16 May 1974
Who was named President for Life of Yugoslavia in 1974?	Tito
How long did the person named "president for life" serve?	five years.
What flag did protesters of Tito often burn?	Yugoslav
What did protesters scream during Tito's visit to the United Nations in the late 1970's?	Tito murderer
Which authorities fielded complaints from TIto about protesters?	United States authorities.
What American state did Tito visit when he saw the U.N.?	New York
Security for Tito's visit was unusually high to keep Tito away from what individuals?	protesters
Where did Tito travel in 1977 to reconcile with Chinese leadership?	Beijing
In what year did Tito travel to China to reconcile with Chinese leadership?	1977
What Chinese leader traveled to Yugoslavia in 1979?	Chairman Hua Guofeng
After the constitutional changes made in what year did Tito reduce his role in the day-to-day running of the state.	1974
In what year did Tito travel to the U.S. to visit Washington D.C., amist protest by anti-communist Croat, Serb and Albanian groups?	1978
During what year did Tito become increasingly ill?	1979
What was built near Morovic for Tito to use in the event of his recovery?	Vila Srna
Where was Tito admitted on 7 January and again on 11 January 1980 with circulatory problems?	the Medical Centre in Ljubljana
When did Tito die?	4 May 1980
Tito's cause of death was what?	gangrene
In what city was Tito interred?	Belgrade
What museum was formerly called "Museum 25 May"?	Museum of Yugoslav History
What name was given to Tito's mausoleum?	House of Flowers
Who made the original print of Los Caprichos?	Francisco Goya
After whose death did speculation begin concerning whether his successors could continue to hold Yugoslavia together?	Tito
What name was changed to Titograd?	Podgorica
When did Uziece revert to its original name?	1992
Where is the birthplace of Antun Augustincic?	Kumrovec
What country is Stejpan Mesic president of?	Croatian
Where is the largest Tito monument located?	Slovenia
Where does the annual "Brotherhood and Unity" relay race end?	"House of Flowers"
Where is the final resting place of Tito?	Belgrade
Where is Tito's birthplace in Croatia?	Kumrovec
How often is the "Brotherhood and Unity" relay race done?	Every year
On what day in May does the "Brotherhood and Unity" relay race end?	25
On what year did a Slovenian court find a 2009 naming of a street after Tito to be unconstitutional?	2011
Where was the street named after Tito that was found unconstitutional located?	Ljubljana
Several public area of Slovenia bear which person's name.	Tito
Under which ruler do historians argue human rights were suppressed in Yugoslavia?	Tito
Tito Square is located in what Slovenian city?	Velenje
How tall is the statue in Tito Square?	10-meter
Where is a 10-meter statue of Tito located?	Tito Square
Where is Velenje located?	Slovenia
What is the ethnic origin of the Danube Swabian people?	German
Where is the location of the Danube Swabian population?	Vojvodina
There were mass executions of Danube Swabian populations in what city?	Vojvodina
Which group of people occupied Yugoslavia at the end of World War II?	German
At the end of what World War did the Germans occupy Yugoslavia?	World War II,
Where in Russia was Tito brought as a prisoner of war in 1918?	Omsk
When was Tito brought to Russia as a prisoner of war?	1918
How old was Pelagija Belousava when Tito met her?	thirteen
How many children did Pelagija bore for Tito?	five
Who was the only surviving child of Tito's?	Žarko Leon
Where is the Hotel Lux located in Russia?	Moscow
When did Tito stay at the Hotel Lux?	1936
What is the name of the Austrian comrade Tito met in Moscow in 1936?	Lucia Bauer
When did Tito marry Lucia Bauer?	1936
Tito's marriage to what person was later erased in records?	Lucia Bauer
Who did Tito marry in 1940?	Herta Haas
When did Haas give birth to Tito's son?	1941
What was the name of Tito's son born to him and Haas?	Aleksandar "Mišo" Broz
With whom did Tito have a parallel life during his marriage to Haas?	Davorjanka Paunović
When did Davorjanka die of Tuberculosis?	1946
Who was Tito's best known wife?	Jovanka Broz
How old was Jovanka Broz when she married Tito?	27
In what year did Tito and Jovanka marry?	1952
Who was the best man at the wedding of Jovanka and Tito?	Aleksandar Ranković
Who went down in history as Yugoslavia's first lady?	Jovanka
Which of Tito's grandchildren is a theatre director?	Aleksandra Broz
Which of Tito's grandchildren is a cardiologist and writer?	Svetlana Broz
Where does Svetlana Broz live?	Bosnia-Herzegovina
Where does Leksandra Broz live?	Croatia
Where does Edvard Broz live?	Bosnia-Herzegovina
What is the name of the official residence in Belgrade?	Beli dvor
What islands were the site of the State Summer Residence from 1949 on?	Brijuni
Who designed the pavilion at the State Summer Residence?	Jože Plečnik
In what city was the official residence for Tito?	Belgrade
Film stars including Elizabeth Taylor visited what island residence of Tito?	State Summer Residence
The grounds at what location were the site of "diplomatic hunts"?	Karađorđevo
What was the name of the yacht the Yugoslav president had at his disposal?	Galeb
What company bought the presidential Boeing 727 after Tito's death?	Aviogenex
Where was the Galeb docked after Tito's death?	Montenegro
What is the English translation of Galeb?	seagull
With what accent did Tito speak German according to a biographer?	Viennese
How much English did Tito speak?	some
Other than Serbo-Croatian, German, Russian, Czech, Slovenian and English, French and Italian, what language does Tito speak?	Kirghiz
What did Tito declare himself to be religiously as an adult?	atheist
What type of religious educaton did Tito attend as a child?	Catholic
What did a priest do to Tito as a child when he had difficulty removing the priest's vestments?	slapped and shouted at
After being yelled at by a priest as a child, what place of worship would Tito refuse to enter again?	church
What is the name of the largest town or city renamed in Tito's name?	Titograd
What is Titograd now called?	Podgorica
What is Podgorica the capital city of?	Montenegro
Whose name was added to the name for every town or city with historical signiciance from the World War II period?	Tito's
What was the name of Tito's personal doctor?	Aleksandar Matunović
Who wrote a book about Tito questioning his true origin?	Aleksandar Matunović
What Serbian journalist includes several alternate identities of Tito?	Vladan Dinić
In what year waas Vladan Dinic born?	1949
Dinic gives several alternate identities of what person?	Tito
In what year did the study in Cryptologic Spectrum come out?	2013
What organization created the Cryptologic Spectrum?	NSA
What other Slavic languages did the Cryptologic Spectrum conclude Tito spoke?	Russian and Polish
The Cryptologic Spectrum also notes whose impressions of Tito's Russian origins?	Draža Mihailović's
Experts from what country disproved the NSA's report?	Croatian
What was the distinct local dialect Tito spoke?	Zagorje
Croatian experts disproved the report from which group concerning Tito's ethnic origins?	NSA
Tito's acute accent is present only in what type of dialects?	Croatian
Starting in what year was the Communist Party outlawed in Yugoslavia?	1920
What party was outlawed in Yugoslavia in 1920?	Communist
"Rudi", "Walter" and "Tito" are names that what person assumed?	Josip Broz
On what date in 1920 was the Communist party outlawed in Yugoslavia?	30 December
What was Tito's former name?	Josip Broz
How many awards and decorations did Josip Broz Tito recieve?	119
Of all of the awards Tito received, how many were from Yugoslavia itself?	21
Which government awards the Legion of Honour and the National Order of Merit?	French
Which government awards the Order of the Bath?	British
Which government awards the Order of the Chrysanthemum?	Japanese
In what year did the Tito-Stalin split occur?	1948
In what year was Tito inaugurated as president?	1953
In what year was Tito's funeral?	1980
Who was the founder of the Non-Aligned Movement?	Tito
Who was inauguarated as President of Yugoslavia in 1953?	Tito
Tito was awarded the Star of what country?	Romania
Tito was awarded the Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of what country?	Austria
Tito was awarded the Queen of where?	Sheba
Tito was awarded with the Order of the White Rose of what country?	Finland
Tito was awarded with the Royal Order of what country?	Cambodia
What is the name of the Marshall Islands in its native language?	Aolepān Aorōkin M̧ajeļ
Near what major line of latitutde are the Marshall Islands located?	the equator
As of 2011, how many people live in the Marshall Islands?	53,158
What country borders the Marshall Islands on the western side?	the Federated States of Micronesia
Which island is home to the capital of the Marshall Islands?	Majuro
What is the official name of the Marshall Islands?	Republic of the Marshall Islands
In what ocean are the Marshall Islands located?	Pacific Ocean
How many people lived in the Marshall Islands in 2011?	53,158
How many coral atolls comprise the Marshall Islands?	29
On what island is the capital of the Marshall Islands?	Majuro
Who were the original settlers of the area that became the Marshall Islands?	Micronesian colonists
How were original settlers of the area able to move between islands?	traditional stick charts
In what year did a European explorer first see the Marshall Islands?	1526
Which explorer first saw the Marshall Islands?	Alonso de Salazar
For whom are the Marshall Islands named?	John Marshall
During what span were the Marshall Islands first settled?	2nd millennium BC
Who first settled the Marshall Islands?	Micronesian colonists
In what decade did Europeans first visit the Marshall Islands?	1520s
In what month and year did a European first arrive at the Marshall Islands?	August 1526
After whom are the Marshall Islands named?	John Marshall
In what year did the Marshall Islands gain official recognition by the major European nations?	1874
In 1884, which country purchased the Marshall Islands?	the German Empire
What group was the Marshall Islands a part of following World War I?	the South Pacific Mandate
Who took over the Marshall Islands in the second world war?	the United States
In what year did the Marshall Islands achieve total sovereignty?	1986
What European nation owned the Marshall Islands in 1874?	Spain
Who bought the Marshall Islands from the Spanish in 1884?	the German Empire
Who occupied the Marshall Islands during the First World War?	Japan
In what year was the South Pacific Mandate created?	1919
In what year did the Marshall Islands become a sovereign nation?	1986
What term describes the type of government of the Marshall Islands?	presidential republic
With which country are the Marshall Islands closely related?	the United States
What is the main focus of the Marshall Islands' economy?	service
What does the Marshall Islands receive from the United States?	aid
What is the currency of the Marshall Islands?	the United States dollar
Along with the USPS, what United States agency operates in the Marshall Islands?	the FCC
What is the main component of the Marshall Islands economy?	service
What is the official currency of the Marshall Islands?	United States dollar
What is the government structure of the Marshall Islands?	presidential republic
Assistance from what country is an important part of the Marshall Islands economy?	the United States
What is the ethnicity of most people living in the Marshall Islands?	Marshallese
What family of languages does Marshallese belong to?	Malayo-Polynesian
What does UCCCMI stand for?	United Church of Christ – Congregational in the Marshall Islands
Aside from UCCCMI, what is the other major religious denomination of the Marshall Islands?	the Assemblies of God
From what non-Asian nation do some people living in the Marshall Islands come?	the United States
Of what ancestry are most Marshall Islands citizens?	Marshallese
Along with Marshallese, what is the official language of the Marshall Islands?	English
Of what language group is the Marshallese language?	Malayo-Polynesian
What fraction of Marshall Islands residents are religious?	three-quarters
Along with the United Church of Christ and the UCCCMI, what is a main religion of the Marshall Islands?	the Assemblies of God
Who arrived at the Marshall Islands in the second millennium BC?	Micronesians
What did not exist at the time during which Micronesians arrived at the Marshall Islands?	historical or oral records
What vessel did early settlers of the Marshall Islands use to travel?	canoe
What is the name of the item used as a primitive type of map for navigation by early settlers of the Marshall Islands?	traditional stick charts
Who first settled the Marshall Islands?	Micronesians
When were the Marshal Islands first settled?	2nd millennium BC
In what vehicles did the Marshall Islanders travel by water?	canoe
What navigation aids did the Marshall Islanders use?	stick charts
Which European first saw the Marshall Islands?	Alonso de Salazar
What was Alonso de Salazar's nationality?	Spanish
In what year did Salazar view the Marshall Islands?	1526
What was the name of Alonso de Salazar's ship?	Santa Maria de la Victoria
What did Alonso de Salazar call the island that he saw?	San Bartolome
Who was the first person from Europe to observe the Marshall Islands?	Alonso de Salazar
What was the nationality of the first European to observe the Marshall Islands?	Spanish
In what year did the first European view the Marshall Islands?	1526
What was the name of Alonso de Salazar's ship?	Santa Maria de la Victoria
Which of the Marshall Islands did Salazar most likely see?	Taongi
Whose ship was named Florida?	Álvaro de Saavedra Cerón
From where did Cerón attempt to cross the Pacific Ocean?	the Maluku Islands
What did Cerón name the islands from which people threw rocks at his vessel?	Los Pintados
What was the name given to the islands reached by Cerón in October of 1529?	Los Jardines
What are two possible modern names for the islands called Los Jardines by Cerón?	Enewetak or Bikini Atoll
Who was in charge of the ship named Florida?	Álvaro de Saavedra Cerón
Where did Cerón's expedition begin?	the Maluku Islands
What name did Cerón give to the island that might have been Ujelang?	Los Pintados
What group of islands might have been Bikini Atoll or Enewetak?	Los Jardines
How long did Cerón spend on Los Jardines?	eight days
What was the name given to the island reached by Miguel Lopez de Legazpi on January 9th of 1530?	Los Barbudos
What is thought to be the modern name of the island Legazpi called Los Barbudos?	Mejit
On what date did Legazpi's expedition see the island it named Placeres?	January 10
What name did the expedition give to the island it saw on January 12th?	Corrales
What was the location of Corrales?	10°N
Who led the expedition involving the ship San Pedro?	Miguel López de Legazpi
What did Miguel López de Legazpi call the island discovered on January 9, 1530?	Los Barbudos
What did the Spanish call the island that might have been Ailuk?	Placeres
On what day did the Spanish see the island they named Corrales?	January 12
What island may have been spotted by the Spanish on January 15?	Ujelang
Who arrived at the Marshall Islands in 1788?	Captain John Charles Marshall and Thomas Gilbert
What do natives of the Marshall Islands call their country?	jolet jen Anij
Which Russian was involved in naming the Marshall Islands?	Adam Johann von Krusenstern
Which French citizen was involved in naming the Marshall Islands?	Louis Isidore Duperrey
At what island did the Globe arrive in 1824?	Mulgrave
Who notably accompanied John Charles Marshall to the Marshall Islands?	Thomas Gilbert
In what year did Marshall and Gilbert go to the islands?	1788
What is the traditional name of the Marshall Islands?	jolet jen Anij
What is the English translation of the traditional name of the Marshall Islands?	Gifts from God
On what island did mutinous American whalers land in 1824?	Mulgrave Island
Who was the leader of the group attacked by the people of the Marshall Islands in 1834?	Captain DonSette
What vessel was attacked in 1845?	Naiad
What ships were attacked in 1852?	Glencoe and Sea Nymph
In what year did missionaries arrive to live in the Marshall Islands?	1857
On what island did the Missionaries live with citizens of the Marshall Islands?	Ebon
Who was the captain of the crew killed in 1834?	Captain DonSette
In what year was the ship Naiad attacked by natives?	1845
What type of ship was the Naiad?	schooner
Out of what city was the Sea Nymph sailing?	San Francisco
Where did missionaries live as of 1857?	Ebon
What nation had a claim on the Marshall Islands as of 1874?	the Spanish Empire
What nation formed a protectorate over the Marshall Islands?	the German Empire
What nation asserted their rights over the Gilbert and Ellice islands?	Britain
On what ship did German ambassadors arrive in the Marshall Islands?	SMS Nautilus
What title did the Germans give to Kabua?	King of the Ralik Islands
On what day was a final treaty signed between the Marshall Islands chiefs and the Germans?	November 1
What status did the Marshall Islands have in Germany?	Imperial German Protectorate
What nation had control of the Carolines?	Spain
What notable resource was available in the Marshall Islands?	copra
In what year did Germany buy the Marshalls from Spain?	1884
What company ran the Marshall Islands in the late 19th century?	the Jaluit Gesellschaft
When did the Jaluit Gesellschaft's administration of the islands end?	1905
What document was signed in 1899?	the German–Spanish Treaty of 1899
Along with the Marianas and Palau, what islands were acquired from Spain in 1899?	the Carolines
What official administered Germany's Micronesian possessions?	the governor of German New Guinea
What Catholic group was Father Erdland a part of?	the Sacred Heart Jesu Society
In what year did Father Erdland leave the Marshall Islands?	1914
In what year was Father Linckens' last visit to the Marshalls?	1911
When was Father Linckens' book published?	1912
In what year did Father Linckens first travel to the Marshalls?	1904
What notable historical event occurred in Japan in 1868?	the Meiji Restoration
In what region did the Japanese attempt to build up their power after 1868?	East Asia
Along with fishermen, what sort of Japanese people visited the Marshalls?	traders
On what date did the Japanese land on Enewetak?	September 29, 1914
What military alliance did the Japanese join in the First World War?	the Entente
What did the Japanese occupy on September 30, 1914?	the Jaluit Atoll
On what date was the Treaty of Versailles signed?	June 28, 1919
When was the South Pacific Mandate for Japan approved?	December 17, 1920
About how many Japanese emigrated to the Marshalls when it was a Japanese colony?	1,000
What was the primary nature of Germany's interest in the Marshall Islands?	economic
What was the primary nature of Japan's interest in the Marshall Islands?	land
Along with the Mariana Islands, on what island were there more Japanese settlers than indigenous inhabitants?	Palau
What was the traditional social organization of the Marshall Islanders?	Matrilineality
What system of social organization was used in Japan?	the Japanese Patriarchal system
On what date did the Japanese leave the League of Nations?	March 27, 1933
What language were Marshall Islanders taught in schools while under Japanese colonial administration?	Japanese
Along with Protestants, missionaries from what denomination were allowed to operate in the Marshalls?	Catholic
What Japanese fleet was based in the Marshall Islands?	6th Fleet
On what atoll was the 6th Fleet Forces Service based?	Kwajalein
What was the mission of the 6th Fleet Forces Service?	defense of the Marshall Islands
During what conflict did the US occupy the Marshall Islands?	World War II
What was the name of the campaign in which the US occupied the Marshalls?	the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign
In what year did the United States occupy the Marshalls?	1944
How many months did it take for the US to occupy Kwajalein Atoll, Majuro and Enewetak?	one
Along with Mili, Maloelap and Jaluit, what parts of the Marshall Islands were not occupied in the first three months of the American campaign?	Wotje
In what year did American air attacks on the Marshalls begin?	1943
How large was the Japanese garrison on Mili?	5,100
What fraction of the Japanese garrison on Mili died due to hunger?	half
Along with injuries, what suffering did the American bombing cause to the Marshall Islanders?	lack of food
During what conflict did the US occupy the Marshalls?	World War II
What resolution of the UN Security Council gave the United States control over the Marshalls?	Security Council Resolution 21
In what year was the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands created?	1947
What is the name of the broader region that the Marshall Islands are a part of?	Micronesia
In what year did the Cold War begin?	1946
How many nuclear weapons were tested in the Marshall Islands between 1946 and 1958?	67
What was the name of the United States' largest atmospheric nuclear test?	Castle Bravo
What was the yield of the Castle Bravo bombs in kilotons?	108,496
Which of the Marshall Islands was destroyed in a United States hydrogen bomb test?	Elugelab
What was the name of the US study of nuclear fallout on Bikini Atoll?	Project 4.1
When did the United States begin to pay compensation to Marshall Islanders for nuclear weapon exposure?	1956
In millions of dollars, how much money did the United States pay out in nuclear testing compensation to Marshall Island residents between 1956 and 1998?	759
What document granted sovereignty to the Marshall Islands?	the Compact of Free Association
In what year did the Marshall Islands receive sovereignty?	1986
Where in the Marshall Islands does the United States have a missile testing range?	Kwajalein Atoll
When did UN Trusteeship over the Marshall Islands end?	1990
What Security Council Resolution ended UN Trusteeship over the Marshalls?	Security Council Resolution 683
What is the capital of the Marshall Islands?	Majuro
On what day in 2008 did the Marshall Island government declare a state of emergency?	Christmas
In meters, how high were the 2008 floods?	0.91
What caused the 2008 floods?	extreme waves and high tides
In what year did waves overcome the walls of the capital city?	2013
What part of the Marshall Islands experienced drought in 2013?	the northern atolls
How many people were stricken by drought in 2013?	6,000
In the drought stricken areas, how many litres of water did residents consume each day?	1
Along with pink eye and influenza, what other health issue was caused by the drought?	diarrhea
What official declared a state of emergency in the Marshall Islands in response to the drought?	the United States President
As of 2013, who was the Marshall Islands Minister of Foreign Affairs?	Tony de Brum
In what month and year did the 44th Pacific Islands Forum summit take place?	September 2013
What document did Foreign Minister de Brum present at the 44th Pacific Islands Forum summit?	Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership
What environmental issue did the Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership address?	climate change
Who encouraged de Brum to address climate issues?	the Obama administration
What is the governing system of the Marshall Islands?	parliamentary-presidential system
How old must a citizen of the Marshall Islands be to vote?	18
How often are elections held in the Marshall Islands?	every four years
What is the name of the Marshall Islands legislature?	Nitijela
When was the most recent constitution of the Marshall Islands adopted?	1979
What is the name of the upper house of the Marshall Islands Parliament?	the Council of Iroij
Who comprises the upper house of the Marshall Islands Parliament?	twelve tribal chiefs
How many ministers are in the Presidential Cabinet?	ten
Along with the United Democratic Party, what party currently rules the Marshall Islands?	the AKA
How many electoral districts exist in the Marshall Islands?	twenty-four
What document governs the defense of the Marshall Islands?	Compact of Free Association
What nation is responsible for the defense of the Marshall Islands?	the U.S.
Along with economic aid, what assistance does the Compact of Free Association provide?	technical aid
When did the UN Security Council recommend that the Marshall Islands be allowed to join the UN?	August 9, 1991
When did the UN General Assembly approve the Marshall Islands joining the UN?	September 17, 1991
What nation does the Marshall Islands vote similarly to in the General Assembly?	the United States
What Security Council Resolution recommended that the Marshall Islands be allowed to join the UN?	Resolution 704
On what date did the Iranian Navy capture a Marshall Islands ship?	28 April 2015
What was the name of the Marshall Islands ship seized by Iran?	MV Maersk Tigris
Who chartered the captured Marshall Islands ship?	Rickmers Ship Management
How many crew members were on the MV Maersk Tigris?	34
Near what body of water was the Maersk Tigris seized?	the Strait of Hormuz
What nation lies to the west of the Marshall Islands?	the Federated States of Micronesia
What United States territory does the Marshall Islands claim?	Wake Island
How many square kilometers of ocean do the Marshall Islands cover?	1,900,000
How many square kilometers of land do the Marshall Islands cover?	180
How many atolls are part of the Marshall Islands?	29
How large is the Marshall Islands shark sanctuary in square miles?	772,000
In what month and year did the Marshall Islands declare the largest shark sanctuary in the world?	October 2011
In how many square miles of ocean around the world are sharks protected?	1,776,000
What is forbidden in shark sanctuaries?	shark fishing
What island do the Marshall Islands claim?	Wake Island
Who controls Wake Island?	the United States
In what year did the US take control of Wake Island?	1899
What does the Marshall Islands government call Wake Island?	Enen-kio
When does the wet season in the Marshalls begin?	May
In what month does the Marshall Islands wet season end?	November
Typhoons sometimes begin as what whether event in the Marshalls?	tropical storms
Along with the Marianas, where do typhoons that begin in the Marshalls sometimes terminate?	the Philippines
What feature makes the Marshalls susceptible to harm due to rising sea levels?	its very low elevation
Who said that the Marshalls are the most endangered nation in the world?	the president of Nauru
Why are the Marshall Islands the most endangered nation on Earth?	flooding from climate change
How many millimeters of rain do the northern atolls of the Marshall Islands receive?	1,300
What is the main source of fresh water for the Marshall Islands?	rainfall
What is the Marshall Islands often threatened with?	drought
How much more rain do the southern atolls get compared to the northern?	twice
What body did the Marshall Islands join in 2007?	the International Labour Organization
What is the significance of the Marshall Islands joining the International Labour Organization?	its labour laws will comply with international benchmarks
What may see benefits from the Marshalls joining the International Labour Organization?	business conditions
How much money did the Marshall Islands receive yearly from the United States until 2013?	US$57.7 million
How much money will the United States give the Marshal Islands every year until 2023?	US$62.7 million
What document defines how much money is transferred from the United States to the Marshall Islands?	the Amended Compact of Free Association
What will be established in 2023?	a trust fund
On what atoll is a missile test facility based?	Kwajalein Atoll
Who is the missile test facility named after?	Ronald Reagan
What is the official name of the missile test facility?	Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site
What organization operates the missile test site?	United States Army
Along with coconuts, tomatoes and melons, what crops are notably grown in the Marshalls?	breadfruit
Where does most agricultural production take place?	small farms
In what year was a tuna loining plant constructed?	1999
How many people worked at the tuna loining plant?	400
In what year did the tuna loining plant shut down?	2005
Before it shut down, what was the tuna loining plant attempting to produce?	tuna steaks
What was the amount of the loan to the tuna loining plant that the Marshall Islands government was responsible for?	$2 million
Who did Witon Barry work for?	the Tobolar Copra processing plant
Where was the Tobolar Copra plant located?	Majuro
What is copra?	the meat of the coconut
How many coconuts are required to produce 1 liter of coconut oil?	6 to 10
How many kilowatts of power are produced by the solar plant built in 2009?	57
About how many people lived in the Marshall Islands in 1862?	10,000
How many people lived in the Marshall Islands in 1960?	15,000
As of July 2011, how many people resided on the Marshall Islands?	72,191
On what atoll is Ebeye located?	Kwajalein Atoll
What town hosts the largest number of Marshall Islanders outside the Marshall Islands?	Springdale, Arkansas
What is the ethnicity of most Marshall Islands residents?	Marshallese
From what continent did the Marshallese originate?	Asia
What fraction of the population lives on Majuro or Ebeye?	one-half
What recent Asian ancestry do some Marshall Island residents have?	Japanese
From when did the Marshallese migrate from the Asian continent?	several thousand years ago
What was the previous name of the United Church of Christ?	Congregational
What percentage of Marshall Islanders belong to the Assemblies of God?	24.2%
What percentage of Marshall Islands residents are Mormons?	8.3%
What percentage of Marshall Islanders worship at the Assembly of God Part Two?	2.2%
When did the first mosque in Majuro open?	September 2012
What body operates the state schools in the Marshall Islands?	Ministry of Education (Marshall Islands)
Along with the University of the South Pacific, what tertiary education institution exists in the Marshall Islands?	College of the Marshall Islands
Where is the Marshall Islands International Airport located?	Majuro
What airfield operates in Kwajalein?	Bucholz Army Airfield
What class was slackta in Poland?	noble class
Under whos' reign did the szlachta gain institutional privileges?	King Casimir III the Great
WHich two kingdoms shared tentative personal unions?	Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Crown Kingdom of Poland
When did the polish-lithuanian commonwealth thrive?	1569–1795
What is one leader from the polish-lithuanian common weaith.	Ducal Prussia
What is another name for folwarks?	manor farms
Were the szlachta obscure and mysterious or obvious and proud.	obscurity and mystery
Around what time was the decline of the polish common wealth.	late 18th century
WHat did the commonwealth increase before it declined.	political and legal privileges
When, during the partitions of Poland, did the szlachta lose legal and social status.	1772 to 1795
What was one name of a power that the szlachta was dependent on.	Russian Empire
When was the March constitution implemented.	1921
What did the Mach constitution do?	legal privileges of the szlachta were legally abolished
In what republic did the szlachta lose their legal privileges.	Second Polish Republic
What was the notion for all polish nobles?	social equals
What ethnic saying is this traditional from?	Polish saying
Did it matter how much money a person had to polish nobles?	regardless of their financial status
What german word does the term szlachta come from?	slahta
What does slahta mean?	"(noble) family"
What is the polish name for knight?	rycerz
German name for knight?	Ritter
Where does the word her derive from in german?	Erbe
What did the poles of the 17th century think the term szlachta came from?	German "schlachten"
What does schlachtan mean in german?	("to slaughter" or "to butcher")
What German word is also suggestive deriving from  szlachta?	Schlacht
What does schlacht mean?	battle
The polish believed szlachta derived from the name of who?	legendary proto-Polish chief, Lech
What were some powerful Polish nobles referred too?	magnates
What is the singular version of magnates?	magnat
What is another name referring polish nobles?	możny
What is the plural version of mozny?	możni
What other country  besides Poland were polish nobles most likely found?	Lithuania
What term designated the noble class of polish Lithuania common wealth?	szlachta
What are two adjectives that best describe the szlachta?	formalized, hereditary
Who is referred to as nobilitas?	hereditary szlachta
What is the legal status of nobilitas?	equivalent in legal status of the English nobility
What simple word does the term szlachta translate too?	nobility
What were the non noble land owners referred too as?	szlachta
Why were the non nobles and nobles referred as the same term?	by courtesy or error
What does szlachta mainly denote?	old-Commonwealth nobility
Why did the mistranslation of szlachta come about?	included those almost rich and powerful enough to be magnates down to rascals
Who was inferior of the other, European countries or szlachta?	szlachta
What ultimately determined nobility?	hereditary juridical status
What were some impoverished szlachta forced to do?	to become tenants of the wealthier gentry.
Did the tenants of the wealthier genrty lose their nobility?	no
What was one noble thing the poor szlachta did?	retained all their constitutional prerogatives
Have the origins of the szlachta been clear or obscure?	obscure
What did they use to refer to the origin of szlactha?	odwieczna
What was one historic theory of the szlachta origins?	descent from the ancient Iranian tribes known as Sarmatians
What was another regional leader involved in the origins of szlachta?	Alexander the Great
What was important and unique about regional leaders?	had not mixed their bloodlines with those of 'slaves, prisoners, and aliens
WHat was the name of the distinct element from a nnon-Slavic warrior class?	Lechici/Lekhi (Lechitów):
In this theory, what was the upper class?	was of a different origin than the Slavonic peasants
WHen did they find the polish kingdom?	about the fifth century.
WHat caste system does the hindu society have?	military caste
Who shares the same caste system as Hindu?	The szlachta
WHat is the earliest surviving use of the clan name of the polish knights?	documentation regarding Raciborz and Albert's tenure
WHn did the knightly genealogiae associate with heraldic devices?	Middle Ages and in the early modern period
The polish anem and cry ritualized what?	the ius militare,
In 1244 the power to command and army had been used to do what?	define knightly status
Around what time were the knights and szlachta very similiar?	Around the 14th century
What was a personal obligation of the szlachtas?	defend the country
What contributed to the long standing traditions?	geography
What was governing the polish tribes?	wiec
What was the wiec?	an assembly of free tribesmen
When power needed to be consolidated what was chosen to govern?	an elected prince
What was the governing position limited to?	elites
What ruled over the tribes?	clans (ród)
What did the clans people all have in common?	theoretically descending from a common ancestor
What gave them a sense of solidarity?	related by blood or marriage
What were stronghold called?	grόd
What was the territory occupied by a single tribe?	opole
WHo established an elite knightly retinue?	Mieszko I of Poland
How long was Miesko I of Poland reigning?	(c. 935 – 25 May 992)
Along with uniting the lekhitic tribes what did poland succeed in?	preserving the unity of his state
Who also established this retinue as well?	Mieszko I's successors
WHat was a polish nobleman referred to as before the 15th century?	rycerz
What is roughly the same to the english version of rycerz?	knight
What people did the rycerstwo class represent?	wealthier families of Poland and itinerant knights from abroad seeking their fortunes
What positive did the szlachta class receive?	gradually formed apart from Mieszko I's and his successors' elite retinues.
What did ducal law implement for the rycerstwo/nobility?	could serve as officials in state administration.
WHen was the period of Division?	A.D., 1138 – A.D., 1314
What stemmed the period of division?	Bolesław III's division of Poland among his sons
What tribe was the prior social structure from?	Polish
WHen did the Piast dynasty appear?	850 A.D.
Polish nation ruled by what dynasty?	Piast dynasty,
What did some Mozni regard themselves with?	co-proprietors of Piast realms
What did the magnates do to the Piasts realms?	attempted to deprive them of their independence
Who constantly sought to undermine princely authority?	możni
WHat were nobles named in german language?	die beste leuten
What were the nobles named in lithuanian?	ponai
What were the higher nobility named?	kunigai' or 'kunigaikščiai'
The kunigai were subordinate to who?	King of Lithuania.
What word is used to denominate nobility?	бояре
What other group had equal status with the lithuanian nobility?	Polish szlachta
What did the polish szlachta become more of?	polonized
What did some lithuanian nobility claim that caused a paradox?	they were of Roman extraction
What is the new term used for the lithuanian nobility?	šlėkta
Who forbid the use of the word slekta?	Lithuanian linguists
WHo was first invloved in the polonization?	the highest members of the nobility
Who imposed various sanction on the people?	Russian Empire
What was an example of imposing sanctions on lithuanians?	removing Lithuania from the names of the Gubernyas
What did the russian officials announce as a sanction?	"Lithuanians are Russians seduced by Poles and Catholicism"
What language was banned from printing on books?	Lithuanian language.
What group did the Nobility of Ruthenia gravitate its loyalty towards?	Grand Duchy of Lithuania
What type of people were the Grand Duchy of Lithuania?	multicultural and multilingual
What eventually became a part of the grand duchy of lithuania?	principalities of Halych and Volhynia
What was common for families of ruthenian and lithuanian?	intermarried
What other rights were equal to orthodox nobles?	Polish and Lithuanian nobility
What social pressure was pressing down the people?	convert to Catholicism
What greatly eased the cultural pressure towards Catholicism.	Union of Brest
What year was the union of brest	1596
Before 1641 the privileged ennoblement was granted by what?	by monarch
What right was reversed by sijm?	ennoblement
What would be given to the enobled one?	undifferentiated coat of arms
After 1641 who was given the privilege of ennoblement?	sejm
What clan was given the privileged of enoblement?	szlachta clan
Around what time was the total legal number of ennoblement at 800?	between the 14th century and the mid-18th century,
What is average for ennoblements between 14th and min 18th century.	two ennoblements per year
What type of sources give information regarding total number of enablements?	heraldic sources
What was the toalt number of legal ennoblements thoughout history of poland and polish commonwealth	1,600
When did theys tart recording the ennoblements?	14th century onward
When were most ennoblements implemented?	final years of the late 18th century
WHo reformed the grand duchy army?	Vytautas the Great
vytautas created what for compromising professional warriors?	bajorai
What names did the newly formed noble families take afteR?	Lithuanian pagan given names of their ennobled ancestors
What is an example of noble family name?	Goštautai,
Who gave the coat of arms to others?	Union of Horodlo
Who defined the significant legislative changes?	Robert Bideleux and Ian Jeffries
What is one exemption was part of the significant changes in legislation?	1374 exemption from the land tax,
What did the 1425 requirement entail?	requirement that military forces and new taxes be approved by provincial Sejms
What were the statutes issued between 1496 and 1611 prescribed from?	rights of commoners
What was a rarest rare to become a noble?	service to the state
Many nobles were actually surprisingly acting in what way?	really usurpers, being commoners,
Who denounced many nobles?	Hieronim Nekanda Trepka
When did the denouncing of many nobles take place?	first half of the 16th century
What did the nobles lose by being denounced?	owning nobility-estates and promised the estate to the denouncer
THe polish nobility had many positives compared to others including what?	many rights
What was the nobilities commonwealth?	Poland
WHo elected the king?	not of the king or the ruling dynasty
WHy did the state affairs partly grow up on?	the extinction of the male-line descendants of the old royal dynasty
The selection of nobility oh the polish kingdom was selected my whom?	dynasty's female-line descendants.
When did kings grant privileges to the nobles?	at the time of their election to the throne
What specified the kings privileges?	king-elect's Pacta conventa
What was also in exchange during he election of the throne?	ad hoc permission to raise an extraordinary tax
What did nobles get in from the king during election?	privileges
When did buda king casimir issue the heir to his nephew?	1355
who issied the first country wide privilege for the nobility?	Buda King Casimir III the Great
WHo is the nephew of buda king casimer III the great?	Louis I of Hungary
What was promised by Buda King Casimer?	the nobility would no longer be subject to 'extraordinary' taxes
WHo would pay for expenses during travels or the royal courts?	the king and the court
When did King Louis of Hungary approve the privilege of Koszyce?	1374
WHy did King louis approve the privilege?	in order to guarantee the Polish throne for his daughter Jadwiga
What did king louis of hungary do for the nobles?	exempted the entire class from all but one tax
WHat happened to the kings right to raise taxes?	abolished
What could the king do to nobles injured or taken during war?	King to pay indemnities
Who establishd the inviolability of nobles property?	King Władysław II Jagiełło
When did the established right for inviolability of nobles property?	1422
What happened to the right to mint coinage?	ceded
Where did the confirmation of privileges of Jedlnia take place?	at Kraków in 1433
WHat was the privileges of jedlnia based mostly off of?	Brześć Kujawski privilege
What was simliar to the english magna cartas habeas corpus?	nobility a guarantee against arbitrary arrest
What does a court need to imprison a member of the nobility?	warrant from a court of justice
What was the nobles guarantee that his throne would be inherited by his sons?	King Władysław's quid pro quo for this boon
When were the Nieszawa statutes granted?	1454
What did the Nieszawa statues clarify?	the legal basis of voivodship sejmiks
THe nobility was protected from what?	judicial abuses
Whos power was curbed?	magnates
Why did the szlachta demand privileges?	their participation in the Thirteen Years' War.
When did the first free election take place?	1492
What was different about later elections then first free election?	no restrictions on the choice of candidates.
Who only voted in the election of 1492?	senators
Who won the election of 1492?	John I Albert
What dynasty was in reign during the election of 1492?	Jagiellonian Dynasty
Who granted the privilege of Piotrkow?	King John I Albert
Privilege of Piotrkow was granted when?	On April 26, 1496
WHat happened to the nobilities feudal power?	increasing
Who was allowed to leave the village?	one son (not the eldest)
What were the townsfolk prohibited from doing?	owning land
When did the Mielnik Polish–Lithuanian union reform?	23 October 1501
Where was the Mielnik Polish–Lithuanian union refromed?	Union of Mielnik
Where was the  coronation Sejm founded?	Union of Mielnik
What did the actof of milno do?	more to strengthen the magnate dominated Senate of Poland then the lesser nobility
What right was given to the nobles?	disobey the King or his representatives
When did the Act of "Nihil novi nisi commune consensu" happen?	3 May 1505
Who granted the act Act of "Nihil novi nisi commune consensu"?	King Alexander I Jagiellon
What did The Act of "Nihil novi nisi commune consensu" Do	forbade the king to pass any new law without the consent of the representatives of the nobility
What happened to the notabilities political position?	greatly strengthened
What has happened to the legislative power?	legislative power from the king to the Sejm.
What was the movement called also known as execution of laws?	"executionist movement
What were the intentions of executionists movement?	seek to curb the power of the magnates at the Sejm and to strengthen the power of king and country
what did the Sejm in Piotrków forced the magnates to do?	return many leased crown lands to the king,
WHen did Jan Zamoyski. die?	1605
What happened when Jan Zamoyski died?	movement lost its political force.
Who was the last king of the Jagiellonian dynasty?	Sigismund II Augustus
What stopped after the death of Sigismund II Augustus?	monarchs could be elected from within only the royal family
After 1573 who could become a polish-lithuanian monarch?	any Polish noble or foreigner of royal blood
How many documents should the new elected king sign?	two documents
What was contained in the Henrican articles and the Pacta conventa?	basic laws of the Commonwealth
The crown tribunal was created when?	1578
Who created the crown tribunal?	king Stefan Batory
What was the crown tribunal supposed to do?	reduce the enormous pressure on the Royal Court
Where was a lot of power placed in result of the crown tribunal?	the nobility class
WHo joined the crown tribunal eventually?	Lithuanian Tribunal
What did powerful leaders of szlachta sought?	gain legal privileges over their peers
What were most szlachtas class?	Few szlachta were wealthy enough to be known as magnates
What is another name for magnates?	Crimsons
A proper magnates own what?	own at least 20 villages or estates.
Who is properly in the major office in the commonwealth?	magnates
Historians estimate how much of magnates make up szlachta?	1%
Out of one million szlachtas how many were magnates?	200–300
Out of one million how many people could be viewed with significant impact politically?	30–40
Magnates recieved gifts often from who?	monarchs
What significantly increased the magnates wealth?	Magnates
What terms were these gifts given?	temporary leases
What did the magnates do eventually with the gifts?	never returned
The right to create ordynacja's was important to what group?	magnates
When did the right to create ordynacja's happen?	late 16th century
What did the right to create ordynacja's entail?	ensured that a family which gained wealth and power could more easily preserve this
What did the powerful families do with the kings estates?	often rivalled
What was an important power basis for the magnates?	estates of the king
When did the sovereignty of szlachta end?	1795
Who ended the sovereignty of szlachta?	Partitions of Poland
UNtil 1918 whos legal status was dependent on the russian empiresovereignty of szlachta?	szlachta
Who redused 64,000 szlachta to commoner status?	Nicholas I
IN 1858 who was szlachta out of all the russian nobles?	62.8%
When and who abolished the serfdom?	Russian Poland on February 19, 1864
Who could the ex serfs sell their land to?	only sell land to other peasants, not szlachta
How much land was held by the peasants?	48.9%
What was different between the polish nobility and others?	European countries the nobility lost power as the ruler strove for absolute monarchy
What happened to nobility at expense of the king?	actually gained power
What did the political system eventually evolve into?	oligarchy
What did the ruler strive for?	absolute monarchy
How much of the total population was polish common wealth?	10–12%
IN 1791 how much did the szalchta comprimise the total population?	8%
Polish szlachta usually incorporated who?	most local nobility from the areas that were absorbed by Poland–Lithuania
How many nobilities made up other European countries besides poland lithuania?	1–3%
What dissolved the priveleges of Russian Empire, Kingdom of Prussia or Habsburg Monarchy?	March Constitution of Poland
What class was polands nobility?	closed class
Who could rise into polish ennoblement?	Many low-born individuals
How much influence did each szlachcic have over politics?	enormous influence
WHo could nullify all the proceedings of a given sejm?	any nobleman
What is is called to nullify proceedings?	liberum veto
Children inherited polish nobility from whom?	noble mother and father
What does an individual do to attain ennoblement?	special services to the state
WHo could naturalize a polish noble?	Polish king
What is another name for ennoblement?	nobilitacja
WHat is another name for polish noble?	indygenat
In theory how were all polish noblemen viewed?	equals
Was was unique about the dignities?	not hereditary
If one is high in dignities they are also high in what other form?	ritual
Nobles held land form whom?	other lords were only peers "de iure"
Who could compose the polish landed gentry?	any nobility that owned lands
whats is another name for polish landed gentry?	(ziemianie or ziemiaństwo
Did all hold title of nobility?	no
What was very important to the polish nobility?	Coats of arms
What kind of system was the coats of arms?	heraldic system
how did the polish nobility system compare to other heraldy countries?	differing in many ways
Where did polish knightshood originate?	Moravia (i.e. Poraj) and Germany
What is the most notable difference between countries?	minorities would be given the noble title
Coat of arms would be shared with who else?	most families sharing origin
How would unrelated families be attributed to the clan?	on the basis of similarity of arms
Did number of cat of arms in the late middle ages fall?	low and did not exceed 200
What was rarely used?	brisure
Where did the  coat of arms proper and a lozenge granted to women not develoupe?	Poland
Where did men get their coat of arms usually?	their fathers
What was the prevalent mentality and ideology called?	Sarmatism
Where did the name sarmatism originate?	powerful ancient nation of Sarmatians
How did sarmatism effect szlachta culture?	served to integrate the multi-ethnic nobility
What was also pushed for by result of sarmatism?	peace and pacifism
What languages were freely mixed?	Polish and Latin
What two religions were most common?	Roman Catholic or Orthodox
What was the minority group in the polish nobility?	Muslims
What was rewarding for switching judiasm to christianity?	ennoblement
What happened after the roman catholic church regained power in Poland?	the nobility became almost exclusively Catholic
What was the smallest amount of religion in the noble?	Jews
During which period was Vigil a poet?	Augustan
How many major works of literature is Virgil known for?	three
Which major Latin epic is Virgil known for?	Aeneid
What is Virgil's full name?	Publius Vergilius Maro
Which collection of minor poems are sometimes attributed to Virgil?	Appendix Vergiliana
Which of Virgil's works is considered the national epic of ancient Rome?	Aeneid
Which works did Virgil model the Aeneid after?	Iliad and Odyssey
Who is the main character in the Aeneid?	Aeneas
What was Aeneas trying to accomplish in the Aeneid?	fulfill his destiny and arrive on the shores of Italy
Who appears as Dante's guide through hell and purgatory in the Divine Comedy?	Virgil
Who was Virgil's editor?	Varius
Whose two commentaries were incorporated into Virgil's biography by Suetonius?	Servius and Donatus
What do the comentaries rely on for some of their information about Virgil?	inferences made from his poetry and allegorizing
Is Virgil's biographical tradition easily researched or is it problematic?	problematic
In which village does tradition believe Virgil was born?	Andes
In which cities did Virgil attend schools?	Cremona, Mediolanum, Rome and Naples
What other career did Virgil consider?	rhetoric and law
Which type of family do scholars generally believe Virgil belonged to?	equestrian landowning
Does Macrobius believe Virgil's father came from a distinguished or humble background?	humble
Which three studies did Virgil abandon for philosophy?	rhetoric, medicine, and astronomy
How was Virgil regarded socially by his schoolmates?	extremely shy and reserved
What was Virgil's nickname?	Parthenias
How did Virgil earn his nickname "Parthenias" or "maiden"?	social aloofness
Which short narrative poem was attributed to Virgil as early as the 1st century AD?	the Culex
Which Hellenistic poet was known for bucolic hexameter poetry?	Theocritus
Who tried to pay off veterans with land, some of which possibly belonged to Virgil?	Octavian
Virgil's loss of his famiyl farm and the attempt to regain his property though poetry was the inferred motive for which work?	Eclogues
To whom was Eclogue 4 addressed to?	Asinius Pollio
Which Eclogues discusses homosexual love?	Ecl. 2
Who helped finish the Aeneid?	Varius Rufus
When where the Eclogues likely published?	before 37 BC
What were Octavian' s agent d'affaires called?	Maecenas
Which leading literary figure often mentioned Virgin in his poetry?	Horace
Which long didactic hexameter poem did Virgil work on for several years?	Georgics
To whom was Georgics dedicated to?	Maecenas
The theme of Georgics is instruction in the methods of what?	running a farm
Which of Virgil's poet friends committed suicide in 26 BC?	Gallus
Who was Gallus disgraced by?	Augustus
Octavian defeated Antony and Cleopatra at which battle?	Battle of Actium
When did Octavian return from the Battle of Actium?	31 BC
Who took turns with Virgil to read the Georgics to Octavian?	Maecenas
Which of Virgil's works is widely considered his finest?	The Aeneid
Who commissioned the Aeneid according to Propertius?	Augustus
How many books are included in The Aeneid?	12
Which of Homer's works did the first six books of the Aeneid model after?	Odyssey
Which of Homer's works did the last six books of the Aeneid connect to?	Iliad
Who is Aeneas' enemy throughout the Aeneid?	Juno
Which queen committed suicide in Book 4 of the Aeneid?	Dido
In which book does Aeneas' father die?	5
Who reveals Rome's destiny to Aeneas?	Anchises
Who guides Aeneas through the Underworld?	Sibyl
To whom is Aeneas betrothed?	Lavinia
Which King does Aeneas ally with in Book 8 of the Aeneid?	King Evander
Who had Lavinia already been promised to?	Turnus
Who is roused to war by the Fury Allecto and Amata Lavinia's mother?	Turnus
When did Augustus' victory at Actium against Mark Antony and Ceopatra VII occur?	31 BC
Who is the protagonist of the Aeneid?	Aeneas
Who is mercilessly slaughtered by Aeneas?	Turnus
Who is the founder of Rome which some scholars see strong associations with Aeneas?	Augustus
Which book supposedly caused Augustus' sister to faint?	6
What was the title of Jean-Baptiste Wicar's artwork inspired by the Aeneid?	Virgil Reading the Aeneid
Who did Virgil recite Books 2, 4, and 6 of the Aeneid to?	Augustus
According to tradition, where did Virgil travel in 19 BC to revise the Aeneid?	Greece
Where did Virgil die?	Brundisium harbor
What date did Virgil die?	September 21, 19 BC
Who were Virgil's literary executors?	Lucius Varius Rufus and Plotius Tucca
What wish of Virgil's did Lucius Varius Rufus and Plotius Tucca disregard?	the poem be burned
Who was one of Virgil's most ardent admirers who referenced Virgil in almost every line of his epic?	Silius Italicus
.What was the title of Silius Italicus' epic in which Virgil was referenced in almost every line?	Punica
Who bought Virgil's tomb?	Silius
Which of Virgil's works was later widely interpreted to have predicted the birth of Jesus Christ?	Fourth Eclogue
Who cautioned "we ought not to relate their lying fables, lest we fall under sentence of eternal death"?	Gregory of Tours
Literate men acknowledged Virgil as a master poet despite what empire collapsing?	Western Roman
Did literate men acknowledge Virgil as a master or novice poet?	master
In which of Dante's works was Virgil a guide through Hell and Purgatory?	Divine Comedy
Who was the author of the Divine Comedy?	Dante
Who was Dante's guide through Purgatory and Hell in the Divine Comedy?	Virgil
Which of Virgil's works was said by some to have predicted Jesus' birth?	Eclogues 4
Which religion did some consider Virgil to have heralded in?	Christianity
During which time period did Virgil's reputation inspire legends associating him with magic and prophecy?	Middle Ages
Where did the tradition start which regarded Virgil as a great magician?	Naples
How long did legends of Virgil's magical powers remain popular?	over two hundred years
What is the modern Welsh word for phramacist?	fferyllydd
Where did Virgil's name become a generic term for magic-worker?	medieval Wales
When did Virgil's reputation as a great magician begin?	12th century
During which time period did the legend of Virgil in his Basket arise?	Middle Ages
What is the name of the beautiful woman who Virgil enamoured?	Lucretia
Which story did Virgil being left halfway in basket parallel?	Phyllis riding Aristotle
Which artist made a woodcut and later an engraving of Virgil and his basket?	Lucas van Leyden
During which time period did Virgil's name become associated with miraclous powers?	Middle Ages
In which district is "Virgil's tomb" located?	Piedigrotta
What is the entrance of the ancient Roman tunnel where "Virgil's tomb" is located also called?	grotta vecchia
Besides Virgilius, which other spelling is permitted in modern usage?	Vergilius
During which time period was Vergilius spelled Virgilius?	Late Empire and Middle Ages
In what century did some German-trained classicists in the US suggest modifying the common usage to Vergil?	19th
Which style guide recommends using Vergilius to avoid confusion with Virgilius Maro Grammaticus?	Oxford
What Country are the Alps located in?	Europe
How many kilometres do the Alps stretch?	1,200 kilometres
How long has it taken for the Alps to form?	over tens of millions of years
What is the highest mountain in the Alps?	Mont Blanc
The Alpine region is also known as what?	the "four-thousanders"
What affects the climate in Europe?	The altitude and size of the range
What type of animal lives inn the higher peaks?	ibex
What plant grows in the rocky areas of the range?	Edelweiss
Evidence of human habitation in the Alps goes as far back to what era?	Paleolithic era
How old was the mummified man discovered at the Austrian-Italian bored?	5,000 years old
What culture was well established by the 6th Century BC?	the Celtic La Tène culture
Who famously crossed the Alps with a herd of elephants?	Hannibal
What person took an army of 40,000 across the mountain passes?	Napoleon
Where was Adolf Hitlers base of operation during World War 2?	Bavarian Alps
The alps is home to how many people?	14 million people
How many visitors go to the Alps annually?	120 million
What is the dominant industry in the Alpine region?	tourist industry
The English word Alps derives from what Latin Word?	Alpes
Who says that all high mountains are called Alpes by Celts?	Maurus Servius Honoratus
What languages have terms for high mountains derived from alp?	Celtic languages
There is a theory that in Greek Alpes is a name of what origin?	Indo-European origin
What name has been used as a name for a number of mountainous areas across Europe?	Albania
Albania was a name for what during Roman Times?	the eastern Caucasus
Albania was occasionally used as a name for what in the English language?	Scotland
What words are likely to have common origins?	alb ("white") and albus
Where do Alb and Albus share their origin from?	the association of the tops of tall mountains or steep hills with snow.
Alb can also mean what?	white
The term alp, alm, albe or alpe refers to what in modern languages?	a grazing pastures in the alpine regions below the glaciers, not the peaks
What refers to a high mountain pasture where cows are taken to be grazed during the summer months?	An alp
Words such as horn, kogel, gipfel, spitz, and berd are used in what regions?	German speaking regions
Mont, pic, dent and aiguille are words used in what regions?	French speaking regions
What are the crescent shaped geographic feature of central Europe?	The Alps
What is the mean height of the Alp's peak?	2.5 km (1.6 mi)
How far does the Alps range stretch?	the Mediterranean Sea north above the Po basin, extending through France from Grenoble, eastward through mid and southern Switzerland
Switzerland, France, Austria and Italy have the greatest what?	alpine territory
The highest portion of the Alp's range is divided by what?	the glacial trough of the Rhone valley
Where are the peaks smaller in the range?	the easterly portion
The Bernese Alps are located in what part of the range?	northern
What makes the classification of the mountains and subregions difficult?	The variances in nomenclature
Who came up with the general classification?	geologist Stefan Schmid
Where is the divide between the Eastern Alps and Western Alps near?	Splügen Pass
The highest peak of the Western Alps is where?	Mont Blanc
How tall is the peak at Mont Blanc?	4,810 m
The highest peak of the Eastern Alps is where?	Piz Bernina
How tall is the peak of Piz Bernina	4,049 metres
Where are the French Prealps located?	France
What mountains are located in Switzerland and France?	the Jura Mountains
What follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald?	The secondary chain of the Alps
What heads approximately east-northeast once at the Swiss bored?	the line of the main chain
What have been crossed for war and commerce?	The Alps
What was established during medieval periods by religious orders?	hospices
Where were hospices established?	the summits of many of the main passes
What is the highest of the most important passes of the Alps?	Col de l'Iseran
What seperates the Otztal Alps and Zillertal Alps?	the Brenner Pass
How long has the Brenner Pass been used as a trading route?	since the 14th century
The lowest of the Alpine passes at what elevation?	985 m (3,232 ft)
Who crossed the Great St. Bernard Pass with 40,000 troops?	Napoleon Bonaparte
Where is the highest point in the alps located?	col de l'Iseran in Savoy (France)
Who began studying the rock formations of the Alps	naturalists
When did the studying of rock formations begin in the Alps?	the 18th century
What was used in the mid-19th century to explain the presence of "folded" mountain chains?	theory of geosynclines
What theory was more widely accepted by the mid-20th century?	the theory of plate tectonics
When did the formation of the alps began?	about 300 million years ago
What did the Pangaean supercontinent consisted of what during the Paleozoic Era?	a single tectonic plate
When did the single tectonic plate break into separate plates?	the Mesozoic Era
The Tethys sea developed during what period of time?	Jurassic Period
The collision between the African and the Eurasian plates began during what time?	the late Cretaceous Period
What was uplifted from extreme compressive stresses and pressure?	marine sedimentary rocks
When did the layer of marine flysch sediments get deposited in the foreland basin?	As the rising peaks underwent erosion
What were later deposited in foreland areas as molasse?	Coarse sediments
Switzerland and Bavaria saw a further upthrusting of what?	flysch
What caused the development of the Jura Mountains?	a late-stage orogeny
What cause different paleogeographic regions in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods?	A series of tectonic events
What is another word for rock composition?	lithology
What geological subdivision is located in the north?	Helveticum
What is Stefan Schmid's profession?	geologist
What happened to the Western Alps during the Cenozoic Era	a metamorphic event
When did the Austroalpine peaks undergo their event?	the Cretaceous Period
The Western Alps and the Austroalpine peaks show distinct differences in what?	nappe formations
When did Flysch deposits probably occur in the Southern Alps of Lombardy?	Cretaceous
What area do peaks in France, Italy, and Switzerland lie in?	Houillière zone
What are more common in the Western Alps?	High "massifs"
When compared to the Western Alps, what area has few high peaked massifs?	Eastern Alps
Layers of rock from Europe, Africa and the ocean make up what?	the structure of the Alps
What is the origin of the bottom nappe structure?	continental Europe
Where are the top of the nappes derived from?	the African plate
What is an example of the ongoing orogeny?	The Matterhorn
What happened to the Alpine orogenic belt that gave it the steep vertical peak?	folded and fractured
Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and peaks in the Pennine Alps cosist of what?	layers of rock from the various orogenies
What are the common characteristics of the Alpine Orogenic Belt?	steep vertical peaks
What group defined a list of 82 official Apline summits that reach 4,000m?	Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme (UIAA)
What is included in the list of 82 official Apline summits other than Mountains?	subpeaks with little prominence that are considered important mountaineering objectives
The list of twenty two summits has summits with at least how much prominence?	500 m (1,640 ft)
When was Mont Blanc first climbed?	1786
When were most of the Alpine fourthousanders climber?	first half of the 19th century
When was the ascent of the Matterhorn?	1865
What did the ascent of the Matterhorn mark?	the end of the golden age of alpinism
Who was among the first to successfully climb all the major 4,000m peaks?	Karl Blodig
When was the first British Mont Blanc ascent?	1788
When was the first female ascent on Mont Blanc?	1819
When had Swiss mountaineers ascended most of the peaks?	the mid-1850s
What year did Edward Whymper reach the top of the Matterhorn?	1865
When were the last of the six great north faces of the Alps climbed?	1938
What have been mined in the Alps for thousands of years?	minerals
What did Celtic tribes mine from the Alps?	copper
What did the Romans mine in the Bad Gastein area?	gold
What does Erzberd in Styria furnish?	high-quality iron ore
The cinnabar deposits are found in what area?	Slovenia
How long have Alpine crystals been studied and collected?	hundreds of years
When did the alpine crystals begin to be classified?	the 18th century
Who studied the shapes of crystals?	Leonhard Euler
By the 19th century what was common in the Alpine regions?	crystal hunting
Who amassed a collection 8000 crystals?	David Friedrich Wiser
Where did the mountains undergo serve erosion?	Miocene Epoch
What was the cause of the severe erosion?	glaciation
Who noted the severe erosion of the mountains?	Louis Agassiz
What was Louis Agassiz also known as?	the "father of the ice-age concept"
Where did Agassiz study during the 1840s?	the Unteraar Glacier
Agassiz found that the Unteraar Glacier moved how much per year?	100 m (328 ft)
The movement of the Unteraar Glacier moved more rapidly in what part?	the middle
What is an example of a valley carved by glaciers during the ice ages?	The Inn valley
What lays at the bottom of the Inn Valley	Eroded rocks from the most recent ice age
The top of the Inn Valley consists of what?	erosion from earlier ice ages
What are Moraines?	piles of rock picked up during the movement of the glacier
Where have moraines accumulated?	at edges, center and the terminus of glaciers.
How do Piedmont glaciers appear?	spread in a fan-like shape
What causes the ice to break and crack loudly?	The stress of the movement
What does the cracking of the ice create?	unpredictable and dangerous crevasses
What causes flooding, property damage, and loss of life?	a piece of glacier will detach or break
What killed about 2500 people in the 17th century?	an avalanche
How many homes in a village near Zermatt were destroyed by an avalanche in the 19th century?	120 homes
What cause the glaciers to descend to permafrost levels in some areas?	High levels of precipitation
From 1876 to 1973, how much did the glaciers that covered the Alps shrink?	to 1,342 km2 (518 sq mi)
What resulted from the loss of the area the glaciers over the Alps?	decreased river run-off levels.
How much of the glaciation in Austria disappeared?	Forty percent
How much of the glaciation disappeared in Switzerland?	30%
What provides Europe with drinking water, irrigation, and hydroelectric power?	The Alps
How much of Europe does the Alps cover?	11 percent of the surface area
How much water does the Alps provide to lowland Europe?	90 percent
How much water does Milan depend on from the Alpine runoff?	80 percent
Water from the rivers is used in over how many hydroelectric power plants?	500
The Rhine, the Rhone, the Inn, the Ticino and the Po rivers flow from what Country?	Switzerland
Where do the major tributaries that flow through the Danube originate from?	the Alps
Which river is second to the Nile as a freshwater source to the Mediterranean?	The Rhone
What does The Rhone begin as?	glacial meltwater
Where does the Rhine originate?	a 30 square kilometre area in Switzerland
Where is the medieval St. Bartholomew Chapel located?	Germany
What side of the Konigssee was St. Bartholomew's chapel built?	south side
What do the rivers form?	lakes
Who have been studying the impact of climate change and water use?	Scientists
Water is diverted from rivers for what purpose?	snowmaking in the ski resorts
What are the effects of diverting the water from rivers?	unknown
What are a classic example of what happens when a temperate area at lower altitude gives way to higher-elevation terrain?	The Alps
Elevations around the world that have a cold climate similar to that of the polar region have been called what?	Alpine
What causes the temperature to decrease?	A rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere
What is sufficient to divide the weather patterns in Europe into a wet north and dry south?	The height of the Alps
Since when has the severe weather in the Alps been studied?	the 18th century
Particularly what part of the weather has been studied?	the weather patterns
What was placed in the mountains early in the 20th century?	Numerous weather stations
Where is the Aosta valley located?	Italy
Where is the Valais located?	Switzerland
What areas experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff?	The areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation
What are the ranges of mean precipitation in the Alps?	2,600 mm (100 in) per year to 3,600 mm (140 in) per year
Where do the higher levels of precipitation occur?	high altitudes
At what altitude does snowfall begin in November?	At altitudes between 1,000 and 3,000 m
How many zones are the Alps split into?	five climatic zones
What is the lowest zone of the Alps called?	colline zone
Where does the lowest zone of the Alps exist?	between 500 and 1,000 m
Where does the montane zone extend from?	from 800 to 1,700 m
Where does the sub-Alpine zone extend from?	from 1,600 to 2,400 m
What has been projected into the 22nd century for the Alps?	Various models of climate change
What will have an effect on snowfall, snowpack, glaciation, and river runoff?	increased temperatures
What have the various models been of?	climate change
How many species of plants have been identified in the Alpine regions?	Thirteen thousand
How are Alpine plants grouped?	by habitat and soil type
Oak, beech, ash, and sycamore maple make up what group of trees?	chief deciduous trees
What is often above the forestry?	a band of short pine trees
What type of soil does Alpenrose prefer?	acidic soil
What is the area above the treeline defined as?	alpine
Why does the alpine area fluctuate greatly?	because of regional fluctuations in tree lines.
What grows in abundance in areas such as the meadows above the Lauterbrunnental?	Alpine plants such the Alpine gentian
What are Gentians named after?	the Illyrian king Gentius
How many species of the early-spring blooming flower grow in the Alps?	40 species
What do the plants tend to form at higher altitudes?	isolated cushions
Ranunculus glacialis have been recorded to have been found how far in the alps?	above 4,000 m
What is Eritrichium nanum commonly known as?	the King of the Alps
What is the best known of the alpine plants?	Edelweiss
What gives way to the growth of plant species with secondary metabolites important for medicinal purposes?	extreme and stressful climatic conditions
Origanum Vulgare has what useful properties?	medicinal
Where are Urtica dioica found?	the Alps
What has nearly exterminated the trees in many areas?	Human interference
What are rarely found after the extreme deforestation between the 17th and 19th centuries?	forests of deciduous trees
What has changed since the second half of the 20th century?	The vegetation
The practice of building ski runs by mechanical means has destroyed what?	the underlying tundra
How many species of wildlife habitat the Alps?	30,000 species
What have the wildlife done to survive the harsh conditions of the Alps?	made adaptations
Some species of wildlife can only survive in what specific environment?	directly above or below the snow line
What is the largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes?	alpine ibex
How high have the Alpine Ibex been sighted?	as high as 3,000 m (9,843 ft)
Where do the ibex live?	in caves
What animal that live in the Alps are classified as antelopes?	chamois
What year was the last brown bear recorded to have been killed?	1792
Where do many rodents live?	underground
Where do Marmots live?	almost exclusively above the tree line as high as 2,700 m (8,858 ft)
Where do marmots build their colonies?	beneath the alpine pastures
What is the most common bird found in the Alps?	the alpine chough
Why do reptiles only live up to the snow line?	they cannot bear the cold temperatures
What do reptiles due since they cannot bear the cold temperatures?	they hibernate underground
How have the Alpine salamanders adapted to living above the snow line?	by giving birth to fully developed young rather than laying eggs
What can be found in the streams up to the snow line?	Brown trout
How long have some species of moths believed to have evolved from the same habitat?	120 million years
What can be commonly seen drinking from the snow melt?	Blue moths
The swallowtail Parnassius family of butterfly habitat ranges up to how much?	1,800 m (5,906 ft)
What species of beetles are were collected for their colors before being protected?	Rosalia alpina
Some species of moths and insects show evidence of what?	having been indigenous to the area
How long ago does the evidence show moths and insects to have been indigenous?	the Alpine orogeny
Where is Emosson located?	Valais, Switzerland
When were dinosaur tracks found in Emosson?	the 1970s
When were late Paleolithic communities established along the lake shores?	About 10,000 years ago
What has been found in caves near Vercors?	Evidence of human habitation
Why were houses built on piles?	to keep them dry
What have been found in Alpine areas of France and Italy?	Standing stones
How old are rock drawings in Valcamonica?	more than 5000 years old
Who was Otzi the Iceman?	a mummy of a neolithic body
When was Otzi the Iceman found?	In 1991
Where was Otzi the Iceman discovered?	the Similaun glacier
When did Celtic tribes settle in Switzerland?	between 1000 to 1500 BC
The Raetians lived in what region?	the eastern regions
The Helvetii occupied which region?	the west
What did the Celtic tribes mine?	salt
Which were the most widespread of the mountain tribes?	The Celts
When was the Second Punic War?	218 BC
Who was the Carthaginian general?	Hannibal
What did the Romans build along the mountain passes?	roads
What can still be found on the mountain passes?	Roman road markers
What brought the defeat of the Allobrogi?	The Roman expansion
When were the Allobrogi defeated?	in 121 BC
When did Julius Caesar overcome the Helvetii?	58 BC
What tribes settled much of the Alpine region?	Germanic tribes
Who established Christianity in the region?	Romans
What did the Frankish expansion and the Bavarian expansion introduce?	feudalism
What area still has intricate frescoes?	Castello del Buonconsiglio in Trento, Italy
What is preserved as an example of medieval architecture?	Château de Chillon
Much of the medieval period was a time of what?	power struggles
Where were the Visconti from?	northern Italy
What dynastie was from Austria and Slovenia?	the House of Habsburg
What Country was a well-established separate state by the 16th century?	Switzerland
What wars took place during the late 18th century and early 19th century?	the Napoleonic Wars
Who annexed territory formerly controlled by the Habsburgs and Savoys?	Napoleon
When was the Helvetic Republic established?	1798
Where was the Helvetic Republic established?	Switzerland
When did many alpine countries develop heavy protection to prevent new invasion?	After the fall of Napoléon
Who built a series of fortifications in the Maurienne valley?	Savoy
Why were a series of fortifications in the Maurienne valley built?	to protect the major alpine passes
Who ordered the construction of a paved road?	Napoléon Bonaparte
What became tourist destinations during the 19th century?	the monasteries built in the high Alps
Who built monasteries in Lucerne, Switzerland and Oberammergau?	The Benedictines
Who had abbeys in the Savor and one in the center of Interlaken?	the Augustinians
When was the Great St. Bernard Hospice built?	the 9th or 10th centuries
How old was the charcoal placed in the Drachloch cave?	50,000 years
What does the finding of charcoal in Dragon's Hole prove?	the high peaks were visited by prehistoric people
What may have been buried by the same prehistoric people?	Seven bear skulls
People blindfolded themselves to cross what?	Alpine passes
Where was Charles VII from?	France
What was Charles VII chamberlain ordered to do?	climb Mont Aiguille
What did the knight leave at the summit of Rocciamelone?	a bronze triptych of three crosses
When did Antioine de Ville climb Mont Aiguille?	1492
When did four Chamonix men almost reach the summit of Mont Blanc?	18th century
Who was the first naturalist to ascend the mountains?	Conrad Gessner
Where was Horace-Benedict de Saussure born?	Geneva
Who was a member of the third ascent of Mont Blanc?	Saussure
Who was the first of many to present the Alps as a place of allure and beauty?	Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Who wrote the poem Die Alpen?	Albrecht von Haller
When did the Alpine countries see an influx of poets, artists, and musicians?	After the end of the Napoleonic Wars
What did the visitors come to experience in the Alpine countries?	the sublime effects of monumental nature
Percy and Mary Shelley were inspired by what region's scenery?	Geneva
What poem did Shelley write during the visits to Geneva?	Mont Blanc
When did scientists began to arrive en masse to study the geology and ecology of the Alpine region?	the mid-19th century
Where was Adolf Hitler born?	Austrian
What did Adolf Hitler have a lifelong romantic fascination with?	the Alps
Where did Adolf Hitler establish a home in the 1930s?	the Obersalzberg region
When was Adolf Hitlers first visit to the Alps?	1923
By 1940 who occupied many of the Alpine countries?	the Third Reich
What country underwent a political coup that made it part of the Third Reich?	Austria
What was the only country that avoided invasion from the Third Reich?	Switzerland
Who wired the infrastructure leading into Switzerland?	The Swiss commanders
Who were trained for the war?	Ski troops
Where was the battle at Riva Ridge?	Italy
Where was a substantial amount of Nazi plunder found at the end of the war?	Austria
Where did American troops find 75 kilos of gold coins?	The salt mines surrounding the Altaussee area
What is the population of the Alpine region?	14 million
What does the economy consist of on the rim of the mountains?	manufacturing and service jobs
Farming and Forestry continue to be a mainstay of what?	Alpine culture
Much of what has not changed since the medieval period?	Alpine culture
When were skills that guaranteed survival in the mountain valleys most important?	the medieval period
What is one of the strongest traditions in Alpine culture?	carpentry
What has been a traditional occupation for centuries?	Farming
What made farming less dominant in the 20th century?	tourism
Why is pasture land limited?	because of the steep and rocky topography of the Alps
When are cows moved to the highest pastures close to the snowline?	mid-June
What is an ancient tradition in most Alpine countries?	Cheesemaking
How much can a wheel of cheese from the Emmental weigh?	up to 45 kg (100 lb)
What is an important farming activity in mountain villages?	Haymaking
How many times is Hay normally brought each year?	twice
When is Carnival celebrated?	before Lent
What do people in high villages build their homes according to?	medieval designs that withstand cold winters
What is the area of the home heated by a stove called?	the stube
The typic Swiss chalet originated from where?	the Bernese Oberland
Which direction do Chalets often face?	south or downhill
What are Chalets built of?	solid wood
The food is passed from the kitchen to where?	the stube
Where is the dining room table placed?	the stube
Traditionally, what are meals served on?	carved wooden plates
How is furniture traditionally carved?	elaborately
What are roofs traditionally constructed from?	Alpine rocks
Where are chalets typically used for roof construction found??	the higher parts of the valleys
The inclination of the roof cannot exceed how much?	40%
How many dialects have been identified in the Slavic Alps?	19
What language is spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland?	Romansh
What's one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world?	the Alps
Where is Saalbach located?	Austria
How many people visit the Alps every year?	over 120 million
What is an integral part of the Alpine economy?	tourism
When did the tourism industry begin?	the early 19th century
When were large hotels built in the Alps?	during the Belle Époque
When were cog-railways built in the Alps?	early in the 20th century
When was the first figure skating championship held?	1882
Where was the first figure skating championship held?	St. Moritz
Where were the Winter Olympics held in 1924?	Chamonix, France
Where were the Winter Olympics held in 1928?	St. Moritz, Switzerland
Where were the Winter Olympics held in 1936?	Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany
When was the Lauberhorn Rennen ran for the first time on the Lauberhorn above Wengen?	1930
When were the Winter Olympics held in Albertville, France?	(1992)
When were ski-lifts built in Swiss and Austrian towns?	post-World War I
When were several new villages built in France almost exclusively for skiing?	the 1970s
Where is Les Menuires located?	France
How much area is devoted to roads in the Alpine region?	4,200 km (2,600 mi)
How many vehicles use the roads?	6 million
Where are most of Europe's highest railways located?	Switzerland
How long is the tunnel connecting Lotschberg and Gotthard planned to be?	57 km
Where is the village of Avoriaz located?	France
Where are the villages of Wengen and Zermatt located?	Switzerland
Why are villages considering becoming car free zones?	reasons of sustainability
When are many passes in the Alps closed?	winter
The lower regions and larger towns of the Alps are well-served by what?	motorways
What can be treacherous even in summer due to steep slopes?	mountain passes
What is a gene?	a locus (or region) of DNA that encodes a functional RNA or protein product
What is the basis of inheritance of phenotypic traits?	The transmission of genes to an organism's offspring
What influence are most biological traits under?	polygenes (many different genes)
What is one instantly visible genetic trait?	eye colour or number of limbs
What is one invisible genetic trait?	blood type, risk for specific diseases, or the thousands of basic biochemical processes that comprise life
What do mutations in a gene sequence lead to?	different variants, known as alleles
What do alleles do?	encode slightly different versions of a protein
What do alleles cause?	different phenotype traits
What does "having a gene" or a "good gene" typically refer to?	having a different allele of the gene
What causes genes to evolve?	natural selection or survival of the fittest of the alleles
What can regulatory regions of a gene be far removed from?	its coding regions
What can coding regions be split into?	several exons
What do some viruses store their genome in instead of DNA?	RNA
What are some gene products?	functional non-coding RNAs
What is a broad, modern working definition of a gene?	any discrete locus of heritable, genomic sequence which affect an organism's traits by being expressed as a functional product
Who first suggested the existence of discrete inheritable units?	Gregor Mendel (1822–1884)
If a distinct trait in edible pea plants is mathematically described as a 2n combination, what does n represent?	n is the number of differing characteristics in the original peas
What is one thing that Gregor Mendel was the first to demonstrate?	independent assortment
What is another thing that Gregor Mendel was the first to demonstrate?	the distinction between dominant and recessive traits
What did Gregor Mendel explain his results in terms of?	discrete inherited units that give rise to observable physical characteristics
What was the dominant theory of heredity prior to Mendel's work?	one of blending inheritance
Who developed the theory of inheritance known as pangenesis?	Charles Darwin
What does the term gemmule describe?	hypothetical particles that would mix during reproduction
What year was Mendel's work first published?	1866
Who are the three scientists that claimed to have reached conclusions similar to Mendel's?	Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak
What ancient Greek word is the word 'gene' derived from?	γένος (génos)
What does the ancient Greek word 'génos' mean?	"race, offspring"
What Danish botanist coined the word 'gene'?	Wilhelm Johannsen
What was the word 'gene' used to describe in 1909?	the fundamental physical and functional unit of heredity
Who first used the word 'genetics' in 1905?	William Bateson
What was shown to be the molecular repository of genetic information by experiments in the 1940s to 1950s?	Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
Who studied the structure of DNA using x-ray crystallography?	Rosalind Franklin
What two scientists published a model of the double stranded DNA molecule?	James D. Watson and Francis Crick
What is one exception to the central dogma of molecular biology?	reverse transcription in retroviruses
What is the modern study of genetics at the level of DNA known as?	molecular genetics
When was the first sequence of a gene determined?	In 1972
What was the first gene to be sequenced?	the gene for Bacteriophage MS2 coat protein
Who developed chain termination DNA sequencing in 1977?	Frederick Sanger
What did the devlopment of the chain termination DNA sequencing method do for the sequencing process?	improved the efficiency of sequencing and turned it into a routine laboratory tool.
What project used an automated version of the Sanger method in its early stages?	the Human Genome Project
In what time span were the theories to integrate molecular genetic with Darwinian evolution developed?	the 1930s and 1940s
What are the theories that integrate molecular genetics with Darwinian evolution called?	the modern evolutionary synthesis
Who proposed an evolutionary concept of the gene as a unit of natural selection?	George C. Williams
What is the definition of the concept of the gene as a unit of natural selection?	"that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency."
Who popularized ideas emphasizing the centrality of genes in evolution?	Richard Dawkins
What do the vast majority of living organisms encode their genes in?	long strands of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
What does DNA consist of?	a chain made from four types of nucleotide subunits
What type of sugar composes part of the DNA molecule?	a five-carbon sugar (2'-deoxyribose)
What are the four bases used in nucleotide subunits?	adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine
Besides the sugar and the four bases, what else does DNA consist of?	a phosphate group
What is the backbone of a DNA double helix made of?	phosphate-sugar
What base pairs with thymine?	adenine
What base does guanine pair with?	cytosine
What causes the specificity of base pairing?	adenine and thymine align form two hydrogen bonds, whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds
Due to the cause of the specificity of base pairing, what must be true of the two strands in a double helix?	The two strands in a double helix must therefore be complementary
What causes the directionality of DNA strands?	the chemical composition of the pentose residues of the bases
What is known as the 3' end?	an exposed hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose
What is known as the 5' end?	an exposed phosphate group
What type of synthesis occurs in the 5'→3' direction?	Nucleic acid synthesis
Why does DNA replication and transcription occur in the 5'→3' direction?	because new nucleotides are added via a dehydration reaction that uses the exposed 3' hydroxyl as a nucleophile
How does the expression of genes encoded in DNA begin?	by transcribing the gene into RNA
What is RNA?	a second type of nucleic acid that is very similar to DNA
What base does RNA have in place of thymine?	the base uracil
What are codons?	a series of three-nucleotide sequences
What specifies the correspondence between codons and amino acids during protein translation?	The genetic code
What is the total complement of genes in an organism or cell known as?	its genome
What does a chromosome consist of?	a single, very long DNA helix
What is encoded on a chromosome?	thousands of genes
What is the region of the chromosome at which a particular gene is located called?	its locus
What does each locus contain?	one allele of a gene
Where are the majority of eukaryotic genes stored?	on a set of large, linear chromosomes
Chromosomes that are packed within the nucleus in complex with histones are called what?	a nucleosome
What does the manner of DNA storage on the histone and the chemical modifications of the histone itself regulate?	whether a particular region of DNA is accessible for gene expression
What are replication origins?	regions where DNA replication is initiated to make two copies of the chromosome
Long stretches of repetitive sequence that cap the ends of the linear chromosomes are called what?	Telomeres
What are prokaryotes?	bacteria and archaea
How do prokaryotes store their genomes?	on a single large, circular chromosome
What type of chromosome do some eukaryotic organelles contain?	a remnant circular chromosome with a small number of genes
Small circles of DNA that encode only a few genes and are transferable between individuals are called what?	plasmids
What allows genes for antibiotic resistance to be passed between individual cells?	horizontal gene transfer
What type of organism has relatively gene dense chromosomes?	prokaryotes
Regions of DNA that serve no obvious function are often found in what type of organism?	eukaryotes
What is referred to as "junk DNA"?	DNA without an identified function
What percentage of the human genome is made of protein coding DNA?	barely 2%
What percentage of bases in the human genome are expressed by protein coding DNA	about 80%
Often, how large a part of the structure of a gene is the protein coding sequence?	often only a small part
What often plays only a small part in the structure of a gene?	the actual protein coding sequence
What is one of the many elements that the structure of a gene consists of?	DNA regions that are not transcribed
What is another element of the structure of a gene?	untranslated regions of the RNA
What elements does the structure of a gene consist of?	DNA regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the RNA
What do all genes contain that is required for their expression?	a regulatory sequence
How is a promoter sequence recognized?	by transcription factors and RNA polymerase
What results when genes have more than one promoter?	messenger RNAs (mRNA) that differ in how far they extend in the 5' end
What does a "strong" promoter sequence do?	bind the transcription machinery well
What does a "weak" promoter sequence do?	bind poorly and initiate transcription less frequently
How do regulatory regions act?	by binding to transcription factors
What happens when a regulatory region binds to transcription factors?	the DNA to loop
How do enhancers increase transcription?	by binding an activator protein
What happens after an enhancer binds an activator protein?	helps to recruit the RNA polymerase to the promoter
What causes DNA to be less available for RNA polymerase?	silencers bind repressor proteins
What is at both ends of the transcribed pre-mRNA?	untranslated regions
Where are the ribosome binding site, terminator and start and stop codons located on transcribed pre-mRNA?	untranslated regions
What do most eukaryotic open reading frames contain?	untranslated introns
What dictates the splice sites to generate the final mature mRNA?	The sequences at the ends of the introns
What encodes the protein or RNA product?	the splice sites to generate the final mature mRNA
What are most prokaryotic genes organized into?	operons
What are multiple protein coding sequences transcribed as?	a unit
What sort of functions do the products of operon genes typically have?	related functions
What type of network are the products of operon genes typically involved with?	the same regulatory network
What type of coding sequences do prokaryotic genes typically have?	multiple protein-coding sequences
What is an example of a regulatory region of a gene that does not have to close to the coding sequence?	enhancers
Why do some regulatory regions of a gene not have to be close to the coding sequence?	because the intervening DNA can be looped out to bring the gene and its regulatory region into proximity
What part of a gene can be much larger than its exons?	a gene's introns
How do regulatory regions on different chromosomes operate in order to allow regions on different chromosomes to come into contact with one another?	in trans
Where can regulatory regions be found?	different chromosomes
What model did early work in molecular genetics suggest?	the model that one gene makes one protein.
What discovery caused the model that one gene makes one protein to be refined?	the discovery of genes that can encode multiple proteins
How do genes encode multiple proteins?	by alternative splicing and coding sequences
How are alternative splicing and coding sequences distributed?	split in short section across the genome
In order for a gene to encode multiple proteins, how must its mRNAs be arranged?	concatenated by trans-splicing.
What sort of definition can be used to conveniently encompass the complexity of diverse phenomena?	A broad operational definition
What is the broad operational definition of a gene?	a union of genomic sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products
What does the typical definition of a gene categorize genes by?	their specific DNA loci
What does the broad operational definition of gene categorize genes by?	their functional products (proteins or RNA)
What does the broad operational definition of a gene classify as gene-associated regions?	regulatory elements
How many steps are required to read the information encoded in a gene's DNA and produce the specified protein?	two steps are required
What is the first step to read the information encoded in a gene's DNA and produce the protein it specifies?	the gene's DNA is transcribed to messenger RNA (mRNA)
What is the second step to read the information encoded in a gene's DNA and produce the protein it specifies?	mRNA is translated to protein
What step must RNA-coding genes still go through?	the first step
What is the process of producing a biologically functional molecule of either RNA or protein called?	gene expression
What specifies the amino acid sequence of a protein?	The nucleotide sequence of a gene's DNA
What are sets of three nucleotides known as?	codons
What does each codon correspond to?	a specific amino acid
What indicates the beginning and end of the protein coding region?	a "start codon", and three "stop codons"
How many possible codons are there?	There are 64 possible codons (four possible nucleotides at each of three positions, hence 43 possible codons)
What does transcription produce?	a single-stranded RNA molecule known as messenger RNA
How does the nucleotide sequence of mRNA compare to DNA?	complementary to the DNA from which it was transcribed
What is used as a template to generate a complementary mRNA?	The gene's DNA
Why does the mRNA match the sequence of the gene's DNA coding strand?	because it is synthesised as the complement of the template strand
What is the enzyme called that performs transcription?	an RNA polymerase
Where does transcription occur in prokaryotes?	in the cytoplasm
If the transcription is very long, where on the RNA may translation begin?	at the 5' end of the RNA
Where does transcription occur in eukaryotes?	transcription occurs in the nucleus
Where does a eukaryote store the cell's DNA?	in the nucleus
What is the RNA molecule produced by the polymerase known as?	the primary transcript
What is the process by which a mature mRNA molecule is used as a template for synthesizing a new protein called?	Translation
What does a ribosome consist of?	large complexes of RNA and protein
What is a ribosome responsible for?	carrying out the chemical reactions to add new amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain
How is the genetic code read?	via interactions with specialized RNA molecules called transfer RNA (tRNA)
How many unpaired bases does each tRNA have?	three
When are genes expressed?	only when the product is needed
What are examples of a cell's external environment?	available nutrients, temperature and other stresses
What are examples of a cell's internal environment?	cell division cycle, metabolism, infection status
At which step can gene expression be regulated?	at any step
What example of post-translational modification of a protein was first described in 1961?	The regulation of lactose metabolism genes in E. coli
What is first copied into RNA as an intermediate in the manufacture of the final protein product?	A typical protein-coding gene
In some cases, what are the actual functional products?	the RNA molecules
What sort of synthesis occurs when the RNA molecules are the actual functional products?	the synthesis of ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA
What sort of function are ribozymes capable of?	enzymatic function
What are the DNA sequences from which ribozymes are transcribed known as?	non-coding RNA genes
In what form do some viruses store their entire genome?	in the form of RNA
Why do the cellular hosts of some viruses not have to wait for transcription to synthesize their proteins?	Because they use RNA to store genes
What is one type of an RNA retrovirus?	HIV
What sort of transcription does the genome of HIV require before its proteins can be synthesized?	reverse transcription
Besides viruses, where has RNA-mediated epigenetic inheritance been observed?	in plants and very rarely in animals
Where do organisms inherit their genes from?	from their parents
How much of an asexual organism's genome is inherited from its parents?	a complete copy
How many copies of each chromosome does a sexual organism have?	two copies of each chromosome
How many sets of chromosomes does a sexual organism inherit from each parent?	one complete set from each parent
Why do sexual organisms have two copies of each chromosome?	because they inherit one complete set from each parent
According to Mendelian inheritance, what is part of the cause of variations in an organism's phenotype?	variations in its genotype
What sort of characteristics are described by an organism's phenotype?	observable physical and behavioral characteristics
What is a genotype?	particular set of genes
What specifies a particular trait with a different sequence of alleles?	Each gene
How many alleles do most eukaryotic organisms have for each trait?	two alleles for each trait
Where can alleles be located in order to be either dominant or recessive?	at a locus
When paired with any other allele for the same trait, what do dominant alleles give rise to?	their corresponding phenotypes
When do recessive alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotype?	when paired with another copy of the same allele
When do alleles assort independently?	in the production of gametes
What are gametes?	germ cells
What does the growth, development, and reproduction of organisms rely on?	cell division
In cell division, what two cells are created?	identical daughter cells
What specialized enzyme is responsible DNA replication?	DNA polymerases
Why does the sequence of one strand completely specify the sequence of its complement?	Because the DNA double helix is held together by base pairing
What one word characterizes the process of DNA replication?	semiconservative
What is one thing the cell must do once DNA replication is compete?	physically separate the two copies of the genome
What is another thing the cell must do once DNA replication is complete?	divide into two distinct membrane-bound cells
In binary fission, what shape is each genome?	circular
In binary fission. when does each genome separate into daughter cells?	as the membrane invaginates to split the cytoplasm
Compared to the rates of cell division in eukaryotes, with what speed does binary fission occur?	extremely fast
The duplication and transmission of genetic material from one generation of cells to the next is the basis for what?	molecular inheritance
Why do organisms inherit the characteristics of their parents?	cells of the offspring contain copies of the genes in their parents' cells
In what type of organism will the offspring be a genetic copy or clone of the parent organism?	In asexually reproducing organisms
In what type of organism will a specialized form of cell division called meiosis produce cells called gametes?	In sexually reproducing organisms
What are the gametes produced by females called?	eggs or ova
When can an event called genetic recombination or crossing-over sometimes occur?	During the process of meiotic cell division
If the alleles on the chromatids are the same, what effect arises from genetic recombination?	no effect
If the alleles on the chromatids are different, what effect arises from genetic recombination?	reassortment of otherwise linked alleles
Each of a parent's two genes for each trait will sort independently into gametes according to what Mendelian principle?	independent assortment
In genetic linkage, what sort of point is extremely unlikely to occur?	a crossover point
What is it called when errors occur in DNA replication?	mutations
What is the lowest error rate that occurs in eukaryotic cells?	10−8 per nucleotide per replication
What is the highest error rate that can occur for some RNA viruses?	10−3
What can small mutations be caused by?	DNA replication
What can larger mutations be caused by?	errors in recombination
What is it called when multiple different alleles for a gene are present in a species's population?	polymorphic
What can some alleles give rise to?	different phenotypic traits
What is a gene's most common allele known as?	the wild type
What are rare alleles called?	mutants
What is one cause of the genetic variation in relative frequencies of different alleles in a population?	genetic drift
What are mutations that have no effect on an organism's phenotype called?	silent mutations
What are mutations that do not change the amino acid sequence called?	synonymous mutations
What are mutations that lead to amino acid sequence changes but leave the protein functioning similarly called?	conservative mutations
What is a result of deleterious mutations?	Genetic disorders
What does the directional selection of beneficial mutations lead to?	adaptive evolution
What are genes with a most recent common ancestor called?	homologs
What is one reason for homologs to appear?	gene duplication within an organism's genome
What are genes that occur from duplication within an organism's genome called?	paralogous genes
What are genes that result from divergence of the genes after a speciation event called?	orthologous genes
What does comparing the sequence alignment of genes' DNA measure?	The relationship between genes
What is the degree of sequence similarity between homologous genes called?	conserved sequence
How do genes typically accumulate mutations over time?	by neutral molecular evolution
Under what type of selection are genes constrained so they change more slowly?	stabilizing
What type of analyses can the sequence differences between genes be used for?	phylogenetic
What is the most common source of new genes in eukaryotic lineages?	gene duplication
What creates copy number variation of an existing gene in the genome?	gene duplication
What are the genes that result from eukaryotic gene duplication called?	paralogs
What type of copy can gene duplication sometimes result in?	nonfunctional
What are functional copies of a gene which have a loss of function due to mutation called?	pseudogenes
What is a gene whose sequence shows no similarity to existing genes called?	De novo or "orphan" genes
What is the estimate of the number of orphan genes in the human genome?	18 to 60
How do the lengths of orphan genes compare to most eukaryotic genes?	typically shorter
How does the structure of orphan genes compare to most eukaryotic genes?	simpler in structure
What is one primary source of orphan protein-coding genes?	gene duplication followed by extremely rapid sequence change
What is the  transfer of genetic material through a mechanism other than reproduction known as?	Horizontal gene transfer
In what type of organism is horizontal gene transfer a common source of new genes?	prokaryotes
What is one trait that horizontal gene transfer is a common means of spreading?	antibiotic resistance
In what type of organism is horizontal gene transfer rare?	eukaryotes
What is one example of horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotes?	alga genomes containing genes of bacterial origin
What is one characteristic that varies widely between organisms?	genome size
In which type of organism do the smallest genomes occur?	viruses
What is the smallest number of protein coding genes that a virus can have?	2
Which organism acts as a single non coding RNA gene?	viroids
What is the estimate for the total number of protein coding genes on Earth?	5 million
Since when has the number of base pairs of DNA in the human genome been known?	the 1960s
What was the highest initial theoretical prediction of the number of human genes?	2,000,000
What sort of variants did the Human Genome Project indicate that many of the measured transcripts were?	alternative variants
After the Human Genome Project, how many genes were encoded on the mitochondrial genome?	13
What percentage of the human genome consists of protein coding genes?	1–2%
What are the set of genes which are thought to be crucial for the survival of an organism?	Essential genes
What does the definition of essential genes assume an absence of?	environmental stress
How many genes are essential for Escherichia coli?	250–400
What fraction of Escherichia coli's essential genes are orthologs?	Half
How many essential genes does Saccharomyces cerevisiae have?	1000 genes
What type of genes are necessary for performing basic cell functions?	Housekeeping genes
At what relative level are housekeeping genes expressed at?	constant
When investigating gene expression, what type of genes are used as a control for experiments?	housekeeping genes
How are some essential genes regulated?	developmentally
When are some essential genes expressed?	at certain times during the organism's life cycle
What committee has established gene nomenclature for every known human gene?	HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC)
How can the gene nomenclature be accessed?	through a database maintained by HGNC
How many symbols does each gene have?	only one
With what is it preferred that symbols are kept consistent with?	homologs in other species
What type of model does the mouse play a role for?	common model
What is known as the modification of an organism's genome through biotechnology?	Genetic engineering
When did techniques begin to be developed to add, remove and edit genes?	the 1970s
What sort of enzymes do recently developed genome engineering techniques use?	engineered nuclease enzymes
What sort of DNA repair is created by modern genetic engineering techniques?	targeted
What term refers to extensive genetic engineering of an organism?	synthetic biology
What has become a common research tool with model organisms?	Genetic engineering
What do scientists explore by adding genes to mice with a certain gene's function disrupted?	that gene's function
What is an application for which organisms have been modified for?	agriculture
What is another for which  organisms have been modified for?	industrial biotechnology
What is yet another application for which  organisms have been modified for?	medicine
For what sort of organisms is the embryo normally engineered?	multicellular organisms
What techniques can be used to alter the genomes of an adult organism to treat genetic disease?	gene therapy techniques
What part of the organism is usually created which becomes a developed genetically altered organism?	the embryo
What can be changed in an adult organism using gene therapy techniques?	the genomes of cells
What can be treated using genetic engineering?	genetic diseases
What is the official name for Guinea-Bissau?	the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
Where is Guinea-Bissau located?	West Africa
How many square miles is Guinea-Bissau?	13,948 sq mi
What is the estimated population of Guinea-Bissau?	1,704,000
How many kilometers does Guinea-Bissau cover?	36,125
What kingdom was Guinea-Bissau once part of?	Gabu
What empire was Guinea-Bissau once part of?	Mali Empire
What year was Guinea-Bissau declared independent?	1973
What country did Guinea-Bissau seek to differentiate itself from?	Guinea (formerly French Guinea)
Guinea-Bissau has a history of what since independence?	political instability
What percentage of the population speaks Portuguese?	14%
What percentage of the population speaks Crioulo?	44%
What are the two main religions?	African traditional religions and Islam
What is their gross domestic product status?	one of the lowest in the world
What is the minority religion?	Christian (mostly Roman Catholic)
What Islamic organization does Guinea-Bissau belong to?	Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
What Portuguese organization does Guinea-Bissau belong to?	Community of Portuguese Language Countries
What West African organization does Guinea-Bissau belong to?	Economic Community of West African States
What South Atlantic organization does Guinea-Bissau belong to?	South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
What Latin organization does Guinea-Bissau belong to?	the Latin Union
What area was known as the Slave Coast?	Portuguese Guinea
Who exported African slaves to the western hemisphere?	Europeans
What kingdom was Guinea-Bissau once a part of?	Gabu
How long did the Mali Empire persist?	until the 18th century
Who traded slaves into the Middle East?	Arabs
When was Alvise Cadamosto's voyage?	1455
When was Eustache de la Fosse's voyage?	1479–1480
What was the name of the Portuguese explorer?	Diogo Cão
What river did Diogo Cao reach in the 1480's?	Congo River
What country is about 4200 km from Guinea-Bissau?	Angola
What areas were the first places colonized by the Portuguese?	the rivers and coast
When did the Portuguese first set up trading posts in Guinea-Bissau?	16th century
When did the Portuguese explore the interior of Guinea-Bissau?	19th century
Who controlled the inland trade in Guinea-Bissau during this time?	local African rulers
What ports were the Portuguese restricted to?	Bissau and Cacheu
Who tried to establish a rival foothold at Bolama?	the British
When was a rival foothold  attempted at Bolama?	the 1790s
Who regarded Bolama as their own in the 19th century?	the Portuguese
What other area did the Portuguese regard as their special territory?	part of present South Senegal
What rival did the Portuguese fend off in Guinea-Bissau?	the British
What group started an armed rebellion in Guinea-Bissau?	African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
When did the armed rebellion begin?	1956
Who was the leader of the armed rebellion?	Amílcar Cabral
Who supplied doctors and technicians to the rebels?	Cuba
When was Cabral assassinated?	January 1973
When was independence declared?	24 September 1973
What date was independence considered universal?	25 April 1974
What event caused the recognition to be universal?	socialist-inspired military coup
Where did a coup take place?	Portugal
Who was overthrown in the coup?	Lisbon's Estado Novo regime
Who was the first President of Guinea-Bissau?	Luís Cabral
How many Guinean soldiers did the PAIGC kill?	thousands
Where did one of the massacres occur?	Bissorã
When did the PAIGC acknowledge the executions?	29 November 1980
Where were the soldiers buried?	Cumerá, Portogole, and Mansabá
Who controlled the country prior to 1984?	a revolutionary council
When were the first multi-party elections held?	1994
What led to the Guinea-Bissau Civil War?	An army uprising
When was the president ousted?	June 1999
Who was elected president in the 2000 election?	Kumba Ialá
When was a military coup conducted?	September 2003
Who did the military arrest?	Ialá
When were legislative elections held?	March 2004
When did the mutiny of military factions occur?	October 2004
Who died in the mutiny?	the head of the armed forces
After the coup, when were presidential elections held?	June 2005
At that time, who ran claiming to be the legitimate president of the country?	Ialá
Who won the election?	João Bernardo Vieira
Who did Vieira beat in a runoff election?	Malam Bacai Sanhá
When was Vieira, a former president, deposed?	1999
What was reported to be entering the country prior to the election?	arms
What type of "disturbances" were reported during the campaign?	attacks on government offices
How did foreign election monitors describe the election?	"calm and organized"
What year was the election held?	2005
Where the election monitors local, or foreign?	foreign
When was the parliamentary election held?	November 2008
Who won a strong majority in the election?	PAIGC
How many seats did PAIGC win in the election?	67
Whose residence was attacked by members of the armed forces?	President Vieira's
When did the attack on the residence occur?	November 2008
Who was assassinated on 2 March 2009?	Vieira
Who was assassinated on 1 March 2009?	General Batista Tagme Na Wai
Who pledged to respect the constitutional order of succession?	Military leaders
Who was appointed interim president?	Raimundo Pereira
Who won the election in June 2009?	Malam Bacai Sanhá
When was a coup d'etat staged?	12 April 2012
Who staged the coup d'etat?	members of the country's military
Who assumed control of the country after the coup d'etat?	Mamadu Ture Kuruma
Who did Kuruma negotiate with?	opposition parties
What was Kuruma's former position?	vice chief of staff
What country is listed as a republic?	Guinea-Bissau
When had the government been highly centralized?	In the past
When was multi-party governance established?	mid-1991
Who is the head of state?	president
Who is the head of government?	prime minister
How many members compose the legislature?	100
Is the legislature bicameral or unicameral?	unicameral
How long do members serve in the legislature?	four-year term
What is the head of the judicial system?	Tribunal Supremo da Justiça (Supreme Court)
How many justices are on the Supreme Court?	nine
Who was elected as President in 2005?	João Bernardo "Nino" Vieira
What body made the declaration of who won the presidency?	CNE (Comité Nacional de Eleições)
How long was it since Vieira had held the office of president?	six years
What year did Vieira first assume power?	1980
Whose government did Vieira topple in 1980?	Luís Cabral
What was NOT triggered by Vieira's death?	widespread violence
When was Vieira killed?	2 March 2009
In the 2009 election, who was the candidate of the PAIGC?	Sanhá
In the 2009 election, who was the candidate of the PRS?	Kumba Ialá
Who won the 2009 election?	Sanhá
When did President Sanha die?	2012
What party did Sanha belong to?	PAIGC (African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde)
Besides the PAIGC, what is the other major political party?	PRS (Party for Social Renewal)
How many minor political parties are there?	more than 20
What office did Sanha hold in 2012?	President
How many regions does Guinea-Bissau contain?	eight
How many autonomous sectors does Guinea-Bissau contain?	one
How many subdivided Sectors does Guinea-Bissau contain?	37
What country is on the north border of Guinea-Bissau?	Senegal
What country is on the south border of Guinea-Bissau?	Guinea
What is to the west of Guinea-Bissau?	Atlantic Ocean
What latitudes does Guinea-Bissau mostly lie between?	11° and 13°N
What longitudes does Guinea-Bissau mostly lie between?	13° and 17°W
Guinea-Bissau is larger than what two countries?	Taiwan or Belgium
How high is the highest point in Guinea-Bissau?	300 metres (984 ft)
What archipelago lies off the mainland?	Bijagos
How many square kilometers is Guinea-Bissau?	36,125
Where does Guinea-Bissau get its hot dry winds from?	the Sahara
What is the average rainfall in Bissau, in millimetres?	2,024
When is the rainy season in Guinea-Bissau?	between June and September/October
What does the country experience from December through April?	drought
When is Guinea-Bissau warm?	all year around
What is the average temperature in Guinea-Bissau?	26.3 °C (79.3 °F)
How much of the population lives below the poverty line?	More than two-thirds
What are Guinea-Bissau's major exports?	fish, cashew nuts and ground nuts
What per capita index does Guinea-Bissau rank as one of the lowest in the world?	GDP
For what index does Guinea-Bissau rank as one of the lowest on earth?	Human Development Index
What area depends on agriculture in Guinea-Bissau?	The economy
Political instability has resulted in what type of economic activity?	depressed
Political instability has resulted in what description of social conditions?	deteriorating
What type of imbalances have increased as a result of the instability?	macroeconomic
How long does it take to register a business in Guinea-Bissau?	233 days or about 33 weeks
What is the one country that takes longer than Guinea-Bissau to register a business?	Suriname
What did the main political parties sign to help the economy?	a pact of stability
What organization backed a structural reform program?	IMF
When did Guinea-Bissau become independent?	1974
What country left Guinea-Bissau in 1974?	Portugal
What happened in Portugal that contributed to Guinea-Bissau's independence?	the Portuguese Colonial War and the Carnation Revolution
In what year did Guinea-Bissau start to bring some internal monetary stability to the country?	1997
What did the government do in 1997 to increase monetary stability?	entered the CFA franc monetary system
What years did the civil war take place?	1998 and 1999
When was there a military coup in Guinea-Bissau?	September 2003
When were parliamentary elections held?	March 2004
When did drug traffickers begin to use Guinea-Bissau?	2005
Where did the drug traffickers come from?	Latin America
What was the final destination of the drugs going through Guinea-Bissau?	Europe
Who described Guinea-Bissau as being at risk for becoming a "narco-state"?	a United Nations official
Who has done little to stop drug trafficking in the country?	The government and the military
What was the population of Guinea-Bissau in 1950?	518,000
What was the population of Guinea-Bissau in 2010?	1,515,000
What is the source of the population data?	the 2010 revison of the UN World Population Prospects
What percentage of the population was below the age of 15?	41.3%
What percentage of the population was 65 or older?	3.3%
What natives comprise a very small percentage of the population?	Portuguese
Who left the country after Guinea-Bissau gained independence?	Portuguese nationals
What ethnic group has a tiny population in Guinea-Bissau?	Chinese
What is the name of a former Asian Portuguese colony?	Macau
What is the ancestry of the Chinese population in Guinea-Bissau?	mixed Portuguese and Chinese ancestry
What percentage of the population speaks Kriol?	44%
What is the official language of Guinea-Bissau?	Portuguese
How long was Guinea-Bissau under colonial rule?	centuries
What type of language is Kriol?	a Portuguese-based creole language
What is the second language for most Portuguese in Guinea-Bissau?	Kriol
Why is French taught in school?	Guinea-Bissau is surrounded by French-speaking nations.
What is Guinea-Bissau a full member of?	the Francophonie
Who speaks both African languages and Kriol?	Most Portuguese and Mestiços
In the 20th century most people practiced some form of what faith?	Animism.
What religion was adopted by the population in the early 21st century?	Islam
What percentage of the population now practices Islam?	50%
What denomination are the majority of Guinea-Bissau's muslims?	Sunni
What sect does 2% of the population belong to?	Ahmadiyya
What percentage of the population is Christian?	Approximately 10%
What percentage of the population continues to hold indigenous beliefs?	40%
What forms of Islamic and Christian faiths do many residents practice?	syncretic
What do many residents combine with Islamic and Christian practices?	traditional African beliefs
What infection has a very small prevalence in Guinea-Bissau?	HIV
What percentage of the adult population has an HIV-infection?	1.8%
How many HIV-infected pregnant women receive retroviral coverage?	20%
What does retroviral coverage help prevent?	transmission to newborns
Who receives retroviral coverage?	infected pregnant women
What kills more residents than AIDS?	Malaria
What percentage of the population has Malaria?	9%
How many more deaths does malaria cause vs. AIDS?	three times as many
How many children under five slept under antimalaria nets in 2008?	fewer than half
What type of drugs did many young children not have access to in 2008?	antimalarial
What type of disease was reported to be on the rise in Guinea-Bissau?	cholera
How many died from cholera in a November 2012 report?	nine
How many died from cholera in a 2008 epidemic?	225
Where are there reported cholera rates that are lowering?	surrounding countries
How many people were affected by the 2008 cholera epidemic?	14,222
What was the 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births?	1000
What was the 1990 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births?	966
How many midwives are listed per 1,000 live births?	3
How many pregnant women die as a result of pregnancy?	one out of eighteen
According to UNICEF, what percentage of women in Guinea-Bissau had undergone female genital mutilation?	50%
What are the ages when education is compulsory?	7 to 13
What gender has a higher enrollment?	boys
What was the gross primary enrollment rate in 1998?	53.5%
What was the gross primary enrollment rate for males?	67.7%
What was the gross primary enrollment rate for females?	40%
What type of secondary schools does Guinea-Bissau have?	general as well as technical
What institutions have added a Faculty of Law?	universities
What institutions have added a Faculty of Medicine?	universities
What two words are used to describe the Faculty of Law and Faculty of Medicine?	institutionally autonomous
What music genre is usually associated with Guinea-Bissau?	gumbe
What is considered the country's primary musical export?	the polyrhythmic gumbe genre
What major factor has kept gumbe out of mainstream audiences?	civil unrest
What other type of countries has gumbe been kept out of?	generally syncretist African countries
What is the primary instrument of Guinea-Bissau?	The calabash
What type of music is the calabash used in?	extremely swift and rhythmically complex dance music
What language are lyrics typically sung in?	Guinea-Bissau Creole
What do typical song lyrics revolve around?	current events and controversies
What is the main controversy found in song lyrics?	AIDS
What is sometimes used as a generic word for any music of Guinea-Bissau?	gumbe
Gumbe fuses how many of the country's folk music traditions?	about ten
Other than gumbe, what are two popular music genres?	Tina and tinga
What sound comes from the Bissagos Islands?	kundere
What type of tradition includes ceremonial music used in funerals?	folk
What grain is a staple for residents near the coast of Guinea-Bissau?	Rice
What grain is a staple for residents in the interior of Guinea-Bissau?	millet
Who encouraged peanut production in Guinea-Bissau?	The Portuguese
What type of oil is harvested?	Palm
What kind of pea is part of the diet in Guinea-Bissau?	Black-eyed peas
What are common dishes in Guinea-Bissau?	soups and stews
What are common ingredients in Guinea-Bissau?	yams, sweet potato, cassava, onion, tomato and plantain
What are spices, peppers and chilis used in?	cooking
What is another name for Guinea pepper?	Aframomum melegueta seeds
What are Guinea peppers used in?	cooking
Who is an internationally renowned film director from Guinea-Bissau?	Flora Gomes
What is Flora Gomes' most famous film?	Nha Fala (English: My Voice)
What year was the first feature film made in Guinea-Bissau?	1987
Who directed the first feature film in Guinea-Bissau?	Umban u’Kest
What prize did the film Mortu Nega win?	Oumarou Ganda Prize
What is the grid plan aligned with rather than the cardinal directions?	Hudson River
In this article, how many degrees north of true west is "West?"	29
Does this article cover east-west or north-south streets?	east-west
Which streets have their own linked articles?	Major streets
Which streets are one-way eastbound?	even-numbered
Odd-numbered streets are one-way in which direction?	west
Do most wide streets carry one-way or two-way traffic?	two-way
What happens at Broadway below 8th Street?	Streets' names change
What happens at Fifth Avenue from 8th street and above?	Streets' names change
Do streets' names change from West to East or North to South?	West to East
The grid covers the length of the island from what starting point?	14th Street north
Which street do numbered streets begin just north of?	East Houston Street
In what village is East Houston Street located?	East Village
Which Village already had streets when the grid plan was laid out?	Greenwich Village
Who laid out the Grid Plan?	Commissioners' Plan of 1811
What is the highest numbered street on Manhattan Island?	220th Street
What is the highest street number within the borough of Manhattan?	228
What is the highest street number in the Bronx?	263
Where is First Place located?	Battery Park City
Where is East First Street located?	Alphabet City
What is the spot where the grid takes hold called?	Peretz Square
What shape is the sliver park where Houston Street, First Street, and First Avenue meet?	triangular
Which street begins just North of East Houston Street at Avenue A?	East 1st Street
East 1st Street begins just North of East Houston Street at Avenue A and continues to where?	Bowery
East 6th Street continues further Eastward and connects to which Drive?	FDR
Where is the East end of East 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 7th Streets?	Avenue D
Which Avenue is the starting location for East 2nd Street?	C
Which street begins just North of East Huston Street and continues to Bowery?	East 2nd Street
What name did 3rd Street previously hold?	Amity Place
Which village do 3rd and 4th Street extend into?	Greenwich
Which street connects East 3rd to West 3rd?	Great Jones
The west end of these streets is Third Avenue and where?	Bowery
Which Apartments interrupt East 5th Street between First Avenue and Avenue A?	Village View
What is the Public School number that interrupts East 5th Street?	364
Which school interrupts East 5th Street?	The Earth School
East 5th Street goes west to what stopping point?	Cooper Square
West 8th Street is an important local street for what activity?	shopping
8th Street between Avenue A and Third Avenue is called what?	St Mark's Place
Where do 8th and 9th Streets begin?	Avenue D
Where do 8th and 9th Streets end?	Sixth Avenue
Which park interrupts 8th and 9th Street at Avenue B?	Tompkins Square Park
Which bus operates on 10th Street between Avenues D and A and between West Street and Sixth Ave?	M8
Does the two-way section of 10th Street have a dedicated bike lane?	no
The end of what road was once home to Newgate Prison?	West 10th Street
Which prison was New York City's first?	Newgate Prison
What was the name of the United States' second prison?	Newgate Prison
Which street runs from Broadway to West Street?	West 11th Street
When was the Old Grapevine tavern demolished?	early 20th century
11th Street and 6th Avenue was the home of what tavern from the 1700s?	Old Grapevine
What church interuppts 11th Street between Broadway and Fourth Avenue?	Grace Church
13th Street is divided into how many parts?	three
The first part of 13th Street is a dead end from which Avenue?	C
Where does the second part of 13th Street end?	Greenwich Avenue
Which street has its third section between Eighth Avenue and Tenth Avenue?	13th Street
Where does 14th Street begin?	Avenue C
Where does 14th Street end?	West Street
How many subway stations are on 14th Street?	six
What is the length of 14th Street in miles?	2.1
Where does 15th Street start?	FDR Drive
Which road starts at a dead end half way between FDR Drive and Avenue C?	16th Street
16th Street pauses at which Square?	Stuyvesant
Which Square stops both 15th and 16th Streets?	Union Square
What is unusual about the traffic between Broadway and Park Avenue South on 17th Street?	runs in both directions
Does traffic on 17th Street generally run one way or two ways?	one way
What was the job of the person who lived at 327 East 17th Street?	Composer
Where was Time Magazine started?	141 East 17th Street
What was Antonin Dvorak's New York home replaced with after it was demolished?	AIDS hospice
What is at the crossing of 18th Street and Seventh Avenue?	subway station
Which train line do the 1 2 trains serve?	IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line
Which train line used to have an 18th Street Station at the crossing with Park Avenue South?	IRT Lexington Avenue Line
Where does 10th Street start?	Avenue C
At which Avenue do 21st and 22nd Streets begin?	First
What is different about 20th Street between Avenue C and First Avenue?	very wide
Which street is much wider from Avenue C to First Avenue?	20th Street
How does traffic travel on the last block of the 20th, 21st, and 22nd Streets?	in the opposite direction
Which Street is also known as Police Officer Anthony Sanchez Way?	21st Street
What is 21st Street known as along the northern perimeter of Gramercy Park?	Gramercy Park North
Between what avenues is 21st Street known by Police Officer Anthony Sanchez Way?	Second and Third Avenues
Which police officer does a section of 21st Street refer to?	Anthony Sanchez
Where does 23rd Street begin?	FDR Drive
Where does 23rd Street end?	Eleventh Avenue
What is the length of 23rd Street in kilometers?	3.1 km
Does traffic move in one or two ways on 23rd Street?	two-way
How many local subway stations are on 23rd Street?	five
Which street is a pedestrian plaza between Third Avenue and Lexington Avenue?	25th Street
Where does 24th street start?	First Avenue
Which park is at the end of 24th Street and Madison Avenue?	Madison Square Park
Where does 25th Street end?	Madison
After being interrupted, where do 24th and 25th Streets continue from?	Fifth Avenue
Which street does Club Row occur on?	27th Street
Which strip is known for its numerous nightclubs and lounges?	Club Row
What is the strip of 27th Street between Tenth and Eleventh Avenues known as?	Club Row
Does traffuc on 27th Street run one-way or two-ways?	one-way
Where does 27th Street start?	Second Avenue
How many blocks south of 27th Street is Manhattan's Meatpacking District?	fifteen blocks
Which businesses on 27th Street face competition from other venues in dowtown Manhattan?	nightclubs
What direction is Manhattan's Meatpacking District from West 27th Street?	south
The Fashion Institute of Technology is on the corner of 27th Street and what Avenue?	Eighth
What year was the New York Life Building built?	1928
Who designed the New York Life Building?	Cass Gilbert
Which hospital is located at the end if 27th Street?	Bellevue
Which park does 27th Street pass through between Ninth and Tenth Avenues?	Chelsea
Where does 31st Street begin?	West Side Yard
Which church is situated at 135-139 West 31st Street?	Catholic church of St. Francis of Assisi
Who owned the building at 29 East 32nd Street between 1890 and 1917?	Grolier Club
The corner of Broadway and West 31st Street is home to what business?	Grand Hotel
Which religios center is located at 210 West?	Capuchin Monastery of St. John the Baptist
Where does 35th Street begin?	FDR Drive
Where does 35th Street end?	Eleventh Avenue
On which street does LaptopMD headquarters sit?	35th Street
On which street is the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center located?	35th Street
Which street runs from FDR Drive to Eleventh Avenue?	35th Street
What is the section of East 58th Street between Lexington and Second Avenues known as?	Designers' Way
Which section of Eat 58th Street features high end interior design and decoration establishments?	Designers' Way
Designers' Way occurs on East 58th Street between Lexington and which other Avenue?	Second
Which street begins at East Drive, at Engineers Gate of Central Park?	East 90th Street
Which church is located on East 90th Street between Second and Third Avenue?	Our Lady of Good Counsel Church
Which towers are located at 1601 and 1619 Third Avenue?	Ruppert Towers
What is located on East 90th Street between York Avenue and East End Avenue?	Asphalt Green
Where does 112th Street start?	Morningside Heights
Which street runs from Riverside Drive to Amsterdam Avenue?	112th Street
Which road meets the steps of the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine?	112th Street
Which library is Columbia University's largest?	Butler Library
114th Street marks the southern boundary of which university's Morningside Heights Campus?	Columbia University
114th Street runs along which boundary of Columbia University's Morningside Heights Campus?	southern
On which street is a private indoor pedestrian bridge between Amsterdam Avenue and Morningside Drive?	114th Street
Aove 114th Street is a private pedestrian bridge connecting two buildings from what organization?	St. Luke's–Roosevelt Hospital Center
A bridge connecting two of St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center's buildings crosses above which road?	114th Street
On which road does 120th Street begin?	Riverside Drive
The Interchurch Center is the start of which street?	120th Street
Morningside Park interrupts which street?	120th Street
Who formerly lived at 58 West?	Maya Angelou
120th Street turns into Paladino Avenue and into a pedestrian bridge across what road?	FDR Drive
Which memorial park divides 122nd Street?	Marcus Garvey
Which park divides 122nd Street along with Marcus Garvey Memorial Park?	Morningside Park
How many segments is 122nd Street divided into?	three
Are 122nd Street's three segments contiguous or noncontiguous?	noncontiguous
How many blocks west of Second Avenue does E 122nd Street run?	four
At which park does E 122nd Street end?	Marcus Garvey Memorial Park
At which intersection does E 122nd Street terminate?	Madison Avenue
What is another name for Fourth Avenue?	Park
A segment of what road crosses portions of Third Avenue, Lexington, and Park and runs in East Harlem?	E 122nd Street
At which intersection does W 122nd Street terminate?	Morningside Avenue
At which park does W 122nd Street end?	Morningside Park
How many blocks west from the intersection of Mount Morris Park does W 122nd Street run?	six
Through which historical district does W 122nd Street run?	Mount Morris
What is an alternative name for Sixth Avenue?	Lenox Avenue
What is another name for Tenth Avenue?	Amsterdam Avenue
At which intersection does W 122nd Street end?	Riverside Drive
What is another name for Ninth Avenue?	Morningside Drive
Which district surrounds Columbia University?	Morningside Heights
Besides the Union Theological Seminary, which other Seminary touches Seminary Row?	Jewish Theological
Other than the Jewish Theological Seminary, which other Seminary touches Seminary Row?	Union Theological
Which road runs by two Seminaries, the Manhattan School of Music, Riverside Church, and Grant's Tomb?	Seminary Row
Who is the main character in Taxi Driver?	Travis Bickle
What street is mentioned in the movie Taxi Driver as the location where a cab driver is assaulted?	122nd Street
Which character in Taxi Driver deemed 122nd Street as "Mau Mau Land"?	Wizard
What is the term given to 122nd Street by Wizard in Taxi Driver indicating the area is majority black?	"Mau Mau Land"
Which neighborhood surrounds 122nd Street?	Harlem
Which street in West Harlem runs just two blocks between Amersterdam Avenue and Claremont Avenue?	La Salle Street
La Salle Street runs between Amsterdam Avenue and which other Avenue?	Claremont
In which neighborhood does La Salle Street run?	West Harlem
Which street was swallowed up to make low income housing projects?	125th Street
Which street is the only area left of the routing onto old Manhattan Avenue?	La Salle Street
There is a small stretch of what road between Broadway and Twelfth Avenue?	West 132nd Street
The main portion of what road runs eastbound from Frederick Douglass Boulevard to Park Avenue?	132nd Street
On what Avenue is a southbound exit and entrance to the Harlem River Drive?	Park Avenue
West 132nd Street is interrupted by St. Nicholas Park and which college?	City College
West 132nd Street is interrupted by City College and which park?	St. Nicholas Park
Who takes care of the 132nd Street Community Garden?	local residents
The 132nd Street Community Garden is located between Malcom X Boulevard and what other Boulevard?	Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
In which year did the garden receive a makover with a water distribution system?	1997
Who funded the 132nd Street Community Garden's water distribution system?	Borough President's office
How much did the 132nd Street Community Garden's water distribution system cost?	$100,000
What is the 132nd Street Bus Depot currently known as?	Manhattanville Bus Depot
What was the Manhattanville Bus Depot formerly known as?	132nd Street Bus Depot
In which neighborhood is the Manhattanville Bus Depot?	Manhattanville
The former 132nd Street Bus Depot is located between Broadway and what other drive in the Manhattanville neighborhood?	Riverside Drive
How many crosstown streets are mapped in the Commissioner's Plan of 1811?	155
Which street is the northernmost of the streets mapped in the Commissioner's Plan of 1811?	155th Street
Which street forms the boundary between Harlem and Washington Heights?	155th Street
What document established Manhattan's numbered street grid?	Commissioner's Plan of 1811
155th Street forms the boundary between Harlem and what other neighborhood?	Washington Heights
Where does 155th Street start?	Riverside Drive
155th Street crosses Broadway, Amsterdam Avenue, and what other Avenue?	St. Nicholas
How many meters long is the viaduct on which 155th Street travels?	490
In what year was the viaduct along 155th Street constructed?	1893
A section of 155th Street connects Harlem River Drive and what Avenue?	Bradhurst
181st Street runs through what neighborhood?	Washington Heights
What is the west end of 181st Street called?	Plaza Lafayette
Does Plaza Lafayette refer to the east or west end of 181st Street?	west
Which river does 181st Street run near?	Hudson River
Which road runs from the Washington Bridge to the Henry Hudson Parkway?	181st Street
In which direction is 181st Street largely residential?	West
In which direction is 181st Street mostly commercial?	East
Which street marks the western boundary of the shopping distrit?	Fort Washington Avenue
Which river touches the major shopping district near 181st Street?	Harlem
How many subway lines serve 181st Street?	two
How many metres apart are 181st Street's two subway stations?	500
On what avenue is the George Wasington Bridge Bus Terminal?	Fort Washington Avenue
Which road is the Trans-Manhattan Expressway's last south/west exit?	181st Street
187th Street runs from Laurel Hill Terrace in the east to which avenue in the west?	Chittenden Avenue
What is 187th Street interrupted by?	stairs
Where do the stairs interrupting 187th street lead to?	Broadway valley
An area of 187th Street serves as the main shopping district for which neighborhood?	Hudson Heights
Which is the eastmost intersection that 187th Street has?	Laurel Hill Terrace
Which is the westernmost intersection that 187th Street has?	Chittenden Avenue
Wadsworth Avenue is intersected by what street?	187th Street
Which school is located on Cabrini Boulevard?	P.S. 187
On what street is the Dombrov Shtiebel?	187th Street
Which University has a campus on 187th Street?	Yeshiva University
Cabrini Boulevard is just north of what street?	187th Street
On what street is the Mount Sinai Jewish Center?	187th Street
What is the center of the nervous system in all creatures?	The brain
What is the most complex organ in an animal's body?	The brain
In people, how many neurons make up the cerebral cortex?	15–33 billion
Neurons in the brain interact with each other by fibers called what?	axons
A few animals without spines that do not have a brain are what?	sponges, jellyfish, adult sea squirts
Hormones secreted are driven by what organ in the body?	The brain
What type of responsiveness can be used without a brain?	reflexes
Reflexes only require one of what two structures in a body?	spinal cord or peripheral ganglia
Which part of a computer does the brain most resemble?	central processing unit (CPU)
Animals with a spine are called what?	vertebrates
Animals without a spine are called what?	invertebrates
The easiest way to learn about brain anatomy is by what?	visual inspection
Brain tissue is naturally soft, but can be stiffened with what liquid?	alcohol
The two main areas of the brain are what colors?	grey matter, with a dark color, separated by areas of white matter
What instrument can you use to examine the microstructure of the brain?	microscope
Grey matter of the brain is what color?	dark color
Brains of organisms are made up mostly of what two classes of cells?	neurons and glial cells
Glial cells are also referred to as what?	glia or neuroglia
Which of the two broad classes of cells: neurons and glial cells send signals to other cells?	neurons
Axons send signals that are named what?	action potentials
What is the typical speed that axons send their electrical signals?	1–100 meters per second
Axons send signals to other neurons by junctions known as what?	synapses
The neurotansmitter binds to what of a target cell?	receptor molecules
An axon can connect to how many other cells?	several thousand
How many synapses does the human brain supposedly contain?	100 trillion synapses;
The fruit fly has a brain that has how many synapses?	several million
A synapse whose purpose is to excite the target cell are called what?	excitatory
The primary job of the brain is what?	cell-to-cell communication
Axons grouped together are known as what?	nerve fiber tracts
An axon that can greatly increase speed of signals is wrapped in what?	sheath of myelin
Myelin is what color in the brain?	white
Most of the space in the brain is made up of what structures?	axons
Grey matter of the brain consist of lots of what?	neuron cell bodies
Creatures that have a diffuse nerve net are called what?	cnidarians
Bilaterians are animals that have what?	symmetric body shape
The Cambrian period was how long ago?	485-540 million years ago
A nerve cord with an enlargement is called what?	a ganglion
What type of creature has a ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord as well?	leeches
A name for a group of primitive flatworms is what?	acoelomorphs
Some bilaterians without a brain are what?	echinoderms, tunicates, and acoelomorphs
Which two groups of invertebrates have complex brains?	arthropods (insects, crustaceans, arachnids, and others), and cephalopods
Arthropods and cephalopods have brains that come from a pair of what?	parallel nerve cords
The invertebrates with the largest brain are what two animals?	octopus and squid
Which brains are easier to work on, vertebrates or invertebrates?	invertebrate
How long ago did the first vertebrate organisms appear?	over 500 million years ago
During which scientific period did vertebrates appear?	Cambrian period
Sharks appeared at about how many Mya?	450 Mya
The foremost part of the brain in mammals is known as what?	(the telencephalon
At how many mya did mammals first appear in time?	200 Mya
Do predators have larger or smaller brains compared to their prey?	larger
In mammals, brain volume and body mass follows a power law with an exponent of what?	0.75
Which group of animals have brains 5-10 times larger than the formula predicts?	primates
The forebrain during development is known as what?	prosencephalon
The midbrain during development is known as what?	mesencephalon
The hindbrain during development is known as what?	rhombencephalon
Which group of animals does the forebrain grow the largest?	mammals
During development, the brain is made up of three swellings at the front of what?	neural tube;
Brain tissue that is living is what color on the outside?	pinkish
The color of the brain inside is what?	white
Brains are surrounded by what system of tissues?	meninges
Meninges separate what structure from the brain?	the skull
The blood-brain barrier is made up of what?	cells in the blood vessel walls
People who study the anatomy of the central nervous system are known as what?	Neuroanatomists
The cerebral hemispheres of the brain are called what?	telencephalon
The thalamus and hypothalamus comprise what region of the brain?	diencephalon
The midbrain region of the brain is known as what?	mesencephalon
Clusters of small nuclei comprise what parts of the brain?	thalamus and hypothalamus
The forebrain is everted in what type of fishes?	teleost fishes
Which part of the brain has led to many distortions among different species?	forebrain area
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a birds relative to body size?	twice as large
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a reptiles relative to body size?	ten times
The biggest difference between brains of mammals and other vertebrates is what?	size.
What part of the brain most strongly differentiates mammals from other vertebrates?	The cerebral cortex
The three-layered structure covering the cerebrum in non-mammals is known as what?	pallium
Mammals have a pallium that involved into what?	neocortex or isocortex
The hippocampus and amygdala are ares inside what structure?	neocortex
The superior colliculus is related to what sensual control of vertebrates?	visual
The larger part of the cerebellum in mammals is called what?	(the neocerebellum
The Neocerebellum supports what other part of the brain?	cerebral cortex
Comparing brain sizes among different creatures is used most commonly by what?	encephalization quotient (EQ)
What is the average EQ of a person?	7-to-8 range
Primates have an EQ in what range?	2-to-3
Primates have a visual processing network of how many brain areas?	30
The visual processing areas occupy how much of the surface of the neocortex or primates?	more than half
Planning, motivation, and attention are controlled by what area?	prefrontal cortex
The prefrontal cortex is the largest in what animals?	primates
The precursor of the nervous system is called what in vertebrates?	the neural plate
The neural groove is a hollow cord of cells with what in the center?	fluid-filled ventricle
The forebrain splits during development into vesicles called what?	telencephalon (which will contain the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related structures) and the diencephalon
The vesicle that contains the cerebral cortex is which one?	telencephalon
The thalamus and hypothalamus are contained in which vesicle?	the diencephalon
A growth cone of an axon is made up of a blob of what?	protoplasm
What two structures does a neuron extend when it is in place during development?	dendrites and an axon
The infant brain contains more of what type of cells in the brain than the adult brain?	neurons
The olfactory bulb is related to what sense?	sense of smell
What area of the hippocampus plays a role in storing new memories?	dentate gyrus of the hippocampus
Which type of cells in the brain are generated throughout your lifetime?	Glial cells
Neurogenesis is the process of what?	neurons continue to be generated throughout life
The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by what?	neurotransmitters and receptors that take place at synapses
What type of signals do neurons transfer from one another?	electrochemical
Chemicals called neurotransmitters are released at what part of the brain?	synapses
What do neurotransmitters attach to?	receptor molecules on the membrane of the synapse's target cell
Neurons that release the same chemicals are following what rule?	Dale's principle
GABA is the abbreviation for what?	gamma-aminobutyric acid
Which of two neurotransmitters is usually inhibitory?	gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
The neurostransmitter that usually excites targets is called what?	glutamate,
Tranquilizers affect which of the two common neurotransmitters?	gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Serotonin comes from what part of the brain?	Raphe nuclei
Antidepressants typically affect what chemical of the brain?	Serotonin
Which chemical of the brain is involved with arousal?	Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine comes from an area of the brain known as what?	locus coeruleus
An EEG of the brain stands for what?	electroencephalography
MEG of the brain is an abbreviation of what?	magnetoencephalography
What type of test is used to tell that a brain is active even during sleep?	EEG
What type of brain waves are seen in mammals during sleep?	large slow delta waves
What type of brain waves are sen when a creature is awake, but inattentive?	faster alpha waves
What type of cells have a huge role in brain metabolism?	Glial cells
Glial cells control what inside the brain?	chemical composition of the fluid that surrounds neurons
Where does the brain usually get most of its energy from inside the body?	glucose (i.e., blood sugar
The energy used for metabolism of the brain in humans is what percentage?	20–25%
Other sources than glucose that provide energy to the brain are what?	ketones
Most vertebrates usually devote how much metabolism to the brain?	2% and 8%
The function of the brain from an evolutionary-biological thought is what?	provide coherent control over the actions of an animal
Computers were invented in what decade in history?	1940s
Neuroscience spawned from what field of science in history?	cybernetics
Who wrote the book, The Computer and the Brain?	John von Neumann's
When was John von Neumann's book, The Computer and the Brain published?	1958
The scientific paper, What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain was released in what year?	1959
Who won a Nobel Prize for the discovery that cells in the visual cortex of monkeys become active when sharp edges move?	David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel
What is the project called that is trying to build a realistic, detailed computer model of the human brain?	the Human Brain Project
What type of animal has a sense that adapted into sonar?	bats
What type of animal uses infrared heat to sense?	snakes
The group of animals that can detect magnetic fields is what?	birds
The group of creatures that can sense electric fields is what?	fish
Light-receptive neurons are located in what part of the eye?	retina
Vibration-sensitive neurons are found in what part of the ear?	cochlea
Signals are sent from the thalamus to what part of the brain?	cerebral cortex
What part of the body is controlled by nuclei in the midbrain?	the eye,
All the muscles controlled by motor neurons in the body are controlled by what?	spinal cord and hindbrain
Which motor areas of the brain control breathing and swallowing?	the medulla and pons,
At the lowest level of the brain and spinal cord, are what areas?	the medulla and pons
The red nucleus controls what part(s) of the body?	coordinating movements of the arms and legs
A strip of tissue found at the edge of the frontal lobe is called what?	primary motor cortex
The primary motor cortex sends signals to the spinal cord through what?	pyramidal tract.
The brain and spinal cord work together to control what system of the body?	autonomic nervous system
What system in the body controls heart rate?	autonomic nervous system
What system in the body controls salivation?	autonomic nervous system
Most of the processes of the autonomic nervous system are called what?	not under direct voluntary control
Which system in the body controls urination?	The autonomic nervous system
The SCN of the nervous system is an abbreviation for what?	suprachiasmatic nucleus
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is a small part of what part of the brain?	the hypothalamus
Which part of the arousal system controls the body's biological clock?	the suprachiasmatic nucleus
The RHT is an abbreviation for what?	retinohypothalamic tract
THE SCN receives information from the optic nerves through what?	the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT
A group of neuron-clusters scattered in the core of the lower brain is called what?	the reticular formation
Reticular neurons transfer signals to what part of the brain?	the thalamus
Damage to the reticular formation can cause what?	state of coma
The SCN transfers signals to a set of areas that implement what?	sleep-wake cycles.
There are two types of sleep called what?	REM sleep (with dreaming) and NREM
What type of sleep involves dreaming?	REM sleep
The three types of brain activity that can be measured are what?	REM, light NREM and deep NREM
Slow wave sleep is also known as what?	deep NREM sleep
During what stage of sleep do serotonin and norepinephrine levels drop?	slow wave sleep
Homeostasis is defined as what?	The ability of an animal to regulate the internal environment of its body
Homeostasis is Greek for what phrase?	"standing still"
The milieu interieur term was used by what physiologist?	Claude Bernard
Homeostasis is like what household tool?	a thermostat.
The hypothalamus is located at the base of what?	the forebrain
In vertebrates, the most important part of the brain is what?	the hypothalamus,
A collection of small nuclei at the base of the forebrain is called what?	the hypothalamus,
The gland directly underneath the hypothalamus is which gland?	the pituitary gland
The pituitary gland sends hormones through what in the body?	the bloodstream
A set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain is called what?	basal ganglia
The basal ganglia is thought to be the central location at which what are made?	decisions
Which neurotransmitter plays a large role in drug abuse?	dopamine
Which of the two systems, reward or punishment is better understood?	The reward mechanism
In what year did Tim Bliss and Terje Lomo publish a paper about long-term potentiation?	1971
BDNF is an abbreviation for what term?	Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Learning and memory expressed as changes in the synaptic connections was first theorized by whom?	Santiago Ramón y Cajal
What field of science studies the brain and the central nervous system?	neuroscience
What scientific field tries to understand the mind and behavior?	Psychology
What field of science strives to diagnose and treat diseases of the nervous system?	neurology
Psychiatry is the branch of science that does what?	study, prevent, and treat mental disorders
Cognitive science seeks to join what two branches of science with other fields?	neuroscience and psychology
The oldest known method of studying the brain is what?	anatomical,
What do neuroanatomists study?	the large-scale structure of the brain
What type of study uses medical imaging techniques to correlate changes in brain structure?	neuroanatomy
Until what century was brain studying mostly anatomical?	the middle of the 20th century,
What do neurophysiologists study?	the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain
The most common tools that neurophysiologists use are what?	drugs and recording devices
What type of receptors does the brain lack?	pain receptors
Electrodes are often glued to what like in EEG studies?	the scalp
The brain is surrounded by what type of fluid?	cerebrospinal fluid
The brain is separated from the bloodstream by what feature?	the blood–brain barrier
The two main structures that protect the brain are what?	the skull and meninges
What type of disease if often studied to understand damage to the brain?	strokes
What type of animal is most commonly used to study brain damage?	rats
Computational neuroscience is concerned with what two studies?	the use of computers to study the brain; second, the study of how brains perform computation.
What is the most common test subjects for studying of the brain?	mice
Where was the oldest brain that was found?	Armenia
How old was the oldest brain discovered thought to be?	over 5,000 years old
The oldest known brain discovered was found in how old of a person?	12 to 14-year-old
The oldest brain found in a cave was from what gender of human?	girl
The seal of the soul was debated to lie in what two organs of the body?	brain or heart.
Aristotle thought the soul lied in what organ?	the heart
Who invented the atomic theory of matter?	Democritus,
The "father of medicine" is a name given to whom in history?	Hippocrates
What philosopher in history argued for a three-part soul?	Democritus
The physician Galen was from which country in history?	Roman
What period in history was anatomical  studies of nerves greatly increased?	the Renaissance
Who coined the term pneumata psychikon?	The Roman physician Galen
Penumata psychikon is usually translated as what?	animal spirits
Who found out that a shock of electricity to an exposed nerve of a dead frog caused contractions?	Luigi Galvani
The tool that was invented to stain only a small fractions of neurons was called what?	the Golgi stain
What nationality was santiago Ramon y Cajal?	Spanish
Work in the first half the 20th century in electrical properties of nerve cells were by what two main scientists?	Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley
Which decade in history was officially called the "Decade of the Brain"?	the 1990s
Multielectrode recording allows what?	the activity of many brain cells to be recorded all at the same time;
Genetic engineering allows what?	molecular components of the brain to be altered experimentally;
What does genomics allow the study of?	variations in brain structure to be correlated with variations in DNA properties and neuroimaging.
During what century was multielectrode recording invented?	the 21st century,
Genetic engineering was first discovered in what century?	the 21st century,
What is a geographical term that roughly encompasses Western Asia?	Near East (French: Proche-Orient)
The term near east was originally applies to the maximum extent of what empire?	Ottoman Empire
The term Near East has fallen into disuses in what language?	English
What has replaced the term Near East?	Middle East
Who defines the Near East as including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt. Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Isreal, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the West Bank, and Yemen?	The Encyclopædia Britannica
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations also includes what Country in the definition of Near East?	Afghanistan
What group believes the terms Near East and Middle East denote the same territories?	the National Geographic Society
What empire included all of the Balkan Peninsula north to the southern edge of the Hungarian Plain at the beginning of the 19th century?	the Ottoman Empire
When did the Ottoman Empire lose all of it's empire except Constantinople and Eastern Thrace?	1914
The rise of what saw the independence of Greece, Serbia, the Danubian Principalities and Bulgaria?	the rise of Balkan nationalism
Until what year did the Ottomans retain a band of territory including Albania, Macedonia and Thrace?	1912
When did the Ottomans lose the territory of Albania, Macedonia and Thrace?	the two Balkan Wars of 1912–13
How was the Ottoman Empire portrayed in the press?	as the sick man of Europe
The Balkan states were primarily what religion?	Christian
When did the Ottomans strike at the Armenians?	1894
What are the grounds on which the Ottomans struck at the Armenians?	the explicit grounds that they were a non-Muslim people
What aroused the indignation of the entire Christian world?	The Hamidian Massacres
When did "Near East" come into use to describe the part of the east closest to Europe?	middle of the 19th century
In short, the term Far East appeared to name this area	the East Indies
"Near East" applied to this mainly known area	the Levant
What was the jurisdiction of the Levant in?	the Ottoman Porte
What was needed to set foot on most of the shores of the southern and central Mediterranean?	permits from the Ottoman Empire
What was one region included that was occupied by piratical kingdoms?	North Africa west of Egypt
Where were the piratical kingdoms from?	Barbary Coast
Why was Iran included in the collection of regions?	because it could not easily be reached except through the Ottoman Empire or neighboring Russia
What did the term Near East focus on in the 1890s?	the conflicts in the Balkan states and Armenia
The demise of what left considerable confusion as to what was to be meant by "Near East"	of the sick man of Europe
The terms "Near East" and "Far East" referring to areas of the globe in or contiguous to the former British Empire and the neighboring colonies fit together as a pair based on what?	the opposites of far and near
When do the terms "Near East" and "Far East" appear together in journals?	the mid-19th century
The term Near East and Far East were used in British and American meanings when referring to what?	the near or far east of a field, village or shire.
Who used the terms near Gaul?	The Romans
The appearance of what culture using the terms appears in Linear B?	the Greeks
Usually the terms were given when referencing what?	a geographic feature
What divided Asia on a similar basis?	Ptolemy's Geography
"Scythia this side of the Himalayas" is located where?	In the north
"India on this side of the Ganges" is located where?	To the south
"Scythia beyond the Himalayas" is located where?	In the north
Where did Asia begin?	on the coast of Anatolia
When was John Seller's Atlas Maritima?	1670
What had "India Beyond the Ganges" become?	the East Indies
China, Korea, southeast Asia and the islands of the Pacific were included in what?	"the East Indies"
What was only an English translation of Latin Oriens and Orientalis, "the land of the rising sun"?	"east"
What year did Jodocus Hondius make his world map?	1590
Where was Elizabeth I from?	England
What was Elizabeth primarily interested in?	trade with the east
Who did Elizabeth I collaborate with?	English merchants
What was the goal of the first trading companies?	obtain trading concessions by treaty
What company was charted in 1600 for trade to the East Indies?	The East India Company
What has pleased western historians?	to write of a decline of the Ottoman Empire
What was always in question from the beginning of the Ottoman Empire?	The borders
What was the Ottoman Empire created from?	the lands of the former eastern Roman Empire
How did the last Roman emperor die?	fighting hand-to-hand in the streets
Where was the Roman emperor's capital?	Constantinople
The populations did not accept what?	Turkish rule
The Hungarians had thrown off Turkish rule by what year?	1688
What created Serbia?	the Serbian Revolution
When was the Serbian Revolution?	1815–1833
When was the Greek War of Independence?	1821–1832
When did the Russian Empire begin to question the existence of the Ottoman Empire?	1853
When was the Crimean War?	1853–1856
During the Crimean War who did the British and French support?	the Ottoman Empire
What was the Ottoman Empire's struggle against in the Crimean War?	the incursions of the Russian Empire
The Ottoman Empire eventually lost control of what region?	the Balkan region
Until what year did the words near east and far east not refer to any particular region?	1855
What brought a change in vocabulary?	The Crimean War
The Russian Empire became more militarily active against who?	the Ottoman Empire
Who decided the two polities under attack were necessary for the balance of power?	the British government
What empire began promulgating a new vocabulary?	the British Empire
When was a reprint of a letter sent to The Times appear in Littel's Living Age?	1855
Who was the author of the letter sent to the Times?	Thomas Taylor Meadows
What was Thomas Taylor Meadows replying to?	the suggestion by another interpreter
What was one of the earliest presentations of this vocabulary?	the letter to the Times
What was said must represent usage by that administration?	Meadows' terminology
Who had formed the club that contained much of the colonial administration?	Duke of Wellington
What remained popular in diplomatic, trade and journalistic circles?	"Near East"
What variation soon developed among the scholars and the men of the cloth and their associates?	"the Nearer East,"
There was a need to separate what from the terrain of the Ottoman Empire?	the Biblical lands
What did the Christians see the country as?	the land of the Old and New Testaments
How did the scholars attempt their definition?	on the basis of archaeology
When was the London Review?	1861
Rawlinson, Layard and others were reviewed in what?	The London Review of 1861
Who wrote The London Review of 1861?	(Telford and Barber
What region was explicitly excluded?	India
What region has no mention?	the Balkans
Assyria, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Persia, Armenia, Egypt, Arabia, Syria, Palestine, Ethiopia, Caucasus, Libya, Anatolia, and Abyssinia were all what?	regions in their inventory
What does Hogarth say in detail?	where and why
Hogarth makes no mention of what?	the classics
How is Hogarth's analysis?	geopolitical
When did the term "Near East" acquire considerable disrepute?	the 19th century
The term "Near East" acquired considerable disrepute in whose eyes?	English-speaking public
What was the cause of the onus?	the Hamidian Massacres of Armenians
What was the cause of the Hamidian Massacres of Armenians?	they were Christians
When was Robert Hickens' book wrote?	1913)
Reports from who made the change evident?	influential British travellers
Where did Sir Henry Norman travel in 1894	the Far East
What book did Sir Henry Norman write after traveling to the Far East?	The Peoples and Politics of the Far East
What year did Sir Henry Norman's book come out?	1895
Where did the Normans go off to instead of publishing the book?	New York
When did Norman publish parts of his planned travel book?	June, 1896
What magazine did Norman publish his work in?	Scribner's Magazine
Who were liberators of oppressed Balkan states?	The Russians
Who did Norman say "turned her back"?	England
What does Norman mean in the article when saying "Near East"?	the countries where "the eastern question" applied
What is the rest of the Ottoman domain demoted to?	just "the east."
"The East" refers to what?	The rest of the Ottoman domain
What was William Miller's life span?	1864–1945
What was William Miller an expert on?	the Near East
So to speak, what did William Miller do?	signed the death warrant, so to speak, of the Age of Empires
Where did Miller attend school?	Oxford
Miller's words were considered what?	fighting words
It was considered Europe needed what country?	Turkey
What was Miller citing?	the "collective wisdom" of Europe
The Ottoman Empire had no choice but to develop their relationship with what country?	Austro-Hungarian Empire
Who supported the Austro-Hungarian Empire?	the German Empire
Who did the British Empire side with?	the Russian Empire
The formation of the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance partly caused what?	World War I
By what year were three empires gone?	1918
What year was Arnold J toynbee becoming metaphysical about the Near East?	1916
Who was the Hegelesque historian of civilization?	Arnold J. Toynbee
Arnold J Toynbee believed what?	Geography alone was not a sufficient explanation of the terms
What was able to rise from the death of the Near East?	new nations
What notable nation was able to rise from the ashes of the Near East?	the Republic of Turkey
How did the Republic of Turkey align themselves?	with the west
Who was the founder of the Republic of Turkey?	Mustafa Kemal
Who was a former Ottoman high-ranking officer?	Mustafa Kemal
When was the term middle east common as a noun and adjective?	the 19th century
The middle east was not common in diplomacy and what other context?	archaeology
Where did the "Far East" derive from?	Ptolemy's "India Beyond the Ganges."
Where did the Ottoman Empire end?	the eastern border of Iraq
Why did archaeologists count Iran as "The Near East"?	because Old Persian cuneiform had been found there
Where did the use of the term Middle East as a region of international affairs begin?	in British and American diplomatic circles
What was Iran known as to the west?	Persia
When did Thomas Edward Gordon publish "The Problem of the Middle East"?	1900
What article did Thomas Edward Gordon publish?	The Problem of the Middle East
The problem of the Middle East was published by who?	Thomas Edward Gordon
What threat caused Gordon to publish his article?	resumption of work on a railway
Who was a diplomat and military officer?	Gordon
Who had not used the term middle east previously in publications?	Gordon
Who was a member of American diplomatic and military circles?	Alfred Thayer Mahan
What was Alfred Thayer Mahan concerned about?	the naval vulnerability of the trade routes
When did Alfred Thayer Mahan comment on the trade routes?	1902
Who did not connect with the soldier?	the sailor
What did Mahan believe he was innovating?	the term Middle East
What had already been there to be seen?	the term Middle East
The Near East and the Middle East coexisted until what period?	the period following World War I
Who was the colonial officer killed in China?	Bertram Lenox Simpson
Who wrote the 1910 book 'The Conflict of Color'?	Bertram Lenox Simpson
What was Simpson's pen-name?	Weale
What is the basis of Simpson's unity?	color and colonial subjection
The great whites were appearing as late as what time?	the 1920s
In whose works were the great whites appearing?	James Henry Breasted
What was mainly of interest in America?	A red wavelength
These regions were occupied by who?	the brown men
Where where the yellow?	the Far East
Where were the black?	Africa
When did Kenya become independent?	1963
The color issue was not settled until when?	Kenya became independent
The Ottomans were portrayed as what?	the slavers
Who is known as the saint of all British colonial officers?	Charles George Gordon
What did Charles George Gordon spend his time between?	assignments living among the poor and donating his salary
When did he win Ottoman confidence?	as a junior officer in the Crimean War
What did he become in his later career?	a high official in the Ottoman Empire
When did the term "Near and Middle East" hold stage?	a few years before World War I
What proved to be less acceptable to a colonial point of view?	The term "Near and Middle East,"
When did Captain T.C. Fowle write of a trip he had taken from Karachi to Syria?	1916
Who were the 40th Pathans?	(troops of British India
In the book Fowle wrote, what is the entire region considered?	"the Middle East.
What prevailed with the disgrace of "Near East"?	"Middle East"
What continues in some circles at the discretion of the defining agency or academic department?	Near East
What term was disgraced in diplomatic and military circles?	Near East
What sentiment persists even though racial and colonial definitions of the Middle East are no longer ideologically sound?	sentiment of unity
What definitions of the Middle East are no longer ideologically sound?	racial and colonial definitions
What are racial and colonial definitions of the Middle East considered?	no longer considered ideologically sound
When were terms such as "Near East", "Far East", and "Middle East" relegated to the experts?	the 20th century
Where did the new wave of diplomats often come from?	the new field of political science
Where did archaeology on the international scene fall into?	the shadow of international relations
What replaced the fallen empires of the 19th century?	independent republics
What is the chief remaining nation to assign official responsibilities to a region called the Near East?	The United States
What has the state department been most influential in promulgating?	the Near Eastern regional system
Who has abandoned the term Near East?	The countries of the former empires of the 19th century
The Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs is a division of what?	the United States Department of State
What is perhaps the most influential agency to still use the term Near East?	The Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Secretary Clinton also calls the implementation of official diplomacy of the United States what?	statecraft
Who works closely with the definition of the Near East?	the Near East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies (NESA)
What is NESA?	an educational institution of the United States Department of Defense
What does NESA Teach?	It teaches courses and holds seminars and workshops
What is WINEP?	The Washington Institute for Near East Policy
What is WINEPS target countries as?	the Middle East
How does WINEP bundle the countries of Northwest Africa?	under "North Africa."
What does LoC stand for?	The Library of Congress
What is the Library of Congress?	an institution established by Congress to provide a research library for the government
The Library of Congress is under whose supervision?	the United States Congress Joint Committee on the Library
Who formulates multiple regional divisions as is convenient for its various operations?	The United Nations
Who recognizes the "Middle East and North Africa" region?	UNICEF
The United Nations Statistics Division defines Western Asia to contain what?	the countries included elsewhere in the Middle East
The Food and Agriculture Organization describes its entire theater of operations as what?	the Near East
What is a quasi-independent agency of the United States Government?	The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
The CIA appears to have what?	multiple leadership
Who appoints the director of the CIA?	the president
Who oversees the operations of the CIA?	Congress
The Near East of the NESA is the same as the Middle East define in what?	The World Factbook
What does NESA stand for?	Near Eastern and South Asian Analysis
Whose duties are defined as "support on Middle Eastern and North African countries?"	(NESA)
What does USAID stand for?	U.S. Agency for International Development
What is the independant agency under the Department of State for the purpose of determining and distributing foreign aid called?	USAID
What term does USAID not use?	the term Near East
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office of United Kingdom recognizes what?	a Middle East and North Africa region
What region does the Foreign and Commonwealth office of United Kingdom not recognize?	Near East
What consumed the Near East as far as the Red Sea?	Their original Middle East
What does the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Greece conduct?	"bilateral relationships"
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey does not use what term?	Near East
The Middle East, the Balkans and others are included in what republic?	Republic of Turkey
What is a term of the 20th centrury intended to stabilize the geographical application of Near East to ancient history?	The Ancient Near East
The ancient nations, people and languages of the enhanced Fertile Crescent will always refer to what?	the Ancient Near East
What is the sweep of land from the Nile Valley through Anatolia called?	Fertile Crescent
James Bennett Pritchard wrote what?	Texts relating to the Old Testament
When did James Bennett Pritchard write his textbook?	1950
Who was a British archaeologist?	Leonard Woolley
Who excavated ancient Ur?	Leonard Woolley
What do most universities teaching liberal arts have?	library and museum collections
What has had parallel growth of in the 20th century?	the collection of resources
What are these resources collected for?	for scholarship and research
What does CSAD stand for?	Centre for the Study of Ancient Documents
Who founded the CSAD?	Oxford University
Where is Oxford University?	Great Britain
Where did a large percentage of experts on the modern Middle East began their training?	university departments named for the Near East
What is the meaning of Near East in numerous establishments and publications?	Middle East
What is almost never mixed or confused with studies of the Ancient Near East?	Expertise on the modern Middle East
What includes such languages as Sumerian and Akkadian?	Near Eastern Languages
What was Zhejiang formerly romanized as?	Chekiang
Which province is Zhejiang bordered by to the northwest?	Anhui
Which province is Zhejiang bordered by to the west?	Jiangxi
Which province is Zhejiang bordered by to the south?	Fujian
Which body of water is to the east of Zhejiang?	East China Sea
What is the former name of the Qiantang River?	Zhe River
What does the mouth of the Qiantang River form?	Hangzhou Bay
What does Zhe mean in Chinese?	Crooked
Which river does the province of Zhejiang derive its name from?	Zhe River
What does the Qiantang River flow past?	Hangzhou
What kind of cultures were the Hemudu and Liangzhu?	Neolithic
Where was the site of the Hemudu and LIangzhu cultures?	Zhejiang
What year was there an analysis of the DNA recovered from human remains in Liangzhu culture?	2007
Which culture were the Austronesian and Tai-Kadai peoples linked to in the DNA analysis?	Liangzhu
What haplogroup did a DNA analysis of the Liangzhu culture reveal?	O1
Who populated the areas of Zhejiang in the 2nd millennium BC?	Hundred Yue
When did the kingdom of Yue begin to appear?	Spring and Autumn Period
Where was the kingdom of Yue located according to chronicles?	northern Zhejiang
Who does Shiji claim that its leaders were descended from?	Yu the Great
What does the Sword of Goujian bear?	bird-worm seal script
What was the initial power base for Xiang Liang and Xiang Yu's rebellion?	Kuaiji Commandery
Who did the kingdom of Chu eventually fall to?	the Han
In Later Han, which Mount did control of the area return to the settlement below?	Kuaiji
Who led a rebellion with Xiang Liang against the Qin Empire?	Xiang Yu
Which empire did Xiang Liang and Xiang Yu rebel against?	the Qin Empire
When was the beginning of the Three Kingdoms era?	220–280 CE
What was home to the warlord Yan Baihu?	Zhejiang
What kingdom did Sun Ce and Sun Quan eventually establish?	the Kingdom of Wu
Where was their court in Kuaiji removed to?	Jianye
Along with Manchuria, where did trade reach as far as?	Funan
When was Zhejiang part of the Wu?	during the Three Kingdoms
What is another name for Wu or Eastern Wu?	Sun Wu
What was the most developed state among the Three Kingdoms?	Wu
Which historical novel records that Zhejiang had the best-equipped, strong navy force?	Romance of the Three Kingdoms
Along with Wei, which state avoided direct conflict with Wu?	Shu
What was Nanjing formerly known as?	Jiankang
What was the former name of Hangzhou?	Qiantang
Besides Qiantang and Jiankang, what was the other major metropolitan center in the south?	Chengdu
What year was Qiantang raised in status and renamed Hangzhou?	589
How many major metropolitan centers were there in the south at the time?	three
When was the Jin Dynasty?	265–420
Where did the clan of Zhuge Liang gather together?	Zhuge Village (Zhege Cun)
When did Zhuge Village isolate itself until?	this day
What kind of geography is in Zhejiang?	mountainous
When did Zhuge Liang live from?	181–234
When did the Six Dynasties end?	589
What was the wealthiest area during the Six Dynasties?	Zhejiang
Which dynasty restored and expanded the network that became the Grand Canal of China?	the Sui dynasty
What river was one of the Grand Canal of China's hinterlands?	the Zhe River
When did the Song dynasty reestablish unity around?	960
When was the North lost to the Jurchen Jin dynasty?	1127
What was Hangzhou known as while the capitol of the Southern Song?	Lin'an
When was the Yuan dynasty established?	Lin'an
What did Marco Polo call Lin'an when he visited it?	Kinsay
What were greenware ceramics made from?	celadon
What color tint is Longquan greenware characterized by?	bluish-green
What period did Longquan ceramics decline?	the Ming
What kilns were Longquan kilns replaced by in popularity and production?	Jingdezhen in Jiangxi
What decorations are Yuan Longquan celadons derived from?	Middle Eastern
What do 'to-min' mean?	idle people
What does 'yoh-hu' mean?	music people
What does 'si-min' mean?	small people
What does Tanka mean?	egg-people
What is 'Keh Chiang' a romanization for?	Zhejiang
During which war did the British navy defeat Eight Banners forces at Ningbo and Dinghai?	the First Opium War
When was the Treaty of Nanking signed?	1843
What became one of the five Chinese treaty ports under the terms of the Treaty of Nanking?	Ningbo
What did much of Zhejiang come under control of during the Taiping Rebellion?	the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom
When did Wenzhou become Zhejiang's second treaty port?	1876
What war did the Second Sino-Japanese War lead into?	World War II
Who occupied much of Zhejiang during the Second Sino-Japanese War?	Japan
How many estimated civilians were killed by the Japanese searching for Doolittle's men?	250,000
What type of American crews came down in China following the Doolittle raid?	B-25
The Japanese puppet state that occupied Zhejiang was called what?	the Reorganized National Government of China
When did the People's Republic of China take control of Mainland China?	1949
When did the Republic of China control the Dachen Islands until?	1955
When was the Cultural Revolution?	1966–76
When was the high tide of the Cultural Revolution?	1966–69
What production did the agricultural policy favor over industrial and cash crops?	grain
What type of resources does Zhejiang have a lack of?	natural
What is Zhejiang's location vulnerable to from the sea?	flooding
What type of development has Zhejiang been an epicenter of?	capitalist
Which part of Zhejiang is part of the Yangtze Delta?	Northeast Zhejiang
What type of geography is Northeast Zhejiang?	flat
What does Zhejiang consist mostly of?	hills
What percent of Zhejiang is hills?	70%
What is the highest peak of the province?	Huangmaojian Peak
How high is Huangmaojian Peak in meters?	1,929
How high is Huangmaojian Peak in feet?	6,329
What does the north of the province lie just south of?	the Yangtze Delta
Where does the Grand Canal of China end?	Hangzhou
What is a major river of the province in addition to the Qiangtang River?	Ou Rivers
What is a well-known lake of Hangzhou?	West Lake
What is a well-known lake of Jiaxing?	South Lake
How many islands are along the rugged coastline of Zhejiang?	over three thousand
What is the largest island near Zhejiang?	Zhoushan Island
What is the largest bay of Zhejiang?	Hangzhou Bay
How many distinct seasons does Zhejiang have?	four
When does Spring start in Zhejiang?	March
How many prefecture-level divisions of Zhejiang are there?	eleven
How many county-level divisions of Zhejiang are there?	90
How many township-level divisions of Zhejiang are there?	1,570
What is the largest base of shooting films and TV dramas in China?	Jinhua
What is called 'China's Hollywood'?	Hengdian
How are the politics of Zhejiang structured?	a dual party-government system
Who is the highest-ranking official in the People's Government of Zhejiang?	The Governor of Zhejiang
Who is the Governor subordinate to?	the Zhejiang Communist Party of China (CPC) Provincial Committee Secretary
What is the Zhejiang Communist Party of China (CPC) Provincial Committee Secretary provincially known as?	Zhejiang CPC Party Chief
What type of party-government system are all governing institutions in Mainland China?	dual
When was Tan Zhenlin's term as Zhenjiang's Communist Party Secretary?	1949-1952
Who was the inaugural Communist Party Secretary of Zhenjiang?	Tan Zhenlin
When was the so-called February Countercurrent?	1967
When was Jiang Hua's term?	1956-1968
When was the case against the Gang of Four?	1980
What is the province traditionally known as?	Land of Fish and Rice
What is the main crop of the province?	rice
What is the second main crop of the province?	wheat
What part of Zhejiang is a center of aquaculture in China?	north Zhejiang
What is the largest fishery in the country?	Zhoushan fishery
What is an important commercial port along with Ningbo, Wenzhou and Taizhou?	Zhoushan
What bridge is between Haiyan County and Cixi?	The Hangzhou Bay Bridge
What is the longest bridge over a continuous body of sea water in the world?	The Hangzhou Bay Bridge
What kind of ports are Taizhou and Ningbo?	commercial
The Hangzhou Bay Bridge goes between Haiyan County and where else?	Cixi
What is Zhejiang's own development model dubbed?	Zhejiang model
What is the Zhejiang model based on prioritizing and encouraging?	entrepreneurship
What direction is the economic heart of Zhejiang moving toward?	southeast
What was the annual real growth of urbanites in Zhejiang in 2009?	8.3%
What was Zhejiang's nominal GDP in yuan for 2011?	3.20 trillion
What day of the week was September 15, 2011?	Thursday
What village protested over the large-scale death of fish in a nearby river on September 15, 2011?	Hongxiao
How many company vehicles did angry protesters overturn at the Zhejiang Jinko Solar Company?	eight
How many more nights after the first day did protests last?	two
Who was the deputy head of Haining's environmental protection bureau at the time?	Chen Hongming
What kind of Chinese make up the vast majority of the population?	Han
What varieties of Chinese do the largest Han subgroup speak?	Wu
How many members of ethnic minorities are there?	400,000
How many She people are there?	200,000
Where is the only She autonomous county in China?	Lishui
What is another predominant religion of Zhejiang besides Chinese folk religions and Taoist traditions?	Chinese Buddhism
According to surveys in 2007 and 2009, what percent of the population believes in cults of ancestors?	23.02%
According to surveys in 2007 and 2009, what percent of the population identifies as Christian?	2.62%
What percent of the population identified as Christians in 2004?	3.92%
What percent of the population may be irreligious?	74.36%
What year did the government of Zhejiang recognise folk religion as 'civil religion'?	2015
When did Buddhism arrive in Zhejiang?	1,800 years ago
What has an important presence in Zhejiang since its arrival 1,800 years ago?	Buddhism
What part of 2015 did the government of Zhejiang recognise folk religion as 'civil religion'?	mid
More than how many thousand folk religious organisations were registered in Zhejiang in 2015?	twenty
How many years ago did Catholicism arrive in the province?	400
How many years ago did Protestantism arrive in the province?	150
Where are Protestants especially notable in Zhejiang?	Wenzhou
What percent of Zhejiang was Protestant in 1999?	2.8%
Which religion came to Zhejiang 400 years ago?	Catholicism
When did the rapid development of religions in Zhejiang drive the local committee of ethnic and religious affairs to enact measures to rationalise them?	2014
According to the locality, in addition to "Three Rectifications and One Demolition", what was another name for these measures?	Special Treatment Work on Illegally Constructed Sites of Religious and Folk Religion Activities
These regulations have led to the demolition of churches and what else?	folk religion temples
What have these regulations led to the removal of from churches?	crosses
What was an exemplary case of all this?	Sanjiang Church
How long ago did Islam arrive in Zhejiang?	1,400 years
What religion do the Hui Chinese living in Zhejiang practice?	Islam
How many of the Hui Chinese living in Zhejiang practice Islam?	virtually all
What is practiced by the She ethnic minority in Zhejiang?	She shamanism
What religion came to Zhejiang 1,400 years ago?	Islam
How diverse is Zhejiang, linguistically speaking?	extremely
What do most inhabitants of Zhejiang speak?	Wu
Mandarin and Huizhou dialects are spoken on the border where?	with Anhui
Min dialects are spoken on the border where?	with Fujian
What type of geography is Zhejiang?	mountainous
When was the People's Republic of China founded?	1949
What has been promoted as the standard language of communication throughout China since 1949?	Mandarin
A majority of the population educated since what year can speak Mandarin?	1978
What type of residents tend to be more fluent in Mandarin than rural ones?	Urban
Throughout history there have been a series of what in the area to allow for better communication?	lingua francas
What is one of the most prominent forms of Chinese opera?	Yueju
Where did Yueju originate?	Shengzhou
Who is Yueju traditionally performed by?	actresses only
Who plays male roles in Yueju?	actresses
Who plays female roles in Yueju?	actresses
What is Longjing tea also called?	dragon well tea
Where does Longjing tea originate from?	Hangzhou
What type of umbrellas is Hangzhou known for?	silk
What type of fans is Hangzhou known for?	hand
Zhejiang cuisine is one of how many great traditions of Chinese cuisine?	eight
What neighbours north Zhejiang to the south?	Jiangsu
What neighbours south Jiangsu to the north?	Zhejiang
North Zhejiang and south Jiangsu are famed for their opulence and what else?	prosperity
Inserting north Zhejiang names into poetry gave an effect of what?	dreaminess
The fame of where led to a popular saying?	Hangzhou
Which government's Ministry of Defence is mentioned here?	British
What does MoD stand for?	Ministry of Defence
Who sets the defence policy in Great Britain?	Her Majesty's Government
For which part of the government is the MoD the headquarters?	British Armed Forces
What does the MoD wish to strengthen?	international peace and stability
The UK consists of what two areas?	Great Britain and Northern Ireland
What does the MoD defend?	United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
What are the threats that the MoD has identified?	weapons of mass destruction, international terrorism, and failed and failing states
What does the MoD manage?	day-to-day running of the armed forces, contingency planning and defence procurement
What three services make up the armed forces of the UK?	the British Army, the Royal Navy, and the Royal Air Force
What did David Lloyd George's coalition government reject in 1921?	The formation of a united ministry of defence
When was the Chiefs of Staff Committee formed?	1923
Who created the position of Minister for Coordination of Defence?	Stanley Baldwin
What post did Lord Chatfield hold until 1940?	Minister for Coordination of Defence
Who created the office of Minister of Defence?	Winston Churchill
When was the Ministry of Defence Act introduced?	1946
When did Winstron Churchill form his government?	1940
The new ministry, according to the Act of 1946, was headed by a Minister of Defence who possessed what?	a seat in the Cabinet
Who stopped attending Cabinet with the passage of the Ministry of Defence Act of 1946?	the Secretary of State for War, the First Lord of the Admiralty, and the Secretary of State for Air
During what years did the five Departments of State do the work of the modern Ministry of Defence?	1946 to 1964
What were the five Departments of State that did the work of the modern Ministry of Defence?	the Admiralty, the War Office, the Air Ministry, the Ministry of Aviation, and an earlier form of the Ministry of Defence
When did the defence functions of the Ministry of Aviation Supply merge into the Ministry of Defence?	1971
All former Departments of State (except the Ministry of Aviation Supply) merged in what year?	1964
Who is supported by civilian, scientific, and professional military advisors?	The Ministers and Chiefs of the Defence Staff
What is the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence generally known as?	Permanent Secretary
Where does the Permanent Secretary serve as the senior civil servant?	MoD
What is the role of the Permanent Secretary?	to ensure the MoD operates effectively as a department of the government
What is the name of the person who is the current Chief of the Defence Staff?	General Sir Nicholas Houghton
Who is the professional head of the British Armed Forces?	Chief of the Defence Staff
The professional heads of what three services support the Chief of the Defence Staff?	HM Armed Forces
Which person in the Joint Forces Command supports the Chief of the Defence Staff?	the Commander
How many Deputy Chiefs of the Defence Staff are there?	three
What are the three Deputy Chiefs of the Defence Staff?	Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Capability), Deputy CDS (Personnel and Training) and Deputy CDS (Operations)
Who represents the Defence Medical Services on the Defence Staff?	The Surgeon General
Who leads the Defence Medical Services?	The Surgeon General
One of the Assistant Chiefs of the Defence Staff is for Reserves and what?	Cadets
The Personnel Chief is also known as what?	the Defence Services Secretary in the Royal Household of the Sovereign of the United Kingdom
There is a Defence Services Secretary in the Royal Household of the what?	Sovereign
Who are two of the Assistant Chiefs of the Defence Staff?	Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Reserves and Cadets) and the Defence Services Secretary in the Royal Household of the Sovereign of the United Kingdom
In what year was there a Strategic Defence Review?	1998
What paper was published in 2003?	Delivering Security in a Changing World White Paper
Which part of the Britsh government were the two publications listed concerning?	British Armed Forces
In what concept is the MoD considered a leader?	defence diplomacy
Who was the PM of Britain in 2010?	David Cameron
Who was the president of France in 2010?	Nicolas Sarkozy
In which two countries is the UK installing military bases?	UAE and Bahrain
In which other country is the UK thinking about installing a military base?	Oman
How much was the investment in new equipment and capabilities worth?	£178 billion
In which year was a £178 billion investment made?	2015
How many primary missions were included in the 2015 Review?	four
What is the name of the yearly statement released by the MoD?	The Strategic Defence and Security Review
What was the new threat that arose after the end of the Cold War?	terrorism
Military spending that is based on conventional threats has been dismissed as what?	Cold War mentality
How much of the MoD's equipment budget is invested in the "land environment"?	10%
Where was Britain involved in a land war when some thought that land wars were basically a thing of the past?	Afghanistan and Iraq
Which years make up the time span mentioned for the military budget numbers?	2003 and 2018
Who was the Chief of Defence Materiel in 2009?	General Sir Kevin O’Donoghue
Which department is overseen by the Chief of Defence Materiel?	Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S)
Which programme was mentioned as being underfunded?	Equipment Programme
Who was the Secretary of State for Defence in 2009?	Bob Ainsworth MP
Which publication said the 2009 defence budget was more than 10% overbudget?	London Evening Standard
How much land is owned by the MoD?	227,300 hectares
How much is the land owned by the MoD worth?	£20 billion
The MoD owns or has rights of access to what percentage of the UK's total land?	1.8%
How much is the annual cost to support the defence estate?	in excess of £3.3 billion
Who is one of the largest landowners in the UK?	The Ministry of Defence
What percentage of the defence estate makes up training areas and ranges?	84.0%
What makes up the smallest portion of the defence estate?	storage & supply depots
What percentage of the defence estate is taken up by airfields?	(3.4%
Who manages the defence estate?	Defence Infrastructure Organisation
Barracks and camps are what percentage of the defence estate?	(2.5%
In what city are the headquarters of the MoD?	Whitehall
Who designed the headquarters of the MoD?	Vincent Harris
Who designed the statues that are on either side of the northern entrance to the MoD headquarters?	Charles Wheeler
What is the headquarters of the MoD called?	Main Building
Who made the Gurkha Monument?	Philip Jackson
Who had a wine cellar at the Palace of Whitehall?	Henry VIII
Where is Henry VIII's wine cellar?	the basement of Main Building
When was the cellar in the basement of Main Building built?	1514–1516
What is the main material used to build the cellar in the basement of Main Building?	brick
When was the cellar relocated?	1949
Who in the MoD was convicted of fraud?	Gordon Foxley
What position was held by Foxley?	head of defence procurement
What years was Foxley employed by the MoD?	1981 to 1984
How much money was Foxley accused of taking?	at least £3.5m
What do the police believe the bribes were intended to do?	influence the allocation of contracts
What publication released a report about the Ministry of Defence in 2002?	the Guardian
What was the MoD accused of doing to the public?	secret germ warfare tests
What are the children of some families in the area of the testing experiencing?	children with birth defects and physical and mental handicaps
When was the supposed germ warfare testing taking place?	between 1940 and 1979
When were millions of people supposedly exposed to e. coli and an anthrax-like bacteria?	between 1961 and 1968
How much did the MoD spend on Chinook helicopters?	£240m
When were the helicopters ordered?	1995
Which office reported that the helicopters were being stored, rather than used?	National Audit Office
In what year were the helicopters brought into service?	2010
What is the estimated total cost of the Chinook helicopter project?	£500m
Which aircraft manufacturer got a contract with the MoD?	Boeing
When was the Boeing contract signed?	April 2008
Who is downgrading the Chinook helicopters?	QinetiQ
How much was the Boeing contract worth?	£90m
What was removed from the Chinook helicopters?	more advanced equipment
When was the TA budget withdrawn?	October 2009
How much money was allocated to the volunteer Territorial Army?	£20m
When was the training for the TA supposed to resume?	April 2010
How much of the UK's troops are provided by the TA?	a small percentage
How often do the TA troops regularly train?	weekly evenings and monthly weekends
By how much did the MoD go over its equipment budget?	£6.5bn
When was the overbudget amount discovered?	2013
What are some of the criticisms that have been directed at the MoD?	poor management and financial control
What is a long-range estimate on fulfillment of some of the equipment orders made by the MoD?	up to 39 years
Past projects ordered by the MoD have taken what type of time frame to fulfill?	up to 10 and even as much as 15 years
The term "high definition" originally described televisions systems from what year?	1936
Earlier television systems were based on what?	mechanical systems with as few as 30 lines of resolution
During which entire century were companies and nations trying to achieve true HDTV?	20th
In what century were 4k, 5k, and 8k systems introduced?	21st
What is the most current HDTV system development?	8K
Who started trials in August 1936?	The British high-definition TV service
When was the Baird system discontinued?	February 1937
Which country developed the 441-line system?	France
What prevented France's 819-line system from achieving the definition it was capable of?	the technical limitations of the time
Which system used interlaced scanning to correct the flicker problem of the 240-line?	405-line system
What year did color broadcasts start in the US?	1953,
How many lines of resolution did the US NTSC color system have in 1953?	525
When did Europe begin color broadcasts?	1960s
The PAL and SECAM were color systems where?	Europe
How many lines of resolution were the European monochrome broadcasts?	625
What is the Japan Broadcasting Corporation called?	Nippon Hōsō Kyōkai
What does NHK stand for in Japan?	Nippon Hōsō Kyōkai
What year was NHK Color created?	1972
What was the aspect ratio of the NHK Color?	5:3
What organization became the authority on testing and studying international HDTV technology?	The Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE)
How many major HDTV systems were tested by SMPTE in the late 70's?	four
Who tested the four major HDTV systems in the late 1970's?	SMPTE
Who released A Study of High Definition Television Systems?	an SMPTE study group
In what year was A Study of High Definition Television Systems released?	1979
What was released by an SMPTE study group in 1979?	A Study of High Definition Television Systems
What does DVB stand for?	digital video broadcasting
When was widescreen HDTV transmission modes formally adopted?	early 2000s
In addition to the 625-line PAL system, what European system is considered a standard definition television system?	SECAM systems
In addition to the NTSC system, what 525-line system is considered a standard definition television system?	PAL-M
525 and 625-line systems are now considered what?	standard definition television systems
In what year did France start transmissions using and 819 line system?	1949
What country started transmissions using and 819 line system in 1949?	France
What did France start transmissions with in 1949?	an 819 lines system
Was France's 819 line system in color?	monochrome only
When was France's 819 line system discontinued?	1983
In the end what was the Soviet Union's Transformator system used for?	a research project
When did the Soviet Union develop Transformator?	1958
Who developed Transformator in 1958?	the Soviet Union
How many lines of resolution could an image using the Transformator system have?	1,125
What was the goal of the Transformator system?	providing teleconferencing for military command
In what year did NHK first develop consumer HD television with a 5:3 aspect ratio?	1979
Who first developed consumer HD television with a 5:3 aspect ratio?	the Japanese state broadcaster NHK
When did satellite test broadcasts of Hi-Vision start?	1989
When did regular broadcasting of BS-9ch start?	November 25, 1994
When did regular testing of Hi-Vision start?	1991
When was the MUSE system demonstrated in the US first?	1981
What aspect ratio did the MUSE system use when demonstrated in 1981?	5:3
Which president declared it "a matter of national interest" to introduce HDTV to the US?	President Ronald Reagan
Which system was demonstrated in the US for the first time in 1981?	MUSE
Which system was demonstrated in Washington to President Ronald Reagan?	MUSE
Why did the FCC reject systems such as MUSE?	their higher bandwidth requirements
What was increasing and consuming a lot of bandwidth?	television channels
Who rejected systems such as MUSE as the new standard for the US?	the FCC
What was one of the requirements for a new standard system in the US?	had to be more efficient, needing less bandwidth
What was the existing system at the time?	NTSC
What constraints kept HDTV from being widely adopted in the 90's?	technical and economic
What was HDTV not permitted to do in the 90's?	use bandwidths greater than normal television
How much more bandwith was required from early HDTV commercial experiments than an SD broadcast?	over four times
Efforts were made to reduce analog HDTV to how much of the bandwith of SDTV?	about twice
Despite the reduced bandwith, HDTV format still had to be distributed how?	by satellite
What kind of experiments required over four times the bandwith of a SDTV broadcast?	Early HDTV commercial experiments
How many broadcasters did Japan have sharing a single channel?	seven
Which country had successful public analog HDTV broadcasting?	Japan
What was particularly challenging in the early years of HDTV?	recording and reproducing an HDTV signal
What accomplishment in early HDTV did Japan have?	the only country with successful public broadcasting of analog HDTV
What does ITU-R stand for?	International Telecommunication Union's radio telecommunications sector
What does DVB stand for?	Digital Video Broadcasting
What is the DVB?	an alliance of broadcasters, consumer electronics manufacturers and regulatory bodies
What is the DVB's role?	develops and agrees upon specifications
Who standardizes HDTV specifications?	ETSI
What did the Grand Alliance propose as the new standard for SDTV and HDTV?	ATSC
Which standard were ATSC and DVB based on?	MPEG-2
Who created the standard for DVB-2, DVB-C, and DVB-T?	DVB
Who proposed ATSC as the new standard for SDTV and HDTV?	the Grand Alliance
When did ITU-R start trying to work towards setting a single international HDTV standard?	1983
What did ITU-R start trying to do in 1983?	setting a single international HDTV standard
What was one of the issues with setting a single HDTV standard?	a suitable frame/field refresh rate
What was used as a conversion between the two main frame/field rates?	motion vectors
How many frame/field rates were primarily being used in 1983?	two
What aspect ratio was agreed upon due to the influence of widescreen cinema?	16:9
Who agreed upon the 16:9 aspect ratio?	the IWP11/6 working party
What was a leading factor in the 16:9 aspect ratio being chosen?	widescreen cinema
Which encoding contains both progressive and interlaced content?	MBAFF
Which aspect ratio was the early favorite?	5:3
What scan format is also included in MBAFF?	1440×1152 HDMAC
What was viewed by some as enhanced television format and not true HDTV format?	a mooted 750-line
A mooted 750-line was seen by some at the ITU as what?	an enhanced television format
What were 1920x1080i and 1280x720p defined by?	US SMPTE standards
When was HDTV introduced in the US?	late 1980s
Who made HDTV official in 1993?	the Digital HDTV Grand Alliance
AT&T, Philips, Zenith, and MIT, among others, made up what group in the 90's?	the Digital HDTV Grand Alliance
When did the first public HDTV broadcast happen in the US?	July 23, 1996
What does ATSC stand for?	Advanced Television Systems Committee
When did the first HDTV transmissions happen in Europe?	1990
What event was the first HDTV broadcast in Europe?	FIFA World Cup
When did Europe abandon standard transmission?	mid-1990s
Where was the FIFA World Cup able to be watched in HDTV?	8 cinemas in Italy and 2 in Spain
When did regular broadcasts start in Europe?	January 1, 2004
What event was first broadcasted on January 1, 2004?	Vienna New Year's Concert
The New Year's Day broadcast officially launched which channel?	HD1
When did test transmissions of HDTV begin in Europe?	September 2003
Which European company launched HD1?	Euro1080
Euro1080 was a division of what former company?	Alfacam
What "chicken or the egg" stalemate prompted Euro1080 to broadcast HDTV channels?	"no HD broadcasts mean no HD TVs bought means no HD broadcasts ..."
What was Euro1080 hoping to kick-start by broadcasting HDTV channels?	HDTV interest in Europe
How much did viewers have to pay for the HD1 channel?	free-to-air
What was on HD1 for 4 or 5 hours per day?	a multi-lingual soundtrack on a rolling schedule
What format did the first European HDTV broadcast use?	1080i format
What compression did the first European HDTV broadcast use?	MPEG-2
What signal did the first European HDTV broadcast use?	DVB-S
What compression did Euro1080 later change to?	MPEG-4/AVC
What signal did Euro1080 later change to?	DVB-S2
According to the 2010 Satellite Monitor market survey, how many HD capable TV's were sold in Europe?	185 million
According to the 2010 Satellite Monitor market survey, how many European households were watching HD broadcasts?	20 million
How many pounds were spent in Europe on HD capable TVs in 2010?	£60 million
What percentage of European digital satellite TV homes were watching HD broadcasts in 2010?	27%
The number of European HD channels and viewers has done what since the first HDTV broadcasts?	risen steadily
Which European country first deployed HD content using the new DVB-T2 standard?	the United Kingdom
When did the UK deploy HD content using the new DVB-T2 transmission standard?	December 2009
What transmission standard did the UK start using in December 2009?	DVB-T2
What does DTG stand for?	Digital TV Group
How many HD channels did the Freeview HD service contain as of December 2013?	10
When was the digital switchover process completed in the UK?	October 2012
Which service contains 10 HD channels and finished its roll out in October 2012?	Freeview HD
How was the Freeview HD service rolled out in the UK?	region by region
What are the three HDTV parameters?	[frame size][scanning system][frame or field rate]
Which two parameters can be dropped if its value is implied from context?	frame size or frame rate
When can the frame size or frame rate parameter specification be dropped?	if its value is implied from context
When a parameter is dropped, the remaining numeric parameter is specified first, followed by what?	the scanning system
What size is each 1920x1080p25 frame?	1,920 pixels wide and 1,080 pixels high
The 1920x1080p25 notion identifies progressive scanning format with how many frames per second?	25
The 1080i25 or 1080i50 notion identifies interlaced scanning format with how many frames per second?	25
The 1080i30 or 1080i60 notion identifies interlaced scanning format with how many frames per second?	30
The 720p60 notion identifies progressive scanning format with how many frames per second?	60
What three scanning rates do 50 Hz systems support?	50i, 25p and 50p
Which system suports 59.94i, 60i, 23.976p, 24p, 29.97p, 30p, 59.94p, and 60p	60 Hz
SD television fractional rates were often rounded to what?	whole numbers
Strict notation is required with HD fractional rates to avoid what?	ambiguity
What is usually dropped for the commercial naming of an HDTV product?	the frame rate
What does 24p mean?	24 progressive scan frames per second
What does 50i mean?	25 interlaced frames per second
When naming a commercial HDTV product, a frame rate can be specified without what?	a resolution
Is there a single standard for HDTV color support?	no
Before being converted to RGB, colors are ususally broadcasted using what color space?	YUV
Colors are typically broadcast using YUV and then converted to what?	a RGB color space
When transmitted over the internet, colors are typically to what?	8-bit RGB channels
What assumption is made with colors being transmitted over the internet?	it will only be viewed only on a (sRGB) computer screen
At least how many times more linear resolution does HDTV have over SDTV?	twice
HDTV increases the effective image resolution by not using what?	letterboxing or anamorphic stretching
What does SDTV stand for?	standard-definition television
HDTV handles what aspect ratio without using letterboxing or anamorphic stretching?	16:9
If more bandwith is required than is available, a very high resolution source my not be able to transmitted without loss of what?	fidelity
The compression used in all HDTV storage and transmission systems will do what if resolution is too high?	distort the received picture
A very high resolution source may require more of what?	bandwidth
A broadcasts optimum format depends on what two things?	the type of videographic recording medium used and the image's characteristics
For best fidelity to the source, what three things should match the source?	transmitted field ratio, lines, and frame rate
For best fidelity to the source, the transmitted field ratio, lines, and frame rate should match what?	those of the source
The type of videographic recording medium used and the image's characteristics determine what?	The optimum format for a broadcast
PAL, SECAM, and NTSC frame rates apply to what definition televisions?	analogue standard
PAL, SECAM, and NTSC frame rates do not apply to what broadcasts?	digital or high definition
In former PAL and SECAM countries, what frame rate does HDTV operate at?	25/50 Hz
In former NTSC countries, what frame rate does HDTV operate at?	30/60 Hz
At what rate is standard 35mm photographic film exposed and projected?	24 frames per second
To be shown on SDTV in PAL-system countries, at what rate is cinema film scanned?	25 frame/s
The technique in which with successive pair of film frames, one is held for three video fields, and the next is held for two, is called what?	3:2 Pulldown
The 3:2 Pulldown techniques gives what total time for two frames?	1/12 of a second
What is achieved by the 3:2 Pulldown technique producing a total time of 1/12 of a second for two frames?	the correct average film frame rate
What two formats are typically used to recorde non-cinematic HDTV video intended for broadcast?	720p or 1080i
Which format is typically used for internet distribution of HD video?	720p
Most computer monitors operate in what mode?	progressive-scan
1080i, 1080p, and 720p are often used on what kind of disc.	Blu-ray
In the US, what kind of tuner is needed for residents to receive free, over the air programming?	ATSC
Laws regarding antennas were upated before what?	the change to digital terrestrial broadcasts
Who do these laws prohibit from banning the installation of antennas?	home owners' associations and city government
Laws about antennas keep home owners' associations and city government from banning what?	the installation of antennas
Most television sets sold since what year have an ATSC tuner?	2009
HD content can be displayed by cable-ready TVs without using what?	an external box
Without using an external box, cable-ready TVs can display what?	HD content
What features allow the cable-ready TVs to display HD content without an external box?	a QAM tuner built-in and/or a card slot for inserting a CableCARD
What kind of built-in tuner will allow a cable-ready TV to display HD content without an external box?	QAM
What kind of card will allow a cable-ready TV to display HD content without an external box?	CableCARD
Roku and AppleTV are examples of what?	IPTV
Internet downloads, Blu-ray videos, and Apple TV are examples of what?	High-definition image sources
Terrestrial broadcast and direct broadcast satellite are examples of what?	High-definition image sources
Digital cable and Roku are examples of what?	High-definition image sources
Why does the PlayStation 3 have extensive HD compatibility?	because of its built in Blu-ray disc based player
In addition to having a Blu-ray player the Xbox 360 also features what?	Netflix and Windows Media Center HTPC streaming capabilities, and the Zune marketplace
What high definition gaming platform did Nintendo recently release?	The Wii U
The HD capabilities of modern gaming systems has inspired developers to do what?	port games from past consoles onto the PS3, Xbox 360 and Wii U, often with remastered or upscaled graphics
Sky HD's set-top box, TiVo's Series 3, and Dish Network's VIP 622 are examples of what?	an HDTV-capable digital video recorder
Some cable boxes are capable of doing what?	receiving or recording two or more broadcasts at a time in HDTV format
What restriction does W-VHS recordings have?	analog only
What does D-VHS stand for?	Digital-VHS or Data-VHS
When was the Hauppauge 1212 Personal Video Recorder introduced?	2008
How does the Personal Video Recorder store content?	in MPEG-2 format in a .ts file or in a Blu-ray compatible format .m2ts file
Recent systems can record a broadcast HD program in what format?	'as broadcast' format or transcode to a format more compatible with Blu-ray
What uncompressed storage option was introduced in 2008?	the Hauppauge 1212 Personal Video Recorder
W-VHS recorders are capable of recording what kinds of signals?	analog HD
What kind of recorder is no longer produced for the consumer market?	Analog tape
In the secondary market, analog tape recorders are considered what?	expensive and scarce
Prior to 2004, what were US cable companies required to provide customers who rent HD set-top boxes?	a set-top box with "functional" FireWire (IEEE 1394) on request
When were boxes with "functional" FireWire no longer included in the FCC mandate?	July 2004
Content is now protected by what encryption?	5C
What can 5c encryption prevent?	duplication of content or simply limit the number of copies permitted
In addition to being used to build things, what has wood been used for over thousands of years?	fuel
What kind of strong fibers are part of the composite of wood?	cellulose
What's the matrix in wood made up of?	lignin
What one word describes the function wood provides to a tree or plant?	support
What does wood convey to leaves, roots, and other tissues of a woody plant in addition to water?	nutrients
How many cubic meters of growing stock forest are there on the planet?	434 billion
What percentage of the Earth's stock forest is commercial?	47%
In addition to buildings, what is wood often used to make?	furniture
About how many cubic kilometers of the vast stock forest's wood were harvested in 1991?	3.5
In addition to being carbon neutral, what other adjective describes wood that makes it compelling as a renewable energy source?	abundant
What year were the earliest plants that grew wood discovered?	2011
In which Canadian province were the oldest woody plants found?	New Brunswick
If dendrochronology can't be used, what method would scientists employ to date wood?	carbon dating
How many millions of years old were the plants that were discovered in New Brunswick?	395 to 400
What has been the primary purpose of wood for millennia other than fuel?	construction material
What is often made of wood that provides shelter to people?	houses
For clues about the climate of a place, we can look at variation in isotopic abundances or what other thing?	tree-ring widths
What could be made out of wood that could be used to fight off attackers?	weapons
What category of items often constructed from wood does a chair belong to?	furniture
Where does wood come from?	trees
What forms in a tree to increase its diameter?	woody layers
What is the process of trees growing out to get bigger around called?	secondary growth
What do many places have four of that would cause growth rings in a tree?	seasons
If a place has annual seasons, what are the growth rings on the trees there called?	annual rings
If a growth ring has differences over one season, would the part nearest the tree's center be narrower or wider?	wider
What name, besides springwood, is used for the part of a growth ring formed in the beginning of the growing season?	earlywood
If the opposite of springwood is summerwood, what's the opposite of earlywood?	latewood
Is earlywood usually lighter or darker than the part of the growth ring that forms later in the season?	lighter
Is summerwood the inner or outer portion of a growth ring?	outer
What is the sort of circular imperfection in a piece of wood called?	knot
What property of wood does a knot usually reduce in the wood around it?	strength
In what direction is wood often sawn so that a knot appears as a solid circle that the grain flows around?	longitudinally
Are knots usually lighter or darker than the surrounding wood?	darker
The direction of grain in a knot can differ by as much as how many degrees from the regular wood?	90
Other than the base of a side branch, what tree feature causes a knot?	a dormant bud
What shape is the knot formed by a side branch's base?	conical
What measurement of a stem determines a knot's inner tip placement?	diameter
Because a knot's shape is conical, what shape does a cross-section of it have?	circular
What will the lower limbs of a tree usually do during development?	die
For what length of time can a dead lower limb stay attached to a tree?	years
Rather than being joined to the limb that died, where do subsequent layers grow?	around it
Are the knots that dead tree limbs form attached or not attached?	not attached
A detached knot will probably drop out of the wood when someone saws it into what?	boards
What's the process in which knots are classified called?	grading
Along with firmness, soundness, and form, what property of a knot is classified?	size
What property of knots does the amount of time a branch stayed on a tree while the stem kept growing affect?	firmness
What is wood's breaking strength susceptible to?	defects
Depending on the placement and size of a knot, what property of structural timber can be affected?	stiffness
What do stiffness and elastic strength depend on more than defects?	sound wood
What direction of compression in relation to its grain won't weaken wood with sound knots in it?	parallel
What positive visual component can knots sometimes add to decorative pieces?	interest
What term is used to describe what knots can do to affect the finish of things made from wood even when they've been painted?	bleed
Is bleed easy or difficult to control?	difficult
The stain from a knot bleeding is usually brownish or what other color?	yellow
In what stage of processing does knot primer need to be applied for maximum effectiveness?	preparation
What's another word for "duramen"?	Heartwood
What is heartwood naturally resistant to?	decay
How does heartwood formation occur due to its being genetically programmed?	spontaneously
What adjective describes fully formed heartwood?	dead
Despite being considered dead, what can heartwood have one chemical reaction to?	decay organisms
In what part of a tree's cross-section is heartwood visible?	growth rings
What simple color distinction can heartwood have that makes it stand out from living wood in a tree?	darker
Along with insect infestation, what process can discolor wood and make it look like heartwood?	decay
What kind of plants never form heartwood?	woody
What is the living wood in a tree called?	sapwood
What term is interchangeable with "sapwood"?	alburnum
Is sapwood the younger or older wood in a tree?	younger
What essential liquid is the sapwood tasked with carrying around a tree?	water
How much of the wood in a tree is sapwood at some point in its life?	All
Does a tree growing quickly out in the open have thinner or thicker sapwood for its size than the same kind of tree in a dense forest?	thicker
If a tree starts forming heartwood right away, will its sapwood layer be thin or thick?	thin
What property of heartwood that has nothing to do with how important it is to trees got it its name?	position
Does a beech tree usually have thin or thick sapwood?	thick
Does a sassafras tree typically have a thin or thick sapwood layer?	Thin
Would a thin or a thick sapwood layer be found in a pine tree?	thick
What part of a tree is the cross-sectional area of the sapwood approximately proportional to?	crown
Are more rings necessary if they're narrow or wide?	narrow
As a tree grows bigger, if the sapwood layer doesn't increase in volume, what will it become?	thinner
In what part of the tree trunk is the sapwood layer thinnest?	near the base
Along with the smaller diameter of the upper trunk, what factor leads to thinner sapwood higher up a tree?	age
What usually covers the whole trunk of a very young tree?	limbs
What evidence of the stubs of the limbs a tree loses can always be seen in the wood?	knots
In a very old tree, are you more likely to find a lot of knots in the heartwood or the sapwood?	heartwood
What hides the stubs of a tree's lost limbs from being visible later in its life?	Subsequent growth
Since knots are defects that weaken lumber, would the heartwood or the sapwood from the same tree be stronger?	sapwood
What do broken limbs and deep wounds open a door for in a tree?	decay
Decay can spread to all of what part of a tree?	the trunk
What growth stage of insects bore holes into trees?	larvae
What part of a tree often stays impressively sound even when hundreds or thousands of years old?	inner heartwood
What evidence do some insect larvae leave in a tree forever?	tunnels
In what stage of its life does a tree usually grow the fastest?	youth
As a tree ages, do its growth rings usually get wider or narrower?	narrower
What part of a tree opens and spreads out more as it matures?	crown
Is wood production of a tree lessened or increased as it ages?	lessened
Along with nutrients, what do trees growing in forests have to compete for?	light
When a big tree is cut up, will the pieces of wood differ or all be the same?	differ
In a large log, will the heartwood or sapwood usually be stronger and tougher?	heartwood
If you need really hard, strong wood from a small tree, would it likely be better to use the heartwood or sapwood?	sapwood
Besides big trees, what trees are more likely to have a range of different kinds of wood?	mature
When trees have a visible difference in color between sapwood and heartwood, which is darker?	heartwood
What is deposited naturally in heartwood that changes its color?	chemical substances
Is the color difference between heartwood and sapwood usually very subtle or conspicuous?	conspicuous
What type of properties of heartwood and sapwood is often the same even if their colors are very different?	mechanical
Although heartwood and sapwood might be similar mechanically, if their colors are very different, what other type of difference would they have?	chemical
What type of tree has resin that makes it stronger when it dries?	Longleaf Pine
What's the funny name for resin-saturated heartwood?	fat lighter
What is fat lighter practically impervious to in addition to termites?	rot
If spruce is shot full of crude resin and dried, which of its properties is increased?	strength
Since it's highly flammable, what do people often use little pieces of longleaf pine tree stumps for?	kindling
Which of the wood in a growth ring is usually darker?	latewood
Which property of a tree's wood that gives clues about its strength and hardness can be judged by it's color?	density
What category of trees show this difference greatly?	coniferous
What type of woods might sometimes appear to have darker earlywood on a finished surface?	ring-porous
With the exception of earlywood/latewood difference in some types of trees, how much of an indication of strength is a wood's color?	no indication
What condition does an abnormal color usually indicate in wood?	diseased
What other property can you assume of wood that is diseased?	unsoundness
What causes the black checked pattern in the wood of western hemlocks?	insect attacks
What animals cause the reddish-brown streaks of color in hickory wood?	birds
What's the name for the pretty coloring effect caused in some wood by rot-producing fungi?	spalting
What does wood retain in its cell walls despite being air-dried?	water
Air-dried wood keeps up to what percentage of the water in its cell walls?	16
What kind of dried wood retains a small quantity of water but is considered absolutely dry?	oven-dried
Often the water in wood makes it more pliable and what else?	softer
What material sometimes used for dog chews reacts similarly to wood because of its water content?	rawhide
What material we use to write or print on, like wood, becomes softer and more pliable when wet?	paper
When water content increases within certain limits in wood, does is have a less or greater softening effect?	greater
What type of action does water create in cloth?	softening
What will drying often increase in wood?	strength
What color is also used interchangeably with "undried" for wood?	green
What type of wood can hold four times as much of a load when dried?	spruce
What type of "ultimate" strength is one of the two types increased the most by drying wood?	crushing
What property of wood is least affected by drying?	elasticity
Is strength at elastic limit in endwise compression or stress at elastic limit in cross-bending increased more by drying wood?	strength at elastic limit in endwise compression
Is the strength of the modulus of rupture or elasticity increased more when wood is dried?	modulus of rupture
Along with hygroscopic, cellular, and anisotropic, how is the material of wood described?	heterogeneous
What does wood consist of?	cells
What part of wood's cells are composed of cellulose and hemicellulose?	walls
What makes up 40-50% of the cell walls in wood?	cellulose
What substance is hemicellulose impregnated with?	lignin
What type of cells makes up most wood cells in coniferous trees?	tracheids
Are hardwood or softwood species more uniform in structure?	softwood
What are the visible vessels in hardwoods commonly called?	pores
What hardwood that starts with the letter "O" would have pores?	oak
Besides oak, what's an example of a hardwood with prominent pores?	ash
Is the structure of hardwood simple or complex?	complex
What handles most of the water conduction in hardwoods?	vessels
Are the vessels in chestnut wood large or small?	large
In wood from a willow tree, what would you need to use to see the tiny vessels?	a hand lens
Besides ring-porous, what's the other class hardwoods are often divided into?	diffuse-porous
What species of hardwood are hickory and mulberry trees?	ring-porous
In what season do the growth-rings of ring-porous species form with larger vessels localized?	spring
In what season does the part of the growth-ring with smaller vessels form in ring-porous species?	summer
What fibers does the summer's section of growth-ring have more of?	wood fibers
Along with strength, what property do wood fibers lend to wood?	toughness
What kind of woods have pores that are uniformly sized?	diffuse-porous
What species do aspen, cottonwood, and poplar trees belong to?	Populus
With walnut, what's another tree in the intermediate group?	cherry
What capability is spread through the growth ring in ring-porous species?	water conducting
Is maple wood diffuse-porous or ring-porous?	diffuse-porous
What kind of softwoods often have significant differences in their earlywood and latewood?	temperate
Is latewood denser or less dense than earlywood?	denser
Does strength come from the walls or cavities of wood cells?	walls
Are the cell walls of earlywood thick or thin?	thin
What general size are the cavities in the cells of very dense latewood?	very small
Comparing a heavy and a lightweight piece of wood from a pine, which would have a greater proportion of latewood?	heavy
What feature of a piece of pine with more latewood would be more clear and pronounced?	growth rings
What type of tree has very little contrast between parts of its growth rings?	white pines
Is white pine easy or difficult to work with because of its texture?	easy
What kind of pines have very deep, darkly colored hardwood that stands out against the light earlywood?	hard pines
Having a high proportion of latewood isn't all that matters; what else is important?	quality
What can we judge in wood just by looking at it?	comparative density
What property of wood could we project some indication of by looking at its density?	strength
What could we call some specimens with a high proportion of latewood that explains why they weigh less than specimens with much less latewood?	porous
What facet of wood is affected to some degree by the place where the tree grows?	character
If you want wood that's easy to work with, what kind of growth would you want the tree to have?	moderate to slow
What species of tree can be said to growth ring proportions that aren't determined just by their rate of growth?	conifers
What counterpart of earlywood are scientists still trying to explain the formation of?	latewood
While there is some relationship between where and how a tree grows, what can't anyone formulate to govern it?	a rule
What kind of woods always have very clearly marked seasonal growth?	ring-porous
What size pores form early in ring-porous woods' growing season?	large
When does the denser tissue the new pores abut come from?	the year before
Ring-porous hardwoods have a clear relationship between their properties and what other factor?	rate of growth
Is harder, heavier wood indicated by narrower or wider growth rings?	wider
What kind of wood with a name that starts with "H" is a ring-porous hardwood?	hickory
If the growth rings are wider, was the growth of the tree slower or more rapid?	more rapid
What is the only kind of wood that will definitely be harder and stronger when it grows faster?	ring-porous
Which specific type of wood within ring-porous woods have more fibers to make it strong?	latewood
When there is less latewood, what is diminishing?	breadth of ring
Does slow or rapid growth make relatively porous, light wood?	slow
What kind of oak has just 6-10% volume of large vessels in the log?	good
What kind of fibers are in the latewood of good oak, making it very firm?	thick-walled
What term is sometimes used for wood with wide rings?	second-growth
Do young trees grow more quickly in open stands or in a closed forest?	open stands
What property is important to manufacturers who use "second-growth" hardwood?	strength
What specific kind of "second-growth" hardwood is often used to make handles and spokes?	hickory
What organization tested hickory to find out about its properties?	U.S. Forest Service
What kind of wood often has ring divisions that can't even be seen by looking at it?	diffuse-porous
In diffuse-porous woods, if the demarcation between rings is obvious, what type of difference within the ring might not be?	structure
What adjective describes how our eyes function without a tool like a microscope to help?	unaided
What kind of wood has all similarly sized vessels?	diffuse-porous
What rate of growth in a tree will make the wood from it stronger than trees that grow very slowly or very quickly?	medium
The capability of diffuse-porous woods to carry what substance is spread out in the growth ring?	water
What division of trees are diffuse-porous woods more similar in growth rate to than ring-porous woods?	conifers
Does uniformity of the texture and grain of wood usually result from much or little contrast between earlywood and latewood?	little
What's another term used for "conifer" wood?	dicot
What type of plants produce material that is referred to as "wood" even though it is technically not?	monocot
What monocot plant produces "wood" by the same name that's often used for flooring and veneer?	bamboo
While we call bamboo "wood," what botanical family does it belong to?	grass
Along with bamboo, what's the other monocot that's a major source of so-called "wood"?	palms
Which property of wood reveals the most about its quality?	specific gravity
In addition to lumber strength, what important indicator of wood's quality can be determined using specific gravity?	pulp yield
What measurement is expressed in mass per unit substance?	density
When wood dries and shrinks, what happens to its density?	increases
When wood is described as "green," what does "green" mean?	water-saturated
Along with growth, what kind of factors determine the density of wood?	physiological
Into how many characteristics are the factors of wood combined?	one
What author called wood's density "fairly easily measured"?	Elliott
What should be anticipated because of the many factors that influence wood's density?	Variation
What specific type of growth has an effect on the density of wood?	radial
Which part of a tree can have vertical or horizontal variation in its specific gravity?	bole
Variation in what measurement is sometimes greater within one tree than from one tree to another?	density
What tiny object's source plays a role in determining wood density?	seed
What term do we use for the wood that comes from pine trees?	softwood
What kind of wood does an oak tree have?	hardwood
Is balsa a softwood or a hardwood?	hardwood
What's an example of a softwood that isn't "soft," and is actually harder than a lot of hardwoods?	yew
What's the scientific name for trees like the oak with broad leaves?	dicotyledons
What kind of relationship exists between a tree's properties and its wood's properties?	strong
What property of wood varies according to species?	density
What property of wood has a correlation to its density?	strength
Is mahogany a hardwood or a softwood?	hardwood
What hobby is balsa wood often used for?	model building
What approximate percentage of carbon does wood have?	50%
What element makes up about 6% of the chemical composition of wood?	hydrogen
About what percentage of wood is composed of nitrogen?	1%
Which element in wood composes about 42% of its weight?	oxygen
What element joins potassium, calcium, manganese, iron, and sodium to make a combined 1% of the chemical composition of wood?	magnesium
How many main components make up wood, not counting water?	three
What's the name for the crystalline polymer derived from glucose?	Cellulose
After cellulose, what component is most plentiful in wood?	hemicellulose
What kind of trees have about 30% hemicellulose?	conifers
Which of the three main components of wood is used to manufacture paper?	cellulose
What component of wood determines whether it is hardwood or softwood?	lignin
Which wood has lignin that comes primarily from one type of alcohol?	Softwood
Which type of alcohol mainly becomes softwood lignin?	coniferyl
In addition to coniferyl alcohol, what other alcohol is in hardwood lignin?	sinapyl
Which kind of wood contains lignin derived from two main alcohol sources?	Hardwood
What's the name for the low molecular weight organic compounds in wood?	extractives
Along with fatty acids, what kind of acids are in the extractives in wood?	resin
Wood extractives include resin and fatty acids, terpenes, and what other component?	waxes
What do conifers use rosin to protect themselves from?	insects
Along with tall oil and rosin, what commercial product do we get from wood's extractives?	turpentine
What type of wood is preferred as fuel?	Hardwood
What type of wood burns quickly and makes more smoke than hardwood?	softwood
What type of areas use more wood for fuel?	rural
What benefit besides the cozy atmosphere would a wood-burning fireplace add to a home?	warmth
What wood is decay-resistant when wet?	Elm
What plumbing component was once made out of elm?	water pipe
Until the late 19th century, what vessels were almost always wooden?	boats
What significant purpose has wood been used for as long as humans have built shelters?	construction material
Other than boats, what do people often build with wood?	houses
What term is used in North America for wood used in construction?	lumber
Outside of North America, if someone said "lumber," to what would they be referring?	felled trees
What do people outside of North America call the sawn boards used for building?	timber
What was the preferred wood for construction in Medieval Europe?	oak
For modern solid wood doors, what wood is often used in addition to small-knotted pine or poplar?	Douglas fir
What type of construction is often used now to build homes in much of the world?	timber-framed
In addition to residential applications, what type of buildings often have engineered wood components?	commercial
Along with decorative components, what type of building materials can be engineered from wood?	structural
What industry benefits greatly from engineered wood products?	construction
What might wood be used for in a building made from brick or other materials?	supporting material
What crucial part of a house is often constructed from wood?	roof
Wood might be used to construct what exterior component of a building?	cladding
Inside a building, what wooden things might you open to enter or leave rooms?	doors
What holds together an engineered wood product?	glue
Engineered wood products are often used in construction, but what other major type of applications do they have?	industrial
What requirements do engineered wood products meet?	application-specific performance requirements
What efficient type of unit does the process of "engineering" wood result in?	composite structural unit
Wood fibers from wood strands, lumber, and what other source can be glued together to make larger units?	veneers
What category do composite panels, strand board, and plywood all fit into?	wood structural panels
What's another word for glued laminated timber?	glulam
What does LVL stand for?	laminated veneer lumber
If current building trends continue, what material will be replaced by particle and fiber board?	plywood
About how many cubic meters of wood was used in 1991 to make products like glulam, LVL, and structural composite lumber?	100 million
What material results from chemically breaking down wood?	cellulose
What's the abbreviation for medium-density fiberboard?	MDF
How is wood broken down into chips and fibers?	mechanically
What type of flooring can be made from wood derivatives?	laminate
What widely-used product is almost always made of wood fibers?	paper
What category of products usually made from wood includes chairs?	furniture
What wooden utensil could you stir a pot of soup with?	wooden spoon
Which parts of tools are sometimes made out of wood?	handles
What pieces of furniture that most people use every night can be made out of wood?	beds
What special wooden utensils do many people use to eat Chinese takeout?	chopsticks
What could we monitor electronically that could help inform new methods of wood protection?	Moisture content
Development in the wood manufacturing industry include using lignin to make what substance?	glue
Instead of rubber, what important part of a car might someday be replaced by components of wood?	tire
What material might be developed from wood that could make clothes that resist wear and tear?	high strength fabrics
In addition to extracting components from wood, what might scientist do by adding components, for example, to make innovative products?	modify wood
Along with sculptures, what type of art have people been making out of wood for centuries?	carvings
What did indigenous people in North America make out of the trunks of conifers?	totem poles
What type of tree was often used for totem poles?	Western Red Cedar
What city in Scotland would you visit to see the Millennium clock tower?	Edinburgh
What museum exhibits the Millennium clock tower?	National Museum of Scotland
What kind of wood are clarinet bodies made from?	african blackwood
What expensive wood with a prized color is used to make the backs of violins?	ripple sycamore
What category of wood is often used for musical instruments?	tonewoods
What's the common name for Picea abies?	European spruce
Along with resonance, what property of an instrument will be affected by the wood used to make it?	tone
What type of instruments with a misleading name aren't always made completely out of wood?	woodwind instruments
What are woodwind instrument's reeds often made out of?	Arundo donax
Is the Arundo donax a monocot or dicot cane plant?	monocot
What objects do musicians have to have in order to play woodwind instruments?	reeds
What wood is usually used for cricket bats?	white willow
Ash and hickory are often used for baseball bats to comply with the rules of what organization?	Major League Baseball
What is commonly used for the basketball courts the NBA plays on?	parquetry
What wood has recently started being used to make baseball bats in addition to hickory and ash?	maple
Compared to hickory and ash, what adjective might be used for a maple baseball bat?	fragile
What pieces of equipment for shooting arrows used to be wooden?	archery bows
Which pieces of ice hockey equipment were once made out of wood?	sticks
When the golf club called the "wood" was actually made out of it, what type of wood was used?	persimmon
What is the golf club known as the "wood" usually made out of today?	synthetic materials
What other modern material has joined composites, carbon fiber, titanium, and aluminum to replace wood in the manufacture of sporting equipment?	fiberglass
What component of wood is degraded by bacteria that scientists are still trying to learn about?	cellulose
What type of bacteria are present in Xylophaga?	Symbiotic
What type of wood is it possible the bacteria in Xylophaga help break down?	sunken
How long was the wood submerged in water in the study that discovered the types of bacteria in it?	over a year
What bacteria starting with the letter "F" were found in wood after it was underwater for more than a year?	Flavobacteria
What language family is Somali a part of?	Afro-Asiatic
What part of the Afro-Asiatic language family is Somali a part of?	Cushitic
What is the majority religion of Somalis?	Sunni Muslim
How many people of Somali ethnicity live in Somalia?	12.3 million
What country has the second largest Somali population?	Ethiopia
From whom are several Somali clans descended?	Irir Samaale
From what words is the term 'Somali' generally regarded as being derived?	soo and maal
What does 'soo and maal' mean in English?	go and milk
What word in Arabic means 'wealthy' in English?	dhawamaal
What resource traditionally comprised Somali wealth?	livestock
What did the Arabs call the northern Somali coast in the 9th century?	Berbera
What did the Chinese call the northern Somali coast in the 9th century?	Po-pa-li
In what century was the term 'Somali' first used?	15th
Who ordered that a hymn be composed that first mentioned the Somalis?	the Abyssinian Emperor
Where was the Sultanate of Ifat located?	Zeila
How long ago were rock paintings found in Somalia created?	5000 years
Where are the most notable rock paintings located?	the Laas Geel complex
Along with animals, what is depicted on the rock paintings of Laas Geel?	human figures
Where does a notable rock painting of a man on horseback exist?	the northern Dhambalin region
In what geographic part of Somalia are these rock paintings commonly found?	northern
Along with the Hargesian culture, what culture was present in Somalia in the Stone age?	the Doian culture
What undeciphered writings were found alongside the rock paintings?	Inscriptions
During what period did the Doian culture thrive?	the Stone age
In what country is the oldest evidence of ceremonial burial in the Horn of Africa located?	Somalia
From what millennium do the oldest cemeteries in the Horn of Africa date?	4th millennium BC
At what site were important paleolithic stone tools found?	the Jalelo site
In what geographic part of Somalia were important paleolithic stone tools found?	northern
What economic activity in the Horn of Africa did the ancient Somalis connect to the rest of the world?	commerce
Along with myrrh and spices, what important luxury did ancient Somali merchants provide?	frankincense
Along with the ancient Phoenicians, Egyptians and Babylonians, what ancient people regarded myrrh as a luxury?	Mycenaeans
What ancient land was connected to the modern Somali people?	Land of Punt
What nation did the Land of Put have a close relationship with?	Pharaonic Egypt
Who was a Queen of Egypt during the time when Punt and Egypt were close?	Hatshepsut
Along with houses of dressed stone, what ancient architecture may have been influenced by Egypt?	pyramidal structures
Near what headland was Mosylon located?	Cape Guardafui
Along with Mosylon, Malao, Nikon, Sarapion, Opone and Essina, what city-state flourished in ancient Somalia?	Damo
Along with the Parthians and Axumites, who were the commercial competitors of the ancient Somalis?	Sabaeans
What trade did the ancient Somalis and others compete for?	Indo-Greco-Roman
What body of water separated Somalia from the land where Islam was born?	Red Sea
In what location was Islam born?	the Arabian Peninsula
What civilization was Mogadishu a part of?	Berberi
What was another name for Mogadishu?	the City of Islam
The trade of what luxury in East Africa was once centered on Mogadishu?	gold
What dynasty ruled the Sultanate of Ifat?	the Walashma dynasty
What was the capital of the Sultanate of Ifat?	Zeila
Along with parts of Ethiopia and Somalia, in what modern-day country was the Sultanate of Ifat located?	Djibouti
According to al-Umari, how many cavalry did the Sultanate of Ifat have?	15,000
Near what body of water did al-Umari say Ifat was located?	the Red Sea
What Somali polity of the Middle Ages was known for its fortresses?	the Ajuran Sultanate
What state employed Abmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi?	the Sultanate of Adal
What was another name by which Abmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi was known?	Ahmed Gurey
What state did Adal conquer?	the Ethiopian Empire
What Somali leader received tribute from the Omani empire?	Sultan Ahmed Yusuf
What states supported the Dervish State?	the Ottoman and German empires
In what year did the British defeat the Dervishes?	1920
What was the capital of the Dervish State?	Taleex
In what year did Fascist Italy achieve full control of Somalia?	1927
In what year did the Italian occupation of Somalia end?	1941
Along with British Somaliland, what country in the region was a British protectorate after the Second World War?	Italian Somaliland
At what meeting did the United Nations give Italy trusteeship of Italian Somaliland?	the Potsdam Conference
Along with the Somali Youth League and Somali National League, what was an early Somali political organization?	Hizbia Digil Mirifle Somali
How many years would Italy have to allow Italian Somaliland to become independent?	ten
In what year was the British protectorate over British Somaliland ended?	1960
Along with the Haud, what area of Somalia was given to Ethiopia by the British?	the Ogaden
In what year did the British give the Haud to Ethiopia?	1948
The Ogaden was given to Ethiopia on the basis of a treaty signed by the British with what Ethiopian leader?	Emperor Menelik
In what year did Britain try to purchase Somali lands from Ethiopia?	1956
What people constituted almost the entire population of the Northern Frontier District?	Somali
What was Djibouti called in 1958?	French Somaliland
In what year did Somalia become independent?	1960
What was Mahmoud Harbi's title?	Vice President of the Government Council
When did Djibouti achieve independence?	1977
Who was the first president of Djibouti?	Hassan Gouled Aptidon
On what date did British Somaliland gain independence?	26 June 1960
What was British Somaliland known as upon achieving independence?	the State of Somaliland
What state formed the Somali Republic with British Somaliland?	the Trust Territory of Somalia
On what date did the former British Somaliland and Italian Somaliland unite?	1 July 1960
Who was the first President of the Somali Republic?	Aden Abdullah Osman Daar
On what date was Abdirashid Ali Shermarke assassinated?	15 October 1969
Who assassinated Abdirashid Ali Shermarke?	one of his own bodyguards
On what day, the day after the funeral of Abdirashid Ali Shermarke, did a coup occur?	21 October 1969
Who was the commander of the army when the coup occurred?	Mohamed Siad Barre
What was Mohamed Siad Barre's rank?	Major General
Along with Jama Korshel, who led the Supreme Revolutionary Council?	Salaad Gabeyre Kediye
What was Jama Korshel's title?	Chief of Police
What was the military rank of Salaad Gabeyre Kediye?	Lieutenant Colonel
What name did the Supreme Revolutionary Council give to Somalia?	the Somali Democratic Republic
Along with dissolving the Supreme Court and parliament, what action did the Supreme Revolutionary Council take?	suspended the constitution
What did the new government nationalize along with land?	industry
What international body did the new government join?	the Arab League
In what year did the new government enter the Arab League?	1974
What organization would the Organization of African Unity later become?	the African Union
What rate did the new government's programs significantly increase?	literacy
Along with Kenya, Djibouti and Somalia, in what Horn of Africa country do Somali people live?	Ethiopia
In what geographic portion of Kenya can Somali people be found?	northeastern
What is the name of the idea that believes all ethnic Somalis should live in the same country?	Pan-Somalism
Along with the Soviet Union, what country supported Ethiopia in its war against Somalia?	Cuba
What was the name of the conflict between Somalia and the Soviet Union, Cuba and Ethiopia?	the Ogaden War
In what year did Sanchez publish his study on Somali ethnicity?	2005
What language group speakers are ethnic Somalis closely related to?	Afro-Asiatic
What haplogroup is present in a significant number of Somalis?	E1b1b1a
Based on the presence of the M78 subclade, where do some researchers think Somalis originated?	Egypt/Libya
What percentage of Somali males had DNA containing the M78 subclade of E1b1b?	77%
When did Richards publish his mtDNA research?	2006
Along with Egyptians, Algerians and Somalis, what people commonly possess the M1 haplogroup?	Ethiopians
On what continent is the M1 haplogroup believed to have originated?	Asia
Who authored an mtDNA study in 2005?	Holden
What family of languages is the M1 haplogroup associated with?	Afro-Asiatic
When did Hodgson publish his DNA study?	2014
According to Hodgson, what ancestral people spread the Afro-Asiatic languages?	Ethio-Somali
According to Hodgson, what people is mostly descended from Ethio-Somalis?	Somalis
According to Hodgson, how long ago did the Ethio-Somalis diverge from other non-African ancestries?	at least 23,000 years ago
According to Hodgson, where did the Ethio-Somalis originate?	the Near East
In what year did Mahamoud publish his research?	2006
In what geographic part of Somalia is Zeila located?	northern
From whom were the early Muslims fleeing?	the Quraysh
Along with the Shafi'i, to what sect of Islam do most Somalis belong?	Sunni
What is the majority religion in Somalia?	Islam
A small minority of Somalis belong to what branch of Islam?	Shia
What is another name for a Qur'anic school?	dugsi
What percentage of students at Qur'anic schools are female?	40
What government body regulates Qur'anic education?	the Ministry of Endowment and Islamic Affairs
Along with Minneapolis, London and Birmingham, what city contains a notable population of Somalis?	Toronto
What is the name of the mosque under construction in Minneapolis?	the Abuubakar-As-Saddique Mosque
Along with floods, what natural disaster often spurs Islamic fundraising?	droughts
Along with universities, the construction of what educational buildings are sometimes the focus of Islamic fundraising?	schools
Along with the Horn of Africa, what is a notable location where Somali Islamic figures have been influential?	the Arabian Peninsula
What is a basic social unit of Somali society?	clan
In what geographical portion of Somalia is the tomb of the founder of the Dir clan located?	northern
Of what clan is the Abgaal a sub-clan?	Hawiye
What practice is often used to bind different clans together?	marriage
According to a recent study, how many men of the Dhulbahante clan married women from the Hawiye clan?	3
According to a recent study, how many Dhulbahante men married women of a different Dhulbahante sub-clan?	55
To what clan family do the Ogaden belong?	Darod
What percentage of Dhulbahante men married women of the Majerteen or Ogaden?	4.3%
What law gave Somali husbands and wives equal rights over personal property?	1975 Somali Family Law
What was the official name of the country in which the 1975 Somali Family Law was passed?	the Somali Democratic Republic
In addition to giving spouses equal rights over their personal property during marriage, what did the Somali Family Law give them?	equal division of property between the husband and wife upon divorce
What is the biggest ethnic group in Somalia?	Somalis
What percentage of Somalians are ethnic Somalis?	85%
During what century did the nomad lifestyle decline among Somalis?	20th
Why do many Somalis live in South Asia and Europe?	their seafaring tradition
Along with Djibouti and Ethiopia, in what African country outside Somalia can Somalis be found?	Kenya
What led to an increase in the number of Somalis leaving the country?	Civil strife
Along with the Middle East and North America, to what continent did the Somali diaspora go in the 1990s?	Europe
Along with Ottawa, Calgary, Edmonton, Montreal, Winnipeg, Hamilton and Vancouver, what Canadian city has a significant Somali population?	Toronto
As of 2006, where did Somalis rank in terms of population by ethnicity in Canada?	69th
About how many Somalis live in the UK?	108,000
What percentage of Somalis living in Britain reside in London?	78%
As of 2014, how many Somalis lived in Sweden?	57,906
In 2014, how many Somalis resided in Norway?	38,413
How many Somalis lived in Finland as of 2014?	16,721
What country is Cedar Rapids located in?	the United States
Along with Saint Paul, what city constitutes the Twin Cities?	Minneapolis
About how many Somalis moved to Minnesota ten years ago?	20,000
What area of Minneapolis contains a notable number of Somalis?	Cedar-Riverside
What is hawala?	money transfer services
What sort of meat is sold in Somali businesses in Minneapolis?	halal
In what Middle Eastern country is there a notable Somali population?	the United Arab Emirates
What is another name for the city center of Dubai?	Deira
People of what nationality export more products from Dubai than Somalis?	Iranians
What is the name of an airline owned by Dubai-based Somalis?	Star African Air
How many Dubai-based airlines are owned by Somalis?	three
Near what city in Sudan do many Somalis reside?	Khartoum
In what geographical portion of Sudan do some Somalis live?	north
Along with businesspeople, what sort of Somalis live in Sudan?	students
In what Somali enclave in Kenya have Somalis invested over $1.5 billion?	Eastleigh
In what province of South Africa do Somalis congregate?	Western Cape
What language family does the Somali language belong to?	Afro-Asiatic
What branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family does the Somali language belong to?	Cushitic
Along with Saho, what language is closely related to Somali?	Afar
Among the Cushitic languages, which is the most well-documented?	Somali
Before what year did studies on the Somali language exist?	1900
About how many people in Somalia speak Somali?	7.78 million
In millions, about how many global Somali speakers are there?	12.65
Along with Greater Somalia ethnic Somalis, who speaks Somali?	the Somali diaspora
Along with Northern and Maay, what is the third main group of Somali dialects?	Benaadir
What dialect is Standard Somali based on?	Northern Somali
What is another name for Benaadir?	Coastal Somali
What dialect is spoken on Mogadishu?	Benaadir
In what geographic part of Somalia do the Rahanweyn live?	southern
What is the most frequently used writing script for the Somali language?	the Somali alphabet
Who introduced the Somali alphabet?	Mohamed Siad Barre
In what month and year was the Somali alphabet introduced?	October 1972
Who created the Somali alphabet?	Shire Jama Ahmed
Who invented the Osmanya script?	Osman Yusuf Kenadid
Other than Somali, what is an official language of Somalia?	Arabic
To what language family does Arabic belong?	Afro-Asiatic
In what neighboring country is Arabic also an official language?	Djibouti
What organization do both Djibouti and Somalia belong to?	the Arab League
For how long has Somalia had connections to the Arab world?	centuries
Civilizations from what geographic part of Africa influenced Somali culture?	Northeast
Civilizations from what geographic part of Asia influenced Somali culture?	Southeast
What Asian country notable influenced Somali culture?	India
Along with Northeast Africa, Southeast Asia and India, what locale had a significant influence on Somali culture?	the Arabian Peninsula
Somali food contains influences from what region?	Southeast Asian
Along with textiles, wood carving and pottery, what ancient cultural activity still dominates Somalia today?	monumental architecture
Who called Somalia a "Nation of Bards"?	Margaret Laurence
Of what nationality is the person who called Somalia a "Nation of Bards"?	Canadian
What is the profession of the individual who referred to Somalia as a "Nation of Bards"?	novelist
What is a notable game that is played in Somalia?	Shax
Along with sport, games, literature, dress and festivals, what is a notable Somali cultural tradition?	martial arts
What scale is used by most Somali songs?	pentatonic
How many notes are in a hepatonic scale?	seven
What is an exaple of a hepatonic scale?	the major scale
Along with Arabia and Ethiopia, what land has songs that sound similar to those of Somalia?	Sudan
What does midho mean in English?	lyricists
In what decade were the first Somali feature films made?	1960s
In what year was the SFA founded?	1975
Who was the representative of the Somali Film Agency in Rome?	Ali Said Hassan
What are riwaaydo?	popular musicals
What was the name of Said Salah Ahmed's first feature?	The Somali Darwish
What is a notable characteristic of Somali art?	aniconism
Along with wood carving, architecture and pottery, what is a notable Somali artistic tradition?	music
In what geographic region of Somalia are ancient rock paintings located?	northern
What animals are depicted on the Mogadishan canopies?	birds
In what area of Somalia can one find the tombs decorated with plants?	southern
What do Somali women wear on their feet during Eid?	henna
Along with triangular shapes, what are common henna designs in Somalia?	flower motifs
What do Somali women traditionally put around their eyes?	kohl
From what ancient region did kuul application come?	Land of Punt
What activity is often held before Somali weddings?	Henna parties
What sport do Somalis most enjoy?	Football
What is the name of the Somali national football team?	Ocean Stars
In what year did the Ocean Stars first compete in the Olympics?	1972
Along with Liban Abdi, Ayub Daud and Abdisalam Ibrahim, who is a notable Somali football player?	Mohammed Ahamed Jama
Along with the Somalia Cup, what is an important Somali football competition?	the Somalia League
When did the 1981 FIBA African Championship take place?	15–23 December 1981
Who hosted the 1981 FIBA African Championship?	Somalia
In what city did the 1981 FIBA African Championship take place?	Mogadishu
For what nation did Hussein Ahmed Salah compete?	Djibouti
Who did Mohammed Ahmed compete for in the Olympics?	Canada
Who came in fourth in the 2013 Open World Taekwondo Challenge Cup?	Mohamed Deq Abdulle
What medal did Faisal Jeylani Aweys win in the 2013 Open World Taekwondo Challenge Cup?	silver
Where did the 2013 Open World Taekwondo Challenge Cup take place?	Tongeren
Along with Thai Boxing, in what has Mohamed Jama won a European title?	K1
What is a koofiyad?	an embroidered fez
What do Somali men wear when they aren't wearing Western clothing?	the macawis
Where is the macawis worn?	around the waist
What piece of clothing is the macawis similar to?	sarong
Aside from the koofiyad, what do Somali men wear on their head?	turban
What is the jellabiya?	a long white garment
Along with jellabiyad, what is the jellabiya called in Somali?	qamiis
In what region do men commonly wear the jellabiya?	the Arab world
What is the regular garment of Somali women?	the guntiino
What is the guntiino normally made from?	alandi
What is the usual formal attire for Somali women?	the dirac
Along with silk, saree fabric or chiffon, what might the dirac be made out of?	taffeta
What is the underskirt of the dirac called?	the gorgorad
What is the name of the headscarf worn by married women?	shaash
What is the name of the shawl that married women wear on their upper bodies?	garbasaar
Along with abaya, what is a traditional Arab garment sometimes worn by Somali women?	the jilbab
What is the jewelry worn by Somali women commonly made from?	gold
Along with anklets, what pieces of jewelry are traditionally worn by Somali women?	necklaces
What type of jewelry do Somali women wear at their weddings?	gold
In what year was the Somali flag invented?	1954
Who devised the Somali flag?	Mohammed Awale Liban
What was Mohammed Awale Liban by profession?	scholar
What is the star at the center of the Somali flag called?	Star of Unity
How many points does the Star of Unity have?	five
What is the one culinary tradition that is present among all Somali regional cuisines?	all food is served halal
What type of meat is never present in halal dishes?	pork
What beverage is not halal?	alcohol
Along with alcohol, what liquid is never present in halal food?	blood
What is the English word for qado?	lunch
What is bariis in English?	rice
What is the most popular variety of bariis?	basmati
When is the latest a Somali might eat dinner during Ramadan?	11 pm
After what event during Ramadan is dinner served?	Tarawih prayers
What is another term for xalwo?	halva
Along with wedding receptions, when is xalwo often consumed?	Eid celebrations
What do the Somalis call frankincense?	lubaan
What is the English word for cunnsi?	incense
What do the Somalis call incense burners?	dabqaad
When did Somalis begin to render their language using the Latin alphabet?	1972
Who is the most well-known modern Somali writer?	Nuruddin Farah
In what year did Nuruddin Farah win the Neustadt International Prize for Literature?	1998
Who wrote Ignorance is the enemy of love?	Farah Mohamed Jama Awl
Who won the 2010 Betty Trask Prize?	Nadifa Mohamed
What is the Somali system of customary law?	Xeer
In what century did the Xeer system begin?	7th
In what region did the Xeer system develop?	the Horn of Africa
What fact about Somali legal terms implies that Xeer developed locally?	devoid of loan words
In the Xeer system, what are judges called?	odayal
What does xeer boggeyaal mean in English?	jurists
What does the Xeer system call attorneys?	garxajiyaal
By what term are witnesses known in the Xeer system?	murkhaatiyal
What does the Xeer system call cops?	waranle
Along with Somalo-Islamic architecture, what influences modern Somali architecture?	Western designs
Along with the early modern and ancient, during what period did Somali architecture exist?	medieval
What material was used to make Somali cities?	stone
What do Somalis call their ancient pyramids?	taalo
What were taalo used for?	burial
What were ancient Somali houses made out of?	dressed stone
Ancient Somali houses were similar to houses in what country?	Egypt
What is a notable stone wall built in ancient Somalia?	the Wargaade Wall
During what period was the Muslim faith introduced to Somalia?	early medieval
Along with Arabian influences, where did architectural influences come from in the medieval period?	Persia
In the medieval period, what buildings were notably built atop older ruins?	mosques
Along with sundried bricks and coral stone, what construction material was widely used after the introduction of Islam?	limestone
Before Islam was introduced, what was a common building material in Somalia?	drystone
What is the academic study of the Somali people called?	Somali Studies
Along with sociology, linguistics, historiography and archaeology, what field is part of Somali Studies?	anthropology
Along with chronicles and records, what indigenous sources are used in Somali Studies?	oral literature
What is the name of the annual gathering of Somali Studies scholars?	the International Congress of Somali Studies
When did the International Congress of Somali Studies begin?	1980
In what century did the Middle Ages begin?	5th
What century saw the end of the Middle Ages?	15th
What event marked the beginning of the Middle Ages?	the collapse of the Western Roman Empire
Along with the Renaissance, what era occurred at the end of the Middle Ages?	Age of Discovery
What is the first period of the three that Western history is traditionally divided into?	Antiquity
Along with the movement of peoples, invasion and depopulation, what event started in Late Antiquity and continued into the Middle Ages?	deurbanisation
In what state did barbarian invaders establish kingdoms?	the Western Roman Empire
What empire was North Africa previously a part of?	the Eastern Roman Empire
In what century did the Caliphate conquer North Africa?	7th
In what year did Italians discover the Code of Justinian?	1070
What year marked the beginning of the High Middle Ages?	1000
What event led to larger crop yields in the High Middle Ages?	the Medieval Warm Period
What was the name of the economic system that organized peasants into villages owing labor and rent to nobles?	Manorialism
What was the name of the political system that gave rents to knights in return for military service?	feudalism
In what year did the Crusades begin?	1095
When did the Black Death end?	1350
In what period of the Middle Ages did the Black Death occur?	Late
What portion of the European population died in the Black Death?	a third
What era occurred after the Late Middle Ages?	the early modern period
Along with controversy and schism, what upset the peace of the Church during the Late Middle Ages?	heresy
Along with Antiquity and the Middle Ages, what is the other major division of European history?	the Modern Period
How many major periods is European history divided into?	three
What is another name for Antiquity?	classical civilisation
Along with the Six Ages, what other scheme did writers in the Middle Ages use to divide history?	Four Empires
What writer referred to the Christian period as new?	Petrarch
Who wrote the History of the Florentine People?	Leonardo Bruni
When was the History of the Florentine People published?	1442
Who first divided history into the ancient, medieval and modern periods?	Christoph Cellarius
What date is usually given as the beginning of the Middle Ages?	476
Who was the first writer to date the Middle Ages from 476?	Bruni
When is the Middle Ages generally considered to have ended?	1500
In what year did the Turks conquer Constantinople?	1453
When did Ferdinand II die?	1516
In what century did the Roman Empire achieve its greatest extent?	the 2nd century AD
In what century did the revival of Persia occur under the Sassanids?	3rd century
How much did the size of the Roman army increase in the 3rd century?	doubled
What did the need for increased revenue to pay for the Roman army lead to an increase in?	taxes
What is another term for the Roman landowning class?	curial
In what year did Diocletian begin his reign?	284
When was the Roman Empire split into western and eastern administrative divisions?	286
What was the name of the city previously located on the site of Constantinople?	Byzantium
During what century was the Roman conversion to Christianity considered complete?	5th
When did the rule of Constantine end?	337
In what year did the Ostrogoths settle in the Roman Empire?	376
Who invited the Ostrogoths to settle in the Roman Empire?	Valens
In what province did the Ostrogoths settle?	Thracia
At what battle was the Emperor Valens killed?	the Battle of Adrianople
When did the Battle of Adrianople occur?	9 August 378
Who was the last Western Roman Emperor?	Romulus Augustus
When did the reign of the last Western Roman Emperor end?	476
What is another name for the Eastern Roman Empire?	Byzantine Empire
What Eastern Roman Emperor reconquered Italy?	Justinian
When did Justinian's reign end?	565
When did Aspar die?	Aspar
What year saw the death of Gundobad?	516
What notable Roman figure died in 408?	Stilicho
The loss of what led to the differentiation between the Western Roman Empire and the new kingdoms?	tax revenue
Rather than taxes, what did the new kingdoms use to support their armies?	land or rents
In what century did the Ostrogoths arrive in Italy?	5th
What Ostrogothic leader led his people into Italy?	Theoderic
Who destroyed the Burgundian kingdom in 436?	the Huns
In what part of Europe did the Burgundians settle?	Gaul
Who was the first notable king of the Franks?	Childeric
People of what ethnicity settled in the Balkan Peninsula?	Slavic
In what geographic region did most of the invaders settle in Gaul?	north-east
What is the collective name for languages derived from Latin?	Romance languages
What language was spoken in the Byzantine Empire?	Greek
What languages were spoken by the Slavs?	Slavonic
In what century did the economic revival in the Eastern Roman Empire end?	7th
In what century was there peace with one of Rome's traditional enemies?	5th
Where did most of the invasion in the Eastern Roman Empire take place?	the Balkans
What year saw the completion of the Theodosian Code?	438
Who was Emperor when the Corpus Juris Civilis was compiled?	Justinian
Who defeated the Eastern Roman Empire near Adrianople in 551?	Slavic tribes
What tribe received tribute from the Eastern Roman emperors in the 6th century?	the Avars
Near what river were the Avars originally based?	the Danube
During the reign of what Emperor did the Persians occupy Egypt?	Heraclius
In what year did the reign of Maurice end?	602
What author would Jerome rather read than the Bible?	Cicero
In what year did Jerome die?	420
In what century did Gregory of Tours live?	6th
Along with art, how was religious instruction commonly received in the late 6th century?	music
When was the death of Sidonius Apollinaris?	489
What was the focus of aristocratic culture during this period?	great feasts
Along with gold, what luxury was present on the clothes of the elite?	jewels
Along with loyalty and honor, what virtue did the elite value?	courage
In what society did women have status as abbesses?	Anglo-Saxon
In what country did Gregory of Tours live?	Merovingian Gaul
How many people might live in a large peasant settlement?	700
What was a way in which a free peasant might become an aristocrat?	military service
In what century did written records of peasant life begin to appear?	9th
Along with aristocratic writers, where do contemporary written descriptions of peasants come from?	law codes
What field produces most of the finding about peasants from this era?	archaeology
About how many people lived in Rome at the end of the 500s?	30,000
What new use was found for Roman temples?	Christian churches
What group was notably persecuted after the Roman Empire converted to Christianity?	Jews
What was the ethnicity of a leader who converted to Judaism in this era?	Arab
What was the dominant religion of Persia before Islam?	Zoroastrianism
In what yer did Muhammad die?	632
In what period did Islamic armies conquer Syria?	634–635
In what century did Muslims conquer North Africa?	7th
In what year did the Battle of Poitiers take place?	732
What Islamic dynasty followed the Umayyad?	Abbasid
What was the capital of the Abbasid state?	Baghdad
What dynasty ruled Egypt in this period?	Tulunids
What group conquered southern France from Muslim forces?	the Franks
Along with Naples, what city still traded African goods in the 7th century?	Rome
What event led to African goods no longer being traded in Western Europe by the end of the 7th century?	Muslim conquests
What non-local goods have archaeologists typically found in Britain of this era?	luxury goods
During what century did gold coinage cease?	7th
Coinage from what metal replaced gold coinage?	silver
What was the Anglo-Saxon silver coin called?	penny
What was another name for the denarius?	denier
In what part of Europe were gold coins still minted?	Southern Europe
What language was used by the eastern church?	Greek
What language did the western church use?	Latin
When did the eastern and western churches split?	1054
Over what issue did the eastern and western churches split?	papal supremacy
What was the eastern church subsequently known as?	the Orthodox Church
When did Gregory the Great become pope?	590
About how many of Gregory's letters were concerned with Constantinople or Italy?	850
In what region of Western Europe did the pope have influence?	Britain
When did the Gregorian mission travel to Britain?	597
When did Columbanus die?	615
What religious lifestyle arose in the Early Middle Ages?	monasticism
Who was the pioneer of cenobitism?	Pachomius
Who composed the Benedictine Rule?	Benedict of Nursia
From what part of England did Bede come?	northern
What was the title of the leader of a monastery?	abbot
Along with Austrasia and Neustria, what kingdom was originally part of the Frankish kingdom?	Burgundy
What dynasty ruled Neustria?	Merovingian
From whom did the rulers of the Merovingian dynasty trace their ancestry?	Clovis
What was the title of Pippin?	Mayor of the Palace
What leader was victorious at the Battle of Poitiers?	Charles Martel
What dynasty consisted of descendants of Charles Martel?	Carolingian
In what year did the Carolingians take over Neustria?	753
Who led the coup that gained control over Austrasia?	Pippin III
When did Stephen II become pope?	752
Along with Charles, who was the son of Pippin?	Carloman
On what date did Charlemagne assume the imperial title?	Christmas Day 800
Of what class were most inhabitants of the Carolingian Empire?	peasants
About how many counts existed in the Carolingian Empire?	300
In what settlements did most inhabitants of the Carolingian Empire live?	small farms
Along with the British Isles, with what land did the Carolingians trade?	Scandinavia
Where was Charlemagne's court based?	Aachen
What is the name of the cultural revival associated with Charlemagne?	Carolingian Renaissance
Of what ethnicity was Alcuin?	English
In what year did Alcuin die?	804
What was the Latin of Charlemagne's era later known as?	Medieval Latin
Who was Charlemagne's only living son in 813?	Louis the Pious
How long did Louis the Pious reign?	26 years
When did the reign of Louis the Pious end?	840
Who ruled Italy after Louis the Pious?	Lothair I
Who was the middle son of Louis the Pious?	Louis the German
How many years did the civil war after the death of Louis the Pious last?	three
Between what two rivers did Lothair receive a kingdom?	the Rhine and Rhone
In what modern country were Louis the German's lands?	Germany
In what modern country were Charles the Bald's lands?	France
When did Louis the Child die?	911
What group settled in Iceland during this period?	the Vikings
Who was king of the Franks in 899?	Charles the Simple
In what region of modern-day France did the Vikings settle?	Normandy
What group was defeated at the Battle of Lechfeld?	Magyar
In what year did the Battle of Lechfeld occur?	955
When did Alfred the Great begin his reign?	871
What was the kingdom of Kenneth MacAlpin?	the Kingdom of Alba
Of what dynasty was Otto I a member?	Ottonian dynasty
What group did Otto I defeat?	Magyars
In what year did Otto I become Holy Roman Emperor?	962
Along with Sweden and Norway, what country saw missionary activity in the 9th and 10th centuries?	Denmark
Along with 860, in what year did Swedish raiders attempt to conquer Constantinople?	907
Along with the kingdom of León, what Spanish kingdom was established during this period?	Asturias
Along with Iceland, Normandy, Ireland and England, what other area did Scandinavians colonize during this period?	Russia
Of what dynasty was Leo VI a member?	Macedonian
During what period did Constantine VII reign?	913–959
When did Basil I's rule begin?	867
During what century did John Geometres flourish?	10th
In approximately what year was Bulgaria founded?	680
When were the Constantinian basilicas built?	4th century
In what part of the church was the monumental entrance typically placed?	the west end
What type of architecture did the Carolingian Empire bring back into use?	the basilica
What is a notable architectural feature of the basilica?	transept
How is the transept positioned in relation to the nave?	perpendicular
What was the primary military arm of Anglo-Saxon armies?	infantry
What military arm did the Visigoths have a large amount of?	cavalry
What Scythian weapon was used during this era?	composite bow
What weapon replaced the Scythian composite bow?	Hunnic composite bow
Along with lamellar armor, what armor replaced scale armor?	mail
Along with carved ivories, what religious works of the Early Middle Ages were common?	illuminated manuscripts
What is a notable cross made during this era?	the Cross of Lothair
Where was a notable hoard found near the former lands of the Byzantine Empire?	Nagyszentmiklós
What is a notable decorated book with a binding of jewel-encrusted gold?	Codex Aureus of St. Emmeram
Where was a hoard from Visigothic Spain found?	Guarrazar
The importance of what military arm increased during the Carolingian era?	heavy cavalry
What region raised a militia army called the fyrd?	Anglo-Saxon England
What Roman weapon began to be used again in the Early Middle Ages?	the crossbow
Along with the horseshoe, what invention important for cavalry emerged in this period?	the stirrup
Along with light cavalry, what military arm declined in importance during the Early Middle Ages?	infantry
What was the approximate population of Europe in 1347?	80 million
About how many millions of people lived in Europe in the year 1000?	35
During the High Middle Ages, what percentage of the European population consisted of rural peasants?	90
Along with manors, where did peasants in the High Middle Ages often live?	villages
What was the term for the practice of giving incentives to peasants to cultivate new lands?	assarting
In what centuries did fiefs become hereditary?	11th and 12th
In this period, who usually inherited fiefs?	the eldest son
What were castles originally built out of?	wood
What group constituted the lowest nobility?	Knights
In what century were castles first built?	9th
What group constituted the clergy along with the regular clergy?	the secular clergy
What type of clergy were monks?	regular clergy
What percentage of the European population consisted of monks?	less than one per cent
What social class did many members of the regular clergy come from?	the nobility
From what class were many parish priests?	the peasant class
In what type of settlement did most Jews live?	cities
In what centuries did a Jewish community develop in England?	the 11th and 12th
What religion were Spanish Jews pressured into converting to?	Christianity
In what part of Europe did the Slavs live?	Eastern
What was the religion of the Slavs?	pagan
Along with gardening, animal husbandry and child-care, what work did medieval peasant women do?	taking care of the household
Along with spinning, what income-producing work did peasant women engage in?	brewing
What did peasant women do when it was time for the harvest?	help with field-work
What role did women fill in the Church?	nuns
What sea were the Hanseatic cities located on?	Baltic
Along with Venice and Pisa, what was a notable Italian maritime republic?	Genoa
Who wrote The Travels of Marco Polo?	Marco Polo
What accounting method was utilized in this period?	double-entry bookkeeping
In what region was gold coinage first reintroduced?	Italy
Along with Poland, what Central European kingdom was formed during the High Middle Ages?	Hungary
Who was king when the Magyars settled in Hungary?	Árpád
When did the papacy of Innocent III begin?	1198
Along with France and Spain, the kings of what country consolidated power in the High Middle Ages?	England
In approximately what year did the Magyars settle in Hungary?	900
What dynasty controlled Germany in the early High Middle Ages?	Ottonian
What dynasty ruled Germany starting in 1024?	Salian
When did Henry IV's reign begin?	1084
The clash between Henry IV and the pope was part of what greater conflict?	Investiture Controversy
What was the regnal name of Frederick I Barbarossa's grandson?	Frederick II
Who was Duke of Normandy in 1066?	William the Conqueror
During what period did William reign over England?	1066–87
When did Robert Guiscard die?	1085
What kingdom grew out of the duchy founded by Robert Guiscard?	Kingdom of Sicily
To what dynasty did Henry II belong?	Angevin
What was the name of the Christian reconquest of Iberia from the Muslims?	the Reconquista
How many major Christian kingdoms existed in Iberia around 1150?	five
Along with León, Portugal, Aragon and Castile, what major Christian kingdom existed in Iberia around 1150?	Navarre
What Islamic state controlled southern Iberia until 1031?	the Caliphate of Córdoba
What Islamic state controlled southern Iberia in the 1170s?	the Almohad Caliphate
During what decade did the Seljuk Turks occupy Armenia?	1060s
In what yer was the Battle of Manzikert fought?	1071
Who was taken prisoner at the Battle of Manzikert?	Byzantine Emperor Romanus IV
Who conquered Jerusalem from the Turks?	the Fatimids of Egypt
During what century did the Seljuk Turks occupy Persia?	11th
What pope launched the First crusade?	Urban II
At what gathering was the First Crusade preached?	the Council of Clermont
In what year was the First Crusade proclaimed?	1095
What Byzantine Emperor's request for assistance led to the First Crusade?	Alexios I Komnenos
In what year did the First Crusade take Jerusalem?	1099
What was the purpose of the Third Crusade?	to regain Jerusalem
Who took Jerusalem in 1187?	Saladin
In what year did the Fourth Crusade occur?	1203
What state was founded following the Fourth Crusade?	Latin Empire of Constantinople
After 1291, where did the titular King of Jerusalem reside?	Cyprus
Along with the Baltic and Spain, in what area were crusades called?	southern France
Where was the Teutonic Order headquartered in 1309?	Marienburg
What military order was founded as a result of the Northern Crusades?	the Order of the Sword Brothers
In what century did the Northern Crusades begin?	12th
What century saw the end of the Northern Crusades?	14th
What group opposed the nominalists on the subject of universals?	realists
What ancient philosopher was rediscovered, leading to a revival of philosophy?	Aristotle
When did Peter Lombard die?	1164
What was the name of the school of thought that combined theology and philosophy?	scholasticism
Who authored the Summa Theologica?	Thomas Aquinas
What does chansons de geste mean in English?	songs of great deeds
Along with The Song of Ronald, what is a notable chanson de geste?	The Song of Hildebrand
Who wrote Historia Regum Britanniae?	Geoffrey of Monmouth
What legendary figure was featured in the Historia Regum Britanniae?	Arthur
Who was the subject of Gesta Friderici Imperatoris?	Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
What is another name for canon law?	ecclesiastical law
What is another name for Roman law?	Secular law
Where could one study Roman law in 1100?	Bologna
In what century was the Corpus Juris Civilis rediscovered?	11th
Who wrote the Decretum?	Gratian
What invention led to advances in mathematics?	algebra
What influential astronomy text did Ptomely author?	Almagest
In what language was Almagest originally written?	Greek
In what city was a medical school located that was notably influenced by Islamic medicine?	Salerno
Into what language was Almagest translated in the 12th century?	Latin
Along with the astrolabe, windmill and distilled spirits, what was a notable technological advancement of the 12th and 13th centuries?	mechanical clocks
What was invented in approximately 1286?	Concave spectacles
Near what city were concave spectacles invented?	Pisa
What fraction of land was under cultivation using the two-field system?	one half
What fraction of land was under cultivate using the three-field system?	two-thirds
What invention allowed horses rather than oxen to be used to plow?	the horse collar
What invention led to an increase in efficiency in the farming of heavy soils?	the heavy plough
In addition to requiring less pasture, what distinguishes horses from oxen?	faster
Along with bridges, tithe barns and town halls, what notable new structures were built during this period?	houses
What method, derived from the Romans, was traditionally used to build ships?	mortise and tenon
What new shipbuilding method was invented in this period?	rib and plank
What type of rudder was introduced during this period?	stern-post
What type of sails were first used during this era?	lateen
In what century did Europeans become aware of gunpowder?	13th
Who was recorded as using gunpowder in 1304?	the English
Against whom was gunpowder used in 1304?	the Scots
In what decade were siege cannon known to have been used?	1320s
What led to the increased use of armor in the 12th century?	The increasing use of crossbows
In what century was Romanesque architecture first used?	10th
What feature of Romanesque architecture was especially prevalent in France?	arched stone vaults
Who noted the prevalence of wall-paintings in Western churches of this era?	C. R. Dodwell
What non-church architectural structure developed in the 10th century?	the castle
Around what year did the great wave of church-building in stone occur?	1000
Who was a noted figure in Mosan art?	Nicholas of Verdun
What year saw the death of Nicholas of Verdun?	1205
On what wall of a church was the Last Judgment typically painted?	west
Where are narrative biblical scenes painted in the church at Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe?	on the barrel-vaulted roof
What notable Romanesque metalwork is named for Gloucester?	Gloucester Candlestick
In what century did the Gothic style first flourish?	12th
In what century did the Gothic style cease to be used?	16th
Along with Reims, where is a notable Gothic cathedral in France located?	Chartres
What is a notable English Gothic cathedral?	Salisbury Cathedral
Among which builders was the Gothic style first used?	French
Who noted that 14th century monks bought books in shops?	Janetta Benton
What form of art had the most prestige in this era?	Metalwork
When did Giotto die?	1337
What were many pieces of secular art carved from in this period?	ivory
Along with Duccio, what Italian artist was a noted innovator in this period?	Cimabue
In what century was thought given to monastic reform?	11th
In what year was Cluny Abbey founded?	909
In what part of France was Cluny Abbey founded?	Mâcon
Along with rigor, what did Cluny have a reputation for?	austerity
What reforms were named for the abbey at Cluny?	Cluniac Reforms
During what century did the Investiture Controversy occur?	11th
When did the reign of Pope Leo IX begin?	1049
What pope was involved in the Investiture Controversy?	Pope Gregory VII
In what year was the Concordat of Worms agreed to?	1122
What secular rulers did the Concordat of Worms increase the power of?	German princes
What monastic order did Bernard of Clairvaux belong to?	Cistercians
When did Bernard of Clairvaux die?	1153
Along with Bari, what was a notable new pilgrimage site in this era?	Monte Gargano
Along with Rome and Jerusalem, what traditional pilgrimage site saw a greater number of visitors in the High Middle Ages?	Compostela
Along with the Cistercians, what new monastic order was founded in the High Middle Ages?	Carthusians
Along with the Dominicans, what mendicant order was founded in the 13th century?	Franciscans
What notable vow was sworn by the mendicant orders?	poverty
How did the mendicant orders make a living?	begging
What was the crusade against the Cathars called?	the Albigensian Crusade
Along with the Cathars and Humiliati, what group was notably condemned as heretics in this period?	the Waldensians
In what years did the Great Famine occur?	1315–17
What period resulted in poor weather that increased crop failures?	the Little Ice Age
What period preceded the Little Ice Age?	the Medieval Warm Period
Along with 1317–21, what span saw extreme rains in Europe?	1313–14
In what century did the European average annual temperature decrease?	14th
When did the Black Death start?	1347
How many million people died from the Black Death?	35
What popular uprising occurred in France during this period?	the jacquerie
What English popular revolt took place during this period?	the Peasants' Revolt
What Italian city experienced a popular revolt?	Florence
By the end of this period, about what percentage of Western Europeans were serfs?	50
At serfdom's greatest extent, what percentage of Western Europeans were serfs?	90
In what part of Europe did serfdom increase in this period?	Eastern
Instead of work, how did most Western European peasants pay their landlords in this period?	cash rents
What noble interest did city-dwellers start to mimic in this period?	chivalry
In what year were the Jews expelled from England?	1290
What year saw the expulsion of the French Jewish community?	1306
Along with Hungary, where did many expelled French Jews relocate to?	Poland
In what year were Jews kicked out of Spain?	1492
Along with Turkey, France and Italy, where did expelled Spanish Jews travel to?	Holland
Along with Aragon and Castile, what Christian kingdom was present on the Iberian Peninsula?	Portugal
Why did kings increase the tax rate during this period?	Paying for the wars
What English representative body provided consent for royal taxation?	Parliament
What French body was similar in purpose to the English Parliament?	Estates General
What social class was harmed by the lengthy wars of this era?	the peasantry
When did the Hundred Years' War begin?	1337
What was the nickname of Edward III's son Edward?	the Black Prince
When did the reign of Edward III begin?	1327
Along with Poitiers, what was the site of a notable victory by Edward III's England over the French?	Crécy
What decade saw the victories of Joan of Arc?	1420s
Along with Poland and Hungary, what Eastern European state grew in power?	Bohemia
During what century did Portugal devote itself to overseas expansion?	15th
What nation lost the Hundred Years' War?	England
What was the regnal name of Henry Tudor?	Henry VII
Along with Denmark and Sweden, what country was part of the Union of Kalmar?	Norway
Emperors from what dynasty recaptured Constantinople in 1261?	Palaeologi
Along with the Second Bulgarian Empire and the Kingdom of Serbia, what polity controlled the former Byzantine Balkan lands?	Venice
What tribe of Turks emerged in 13th century Anatolia?	Ottomans
In what year did Bulgaria become a vassal of the Ottomans?	1366
Who was defeated at the Battle of Kosovo?	Serbia
During what years did the Avignon Papacy occur?	1305–78
What is another term for the Avignon Papacy?	Babylonian Captivity of the Papacy
When did the Great Schism end?	1418
How many popes existed simultaneously after the Council of Constance?	two
Who was made pope in 1417?	Martin V
Of what nationality was John Wycliffe?	English
In what year was Wycliffe declared a heretic?	1415
Who did Wycliffe believe should read the Bible?	the laity
What Bohemian movement was influenced by Wycliffe?	Hussitism
How did Jan Hus die?	burned at the stake
In the Late Middle Ages, who was allowed to drink wine at Mass?	the clergy
When did Thomas à Kempis die?	1471
In what year did the Church condemn witches?	1484
In what year was the Malleus Maleficarum published?	1486
What was the Malleus Maleficarum?	handbook for witch-hunters
What school of thought was Duns Scotus opposed to?	scholasticism
Before Roman law, what were areas of jurisprudence traditionally decided by?	customary law
What country did not see the increasing influence of Roman law?	England
Along with Castile and Poland, what country developed a law code in the Later Middle Ages?	Lithuania
What Platonic idea lost influence as a result of the work of Ockham and Duns Scotus?	universals
What was the main purpose of education in this period?	training of future clergy
Along with rhetoric and logic, what constituted the trivium?	grammar
About what percentage of European men were literate in 1500?	ten
In 1500, approximately what percent of European women could read?	one
Along with their family, who typically taught a child letters and numbers?	a village priest
Along with Dante and Boccaccio, who was a notable Italian author of the 14th century?	Petrarch
When did Chaucer die?	1400
Who was a notable female French author of this period?	Christine de Pizan
In what language was most religious literature of this period written?	Latin
Along with Johannes Tauler, who was a prominent German mystic of this period?	Meister Eckhart
Explorers in the employ of what nation discovered the Azores?	Portugal
What leader sponsored the expedition that discovered Cape Verde?	Prince Henry the Navigator
What Portuguese explorer visited India in 1498?	Vasco da Gama
What did Christopher Columbus discover in 1492?	the Americas
What English monarch financed John Cabot?	Henry VII
Along with light cavalry, what military arm was used with increasing frequency in the Late Middle Ages?	infantry
What troops were uniquely successful in English service?	longbowmen
What influenced the increasing development of armor?	the increasing power of crossbows
What weapons were notably employed by the Swiss infantry?	pikes
Along with crossbows, what was plate armor designed to defend against?	hand-held guns
What was replaced by the spinning wheel?	the traditional distaff
What invention replaced laces on clothing?	buttons
What new type of windmill was invented in this period?	the tower mill
In what country did the blast furnace first appear?	Sweden
Where did patent law originate?	Venice
Around what year did the International Gothic style flourish?	1400
What is a notable masterpiece of the International Gothic style?	the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry
Along with the Trecento, what period occurred in Italy during the Late Middle Ages?	Early Renaissance
Who produced most of the Hispano-Moresque pottery?	Mudéjar potters
What is a notable piece of surviving Late Middle Age royal plate?	the Royal Gold Cup
Who carved the Pulpit in Sant'Andrea?	Giovanni Pisano
Along with being carved, how were altarpieces often decorated in this period?	Painted
When did Rogier van der Weyden die?	1464
Of what nationality was Jan van Eyck?	Netherlandish
What does incunabula refer to?	works printed before 1500
Along with the Renaissance, during what period were the Middle Ages disparaged?	Enlightenment
What era did Renaissance scholars negatively compare the Middle Ages to?	the Classical world
How did scholars of the Enlightenment see the Middle Ages?	as a time of ignorance and superstition
What did Enlightenment scholars consider to be inferior to reason?	faith
What is Edward Grant a historian of?	Science
Who argued that scholars in the Middle Ages were rarely coerced by the Church?	David Lindberg
According to Grant, the medieval use of reason was the forerunner the revolutionary rationalism of what century?	18th
During what century was it first proposed that people in the Middle Ages thought the Earth was flat?	19th
Along with autopsies, what is it erroneously believed that the medieval Church forbade?	dissections
According to a misconception, what did the rise of Christianity destroy?	ancient science
According to another misconception, what field of study was the medieval Church opposed to?	natural philosophy
Along with Lindberg, who is a notable scholar of the Middle Ages?	Ronald Numbers
What is phonology a branch of?	linguistics
What kind of systems are the traditional focus of phonology?	phonemes
The study of sign language is a part of what?	Phonology
What part of a language can phonology as a word also refer to?	the phonological system
What is another term for phonological system?	sound system
Aside from syntax and the phonological system, what else comprises a language?	vocabulary
What sort of language system is phonology?	fundamental
What branch of linguistics is phonology distinguished from?	phonetics
What kind of linguistics is phonetics considered to be a part of?	descriptive
Phonology is generally considered a part of the theoretical side of what discipline?	linguistics
When was the phonome's modern concept developed?	mid 20th century
What subfield of modern phonology other than phsycholinguistics crosses over with phonetics?	speech perception
What language does phonology as a word come from?	Greek
What Greek word is -logy derived from?	lógos
Who in 1939 defined phonology?	Nikolai Trubetzkoy
A distinction was drawn between language and what?	speech
When did Lass write about phonology?	1998
What type of grammar was phonology first a part of?	Sanskrit
What is the name of ancient Sanskrit grammar?	Ashtadhyayi
Who first composed the Ashtadhyayi?	Pāṇini
During what time period did Panini do his work?	4th century BC
What other text was related to the Ashtadhyayi?	the Shiva Sutras
When was the phoneme as a concept introduced?	1876
Who was Jan Baudouin de Courtenay's student?	Mikołaj Kruszewski
What nationality was de Courtenay?	Polish
What was de Courtenay's profession?	scholar
Who was influenced by  Jan Baudouin de Courtenay?	Ferdinand de Saussure
What was Nikolai Trubetzkoy's publication?	Principles of Phonology
When was Principles of Phonology published?	1939
What is Trubetzkoy considered to have founded?	morphophonology
What school was Trubetzkoy a member of?	the Prague school.
What was Trubetzkoy's title?	Prince
When was The Sound Pattern of English published?	1968
Other than Chomsky who else published The Sound Pattern of English?	Morris Halle
Besides the syllable what was downplayed as a result of SPE's influence on phonological theory?	emphasis on segments
What other discipline was combined with phonology by the generativists?	morphophonology
Whose publications started the theory of Natural phonology?	David Stampe
According to Stampe what is phonology based on?	a set of universal phonological processes
Aside from being active what other condition can the universal phonological processes exist in?	suppressed
Who is the number two natural phonologist?	Patricia Donegan
Who was the founder of natural morphology?	Wolfgang U. Dressler
Who founded autosegmental phonology?	John Goldsmith
When did John Goldsmith share his work?	1976
What did Autosegmental phonology morph into?	feature geometry
When was Government phonology first seen?	the early 1980s
What is responsible for differences in surface realizations according to Government phonology?	restricted variation
Jonathan Kaye is an important person in what form of phonology?	Government
When did Prince and Smolensky develop their theory?	1991
Where was optimality theory created?	LSA summer institute
Aside from Alan Prince who brought optimality theory to morphology?	John McCarthy
Who were prominent critics of optimality theory?	Mark Hale and Charles Reiss
What followed government phonology?	strict-CV phonology
Where is government phonology popular?	the United Kingdom,
What theory is seen more in the US?	optimality theory
What is Evolutionary Phonology an integrated approach to?	phonological theory
What is combined to sound patterns by Evolutionary Phonology?	synchronic and diachronic accounts
When did Evolutionary Phonology come into being?	recent years.
What sort of approach did Evolutionary Phonology take?	integrated
What are the units called that traditional phonology studies?	phonemes
What is another word for variations?	allophones
What is the opposite of aspirated?	unaspirated
What type of language study involves trying to deduce underlying phonomes?	phonological
Aside from finding out what underlying phonemes are there what does the phonological study of a language try to find out about the language?	sound inventory
What kind of speaker data does studying a language phonologically involve examining?	native
What kind of linguistics describes how factors of languages change in history?	historical
With the passage of time what particular things phonemic in a language are known to change?	contrasts
In the past sounds that now belong to separate phonemes were allophones of what kind of phoneme in English?	the same phoneme
How do speech perception and articulation findings and insights affect previous and more traditional ideas?	complicate
How does interchanging allophones of the same pheneme render words?	unrecognizable
What does splicing words affect?	speech perception
What are assigned to phonemes by different linguists?	sounds
What part of a human does language processing?	brain
The phonetical similarity of what thing causes disagreements between linguists?	allophones
When did theoretical linguists turn away traditional phoneme concepts?	early 1960s
On what level do theoretical linguists consider basic units?	abstract
What is a name for the basic morpheme unit?	morphophonemes
What is the act of analyzing morphophones called?	morphophonology
What kind of linguists are leaving the old methods behind?	theoretical
What do phonemes differentiate?	meaning
Aside from phonemes what is studied by phonology?	how sounds alternate
The study of syllable structure is part of what discipline?	phonology
Under what topic is suprasegmentals studied?	prosody
Aside from bleeding what is an order of rules that define how pronunciation of a sound changes?	feeding
Phonotactics, phonological alternation and prosody are topics contained in what discipline?	Phonology
Stress and intonation are studied under what topic?	prosody
Instead of being language-specific what kind of tools are the principles of phonological analysis designed to be?	general analytical tools
What other types of language have the phonological analysis principles been applied to?	sign languages
What are the principles of phonological analysis able to be applied separately from?	modality
In sign languages what are not represented as instances of speech sounds?	sub-lexical units
In computer terms, what does CPU stand for?	central processing unit
What are the devices called that are from an external source?	Peripheral devices
What are two things that a computer always has?	(CPU), and some form of memory
What were analog computers originally used for?	astronomical calculations
During what war were computers first used for military applications?	World War II,
In computer terms, what does PC stand for?	personal computers
During what war were the first digital computers invented?	World War II
Computers in today's age are based on what that make them much faster than earlier computers?	integrated circuits
How much more powerful are modern computers versus early computers?	millions to billions of times
When was the first known use of the word "computer"?	1613
In which book, was the term "computer" first used?	The Yong Mans Gleanings
Who was the author of the book, The Yong Mans Gleanings?	Richard Braithwait
From the end of what century, did the word "computer" take its well known meaning of today?	19th century
The earliest device to help count was what?	a form of tally stick
Calculi during the Fertile Crescent refers to what?	(clay spheres, cones, etc.)
What was the abacus first used for?	arithmetic tasks
When was the Roman abacus first used?	2400 BC
Where was the Roman abacus first used?	Babylonia
In medieval Europe was was placed on a table to help count money?	a checkered cloth
A checkered cloth on a table was used in medieval Europe to help count what?	sums of money
What is thought to be the first mechanical analog computer?	The Antikythera mechanism
When was the Antikythera mechanism discovered?	1901
Where was the Antikythera mechanism found in 1901?	Antikythera wreck off the Greek island of Antikythera
Where is the Greek Island of Antikythera located between?	Kythera and Crete
The Antikythera mechanism was thought to be the first computer according to whom?	Derek J. de Solla Price.
Who invented the planisphere?	Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī
Who is thought to have invented the astrolabe in history?	Hipparchus
The astrolabe was a combination of what two devices in history?	the planisphere and dioptra
The first astrolabe with gear-wheels was invented when?	1235
The first astrolabe with a mechanical calendar was invented where?	Persia
The sector, a calculating instrument, was invented during what century?	16th century
When was the slide rule first invented?	1620–1630
What is the slide rule used for?	doing multiplication and division.
What industry are slide rules still used today?	Aviation
What was the profession of Pierre Jaquet-Droz?	a Swiss watchmaker
When did Pierre Jaquet-Droz build a mechanical doll that could hold a pen?	In the 1770s
Where is the doll Pierre Jaquet-Droz built today?	Musée d'Art et d'Histoire
Where is the Musee d-Art et d'Histoire located?	Neuchâtel, Switzerland
When was the tide-predicting machine invented by Sir William Thomson invented?	1872
Who invented the first tide-predicting machine in 1872?	Sir William Thomson
What did Sir William Thomson's tide-predicting machine use to function?	system of pulleys and wires
What type of mechanisms did the differential analyzer use?	wheel-and-disc
In 1876 who lobbied for the construction of the differential analyzers?	Lord Kelvin
During what decade were mechanical differential analyzers developed?	1920s
In the 1920s, who was the person who developed mechanical differential analyzers?	Vannevar Bush
Who invented the concept of a programmable computer?	Charles Babbage
Who is considered the "father of the computer"?	Charles Babbage
During what century was the first mechanical computer invented by Charles Babbage?	early 19th century
What year did Charles Babbage find out that An Analytical Engine was possible?	1833
Who was Charles Babbage's son?	Henry Babbage
Who created a simple version of the analytical engine's computing unit?	Henry Babbage
When was the mill created by Henry Babbage?	1888
When was a demonstration by Henry Babbage of the mill given?	1906
Who invented the first analog computer in the form of a tide-predicting machine?	Sir William Thomson
When was the first analog computer in the form of a tide-predicting machine created?	1872
Who created the idea of the differential analyzer in 1876?	James Thomson
James Thomson was the brother of what famous figure?	Lord Kelvin
Where was the differential analyzer built by H.L. Hazen?	MIT
The differential analyzer by H.L. Hazen and Vannevar Bush was first being built in what year?	1927
The torque amplifiers of the differential analyzer were created by whom?	H. W. Nieman
By what decade were analog computing devices rendered obsolete?	50s
Analog computers remain in use in what industries?	education (control systems) and aircraft (slide rule).
Who wrote the paper "On Computable Numbers"?	Alan Turing
When did Alan Turing write the paper, "On Computable Numbers"?	1936
Who did Turing revise the results on the limits of proof and computation in 1931?	Kurt Gödel
A Universal Machine is known as what today?	Universal Turing machine
What part of the US military developed an electromechanical analog computer to use on a submarine?	the United States Navy
When did the US Navy invent an electromechanical computer to use on a submarine?	1938
What type of math did the Torpedo Data computer use to fire a torpedo at a moving target?	trigonometry
Who created the relay computer, the Z2?	Konrad Zuse
When did Konrad Zuse invent the Z2?	1939
What is one of the first electromechanical relay computers?	The Z2
Konrad Zuse was an engineer with what nationality?	German
When did Konrad Zuse create the Z3 computer?	1941
What was the first automatic, digital, programmable computer created by Konrad Zuse?	the Z3
How many relays did the Z3 contain?	2000
What did the Z3 operate for a clock frequency?	about 5–10 Hz
How many words of memory could be stored with the Z3?	64
Where did the engineer Tommy Flowers work at during the 1930s?	Post Office Research Station
In what city did Tommy Flowers work in the 1930s?	London
The Atanasoff-Berry computer was invented in what year?	1942
How many vacuum tubes did the Atanasoff-Berry computer use?	about 300
At what school did John Vincent Atansoff and Clifford E. Berry work?	Iowa State University
Who built the first Colossus in 1943?	Flowers
When was the Colossus sent to Bletchley Park?	18 January 1944
Who achieved success at cracking secret German military communications during World War II?	, the British
Where did the British crack secret German military communications during World War II?	Bletchley Park
What was the first electronic digital programmable computer in the world?	Colossus
How many vacuum tubes did the Colossus Mark I contain?	1500 thermionic valves (tubes)
How many tubes did Colossus Mark II contain?	2400
The US-buils ENIAC stands for what?	Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer)
What was the first electronic programmable computer built in the United States?	ENIAC
How many times could it add or subtract a second?	5000
What was the limit of its high speed memory?	ENIAC
ENIAC was constructed by whom?	John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert
Where did John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert build the ENIAC?	University of Pennsylvania
When was ENIAC fully operational?	1945
The basis for the stored-program computer was written by whom?	Alan Turing
When did Alan Turing write his paper about the basis for the stored-program computer?	1936
When did Alan Turing join the National Physical Laboratory?	1945
The first outline for the report on the EDVAC was released by John von Neumann when?	1945.
Where did John von Neumann circulate the first draft of a report on the EDVAC?	University of Pennsylvania
What was the nickname of the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine?	Baby
What was the first stored-program computer in the world?	The Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine
Where was the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine built?	Victoria University of Manchester
Who built the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine?	Frederic C. Williams, Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill
When did the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine run its first program?	21 June 1948
What was the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1?	The Mark 1
What was the first available computer for the public?	Ferranti Mark 1
When was the Ferranti Mark 1 built?	1951
Where was the Ferranti Mark 1 sent to after it was developed?	University of Manchester
When was the LEO 1 computer first operational?	April 1951
When was the bipolar transistor created?	1947.
When did transistors start replacing vacuum tubes in computers?	1955
At the University of Manchester, who oversaw the building of a computer using transistors instead of valves?	Tom Kilburn
The first transistorised computer was operational in what year?	1953
What did the machine use to generate its clock waveforms?	valves
Who built the Harwell CADET?	electronics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell
In what year was the Harwell CADET built?	1955
The integrated circuit of a computer was the idea of whom?	Geoffrey W.A. Dummer
Where did Geoffrey W.A. Dummer work at?	Royal Radar Establishment of the Ministry of Defence
Where created the first practical integrated circuits?	Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor.
Where did Jack Kilby work at when he created the first IC?	Texas Instruments
When was the first functional IC demonstrated?	12 September 1958.
What was Kilby's IC made of?	germanium
Noyce's IC was made up of what material?	silicon
What was the name of the first single-chip microprocessor?	Intel 4004
Who created the Intel 4004 microprocessor?	Ted Hoff, Federico Faggin, and Stanley Mazor
Where did Ted Hoff, Federico Faggin, and Stanley Mazor work at?	Intel.
Computing resources that are created in cell phones are called what?	smartphones
How many tablets were sold in 2Q 2013?	237 million devices
Billions of instructions per second are called what in computer terms?	(gigaflops)
When a computer goes back and repeats instructions of a program over until an internal condition is met is called what?	the flow of control
What allows a computer to perform repetitive tasks without human intervening?	the flow of control
Which computer is the Harvard architecture modeled after?	Harvard Mark I computer
A computer that stores its program in memory and kept separate from the data is called what?	the Harvard architecture
A computer's assembly language is known as what?	basic instruction can be given a short name that is indicative of its function
Programs that convert assembly language into machine language are called what?	an assembler.
Computer programs that are long lists of numbers are called what?	machine language
Programming languages are translated into machine code by what?	a compiler or an assembler
Programming languages are translated at run time by what?	an interpreter
An ARM architecture computer can be found in what?	a PDA or a hand-held videogame
Assembly language that is translated into machine language is done by what type of computer?	a compiler
An example of a 4GL is what?	SQL
What is the pro of 4GL over a 3G language?	provides ways to obtain information without requiring the direct help of a programmer
Another name for errors in programs are called what?	"bugs
Bugs are usually the fault of whom or what?	programmer error or an oversight made in the program's design
Who was the developer of the first compier?	Admiral Grace Hopper
Who first coined the term "bugs"?	Admiral Grace Hopper
What type of creature shorted a relay of Grace Hopper's computer?	moth
What type of computer of Grace Hopper's was shorted by a moth?	Harvard Mark II
When was Grace Hopper's Hardvard Mark II shorted by a moth?	September 1947
The ALU of a computer stands for what?	arithmetic logic
Input and output devices are known as what term?	I/O
Besides the ALU, input and output devices, what are the other two main components of a computer?	the control unit, the memory
A circuit in a computer part represents what?	a bit (binary digit) of information
In positive logic representation a "1" represents when a circuit is what?	on
In positive logic representation a "0" represents when a circuit is what?	off
What are other names for a control unit for a computer?	a control system or central controller)
Reading and interpreting from a control unit is called doing what?	(decodes
A special memory cell of a CPU is called what?	a register
A register of a CPU keeps track of what?	which location in memory the next instruction is to be read from
What is a component that all CPUs have?	the program counter
In what part can the program counter be changed by calculations?	the ALU
Instructions that change the program counter are called what?	"jumps"
Loops are defined as what?	instructions that are repeated by the computer)
In some CPU designs there is tinier computer called what?	microsequencer
A microsequencer can be found in what other computer component?	CPU
The CPU is an abbreviation for what?	central processing unit
What 3 parts make up the CPU?	The control unit, ALU, and registers
CPUs that are constructed on a single integrated circuit are called what?	a microprocessor
Since when have CPUs been constructed with a microprocessor?	mid-1970s
Some trigonometry functions are what?	sine, cosine,
The term for whole numbers is what?	(integers
Boolean logic consists of what?	AND, OR, XOR, and NOT
Computers that have multiple ALUs are called what?	Superscalar
How many numbers can a cell of a computer's memory hold?	a single number
What is the responsibility of giving significance to what the memory sees as nothing but numbers?	the software's
A group of 8 bits is called what?	a byte
How many numbers can a byte represent?	256 different numbers
What is the range of the numbers that a byte can represent?	0 to 255 or −128 to +127
What part of the computer has memory cells called registers?	The CPU
What is the typical range of registers for a CPU?	two and one hundred registers
What type of memory can a CPU only read from?	ROM
What type of memory can a CPU read and write from?	RAM
What type of memory is always kept and kept the same?	ROM
A progam inside the ROM of a PC is called what?	the BIOS
Software stored in ROM is called what usually?	firmware,
RAM cache memory is slower than what?	registers
Devices that give input or output to a computer are called what?	peripherals
A mouse is what type of peripheral device?	input
A printer is what type of peripheral device?	output
Hard disk drives are what type of peripheral device?	input and output
A keyboard is what type of peripheral device?	input
In computer terms, when a computer is switching rapidly between running each program in turn, is called what?	multitasking
A method of multitasking that takes a "slice" of time in turn is called what?	"time-sharing"
A signal that stops a compute executing instructions is called what?	an interrupt,
Multitasking would seemingly cause a computer to run in what fashion?	more slowly,
What do a lot of programs spend time waiting for?	input/output devices
Multiprocessor and multi-core computers have multiples of what?	CPUs
How many CPUs do supercomputers typically possess?	thousands
What is the name of a computer that has many CPUs and much more powerful?	Supercomputers
What system of the U.S. military's was the first large-scale system to coordinate information between several locations?	SAGE system
When were computers first used to coordinate information between many locations?	the 1950s
Who funded the linking of computers around the US in the 1970s?	ARPA
ARPA is now known as what?	DARPA)
The network spread to be known as what today?	the Internet.
The ability to store and execute lists of instructions are called what?	programs
The mathematical statement of computers versatility is known as what?	The Church–Turing thesis
All devices that can process information can qualify being called what?	a computer
Vacuum tubes in early computers were replaced by what?	transistors
Transistors are typically made up of what today?	photolithographed semiconductors
A computer that is made using pool balls is known as what?	billiard ball computer)
What type of computer can break encryption algorithms quickly?	quantum computers
By what method do quantum computers solve encryption algorithms quickly?	quantum factoring
Computer programs that can learn are studied in what field?	artificial intelligence
Parts of a computer that are real objects are collectively known as what?	hardware
Parts of a computer that are not material objects are collectively known as what?	Software
Software stored in hardware that cannot be changed easily is called what?	firmware
What type of "ware" is a BIOS ROM in a PC?	software
A BIOS chip is located where in a computer?	the motherboard
What type of software is stored in a BIOS chip?	BIOS set up
Processing data from input and output devices is typically done by what?	CPU
Where is the data from input devices sent to after being processed?	output devices
Do some countries have negative feelings towards the word "black"?	communities and countries, "black" is also perceived as a derogatory,
What is "black people" a term for?	racial classification or of ethnicity
Do all regions perceive that term "black people" the same?	the meaning of the expression varies widely both between and within societies
Do some cultures not use the term "Black people"?	, "black" is also perceived as a derogatory, outdated, reductive or otherwise unrepresentative label,
Can the term "black people" have different meanings?	the meaning of the expression varies widely both between and within societies, and depends significantly on context.
Do all societies use the term "black" the same?	Different societies apply differing criteria regarding who is classified as "black"
What factors can affect the classification of "blackness"?	societal variables
Are mixed race people classified as black?	mixed-race people are generally not classified as "black."
How is the term "black" defined in the United States?	it is instead a socially based racial classification related to being African American, with a family history associated with institutionalized slavery.
How did European Colonists use the term "Black"?	European colonists applied the term "black" or it was used by populations with different histories and ethnic origin.
What made up Mauretania?	Morocco, western Algeria, and the Spanish cities Ceuta and Melilla
Who conquered parts of Mauretania?	The Romans
During what period did Mauretania exist?	the classical period.
Where were the people of the region noted?	in Classical literature
What is Mauri in English?	Moors
Where was the Arab Slave Trade?	North Africa
When were the Arab Invasions?	the 7th century
Where were numerous dark-skinned communities?	North Africa
When did these communities begin?	some dating from prehistoric communities.
Who are they descendants of?	Trans-Saharan trade in peoples
When did Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail live?	(1672–1727)
How many black slaves did he own?	150,000
What did he call his slave army?	Black Guard
What did the Black Guard do?	coerced the country into submission.
When did the Black Guard exist?	In the 18th century
Why would a black-looking Arab consider himself white?	because they have some distant white ancestry.
Where does Dr. Carlos Moore work?	Brazil's University of the State of Bahia
How do Afro-multiracials identify in the 21st century?	in ways that resemble multi-racials
Who was the Egyptian President?	Anwar Sadat
What ethnicity was his mother?	Nubian Sudanese
What ethnicity was his father?	Egyptian
What color did he refer to himself as?	reddish
Who was enslaved more often?	black women
What did the Qur'an permit?	sexual relations between a male master and his female slave
What were female slaves used for?	domestic service and agriculture
What is the term for a pregnant slave?	umm walad
What does umm walad mean?	"mother of a child"
Who was the ruler in Morocco?	Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur
When did Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur rule?	from 1578 to 1608
What ethnicity was his mother?	Fulani
What Arabic term is still used for black people?	(Arabic: عبد‎,) (meaning "slave")
Who still had the term "slave" used in reference to them?	sub-Saharan peoples
When did the Arab apartheid intensify?	early 1991
Who felt persecuted due to the apartheid?	non-Arabs of the Zaghawa tribe
Where did these people live?	Sudan
Who controlled the government?	Sudanese Arabs
What was the government being accused of?	deftly manipulat(ing) Arab solidarity" to carry out policies of apartheid and ethnic cleansing.
Who accused the Arab government of practicing acts of racism?	George Ayittey
Who executed the apartheid?	the Arab government
Who was excluded?	blacks
Where were they?	Sudan
What is George Ayittey's profession?	economist
Who was the Canadian Minister of Justice?	Irwin Cotler
How did Alan Dershozitz describe the Sudan?	an example of a government that "actually deserve(s)" the appellation "apartheid."
Who argeed with Dershowitz?	Irwin Cotler
Where did Irwin Cotler live?	Canadian
What did the colonization of South Africa result in?	many unions and marriages between European men and African women from various tribes
What was a result of these marriages?	mixed-race children
What class were Africans and Mixed Race children considered?	second-class
Who was included in the Coloured group?	Bantu, Khoisan, and European descent
What does apartheid mean?	a system of legal racial segregation
What act determined what class a citizen belonged to?	the Population Registration Act of 1945
What test was used to determine if someone was coloured or black?	pencil test
How did the pencil test work?	A pencil was inserted into a person's hair to determine if the hair was kinky enough to hold the pencil
Who administered the "Pencil Test"?	Minor officials
Who was featured in the movie "Skin"?	Sandra Laing
What year was the movie "Skin" made?	2008
At was age was Sandra Laing expelled from school?	age 10
What is Sandra Laing's ethnicity?	South African
How many generations of European Ancestors does Sandra Laing have?	three
Who was oppressed and discriminated against?	those classed as "Coloured"
What era did this discrimination take place?	During the apartheid era
Who were "Coloured" people above in the class system?	those classed as "Black"
Where were the "black" areas?	large townships located away from the cities
What laws did they introduce to support blacks?	affirmative action policies
Who does the term "black" people include?	"Africans", "Coloureds" and "Asians"
What did South Africa's Constitution Declare to be?	a "Non-racial democracy"
Who makes the "Coloured" people feel "Not black enough"?	ANC (African National Congress)
Who is favored more under the affirmative action policies?	"Africans
Who declared Chinese South Africans as "Black People"?	the High Court in South Africa
What year did this ruling happen?	2008
Why was this classification made?	solely for the purposes of accessing affirmative action benefits
What Chinese people did not qualify for benefits?	Chinese people who arrived in the country after the end of apartheid
Why did some Chinese citizens qualify for benefits?	they were also "disadvantaged" by racial discrimination.
What is another way "Coloureds" can be distinguished from "Blacks"?	language
What languages are most common?	Afrikaans or English
What are less common languages spoken?	Zulu or Xhosa
What types of names do "coloureds" have?	European-sounding names
What type of names do "blacks" have?	Bantu names
How many sub-Saharan Black Africans were enslaved?	10 to 18 million
In what time frame were these people enslaved?	between the advent of Islam in 650CE and the abolition of slavery in the Arabian Peninsula in the mid-20th century
Who enslaved these people?	Arab slave traders
Why were women slaves more popular?	for them to serve as concubines
Who was assimilated into the Arab slave owner families?	The mixed-race children of female slaves and Arab owners
How many people in Yemen have African lineage?	average of 38%
How many people in Oman-Qatar have African lineage?	16%
How many people in Saudi Arabia-United Arab Emirates have African lineage?	10%
Genetic studies have found which gene in Arab communities?	African female-mediated gene
Who is seeking minority status from the government?	African-Iraquis
Where would they be represented if minority status is granted?	Parliament
How are Africans classified in the Arabian Peninsula?	as Arab
What types of communities have been reported in Iraq?	Distinctive and self-identified black communities
Who gave information on how blacks were classified in the Arabian Peninsula?	Alamin M. Mazrui et al.
How many East African and black people live in Israel?	About 150,000
What percent of Israel's population is black?	just over 2%
When did they migrate to Israel?	during the 1980s and 1990s
Where did they migrate from?	Ethiopia.
Where are most of the black converts from?	the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.
How many non-jewish African immigrants live in Israel?	around 60,000
What have these immigrants sought?	asylum
Where are most of them from?	Sudan and Eritrea
What languages do they speak?	Niger-Congo
Where are the non jewish immigrants from?	southern Nuba Mountains
When did the slave trade begin?	during the period of the Ottoman Empire
Where were the slaves brought?	Antalya and Istanbul in present-day Turkey
Where did former slaves go for work once freed?	İzmir area
What year did they begin to migrate to Izmir?	1923
Who are the Siddi?	an ethnic group inhabiting India and Pakistan
Who did the Siddi descend from?	Bantu peoples from Southeast Africa
What does the word "Siddi" derive from?	"Sayyid"
Where does the term Sayyid come from?	the title borne by the captains of the Arab vessels that first brought Siddi settlers to the area
When was the "black power" movement in Sindh?	1960s
Who were the first inhabitants of Southeast Asia?	The Negritos
Where do the Negritos reside currently?	Thailand, the Malay Archipelago, and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
What does Negrito mean?	"little black people"
What language does the term Negrito come from?	Spanish
What term is interchangable with Negrito?	Semang
What does the term "Moors" refer to?	Muslims
What descent of Muslims does "Moors" refer to?	Arab or Berber descent
In Medieval and early Modern Europe what ethnicity were lumped together?	Muslim Arabs, Berbers, Black Africans and Europeans
Where did "Moors" migrate from?	North Africa or Iberia
What kind of term is "Moors"?	derogatory
Who claimed that Maurus was derived from the Greek mauron?	Isidore of Seville
When was this claim made?	7th century,
What does mauron mean?	black
What is the compilation of Isidore of Seville's work called?	Etymologies
What was "Black by definition"?	Moors
What are Afro-Spaniards?	Spanish nationals of West/Central African descent
Where do Afro-Spaniards come from?	Angola, Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria and Senegal
Which Spanish colony do Afro-Spaniards reside?	Equatorial Guinea
How many Afro-Spaniards currently live in Spain?	an estimated 683,000
In 2001 how many black people lived in the UK?	over a million black
What percentage of the population was "Black Caribbean"?	1%
What percentage of the population was "Black African"?	0.8%
What percentage of the population was "Black other"?	0.2%
When did Britain encourage immigration of workers?	after World War II
When did African states become independent?	1960s
Who offered many Africans a chance to study in their country?	Soviet Union
How many students moved from Africa to Russia?	about 400,000
Why did students move to Russia?	to pursue higher studies
Migration to Russia continued into many countries where?	Eastern bloc.
Where did the Ottoman slave trade flourish?	in the Balkans
What town had it's own black community?	Ulcinj
What country is Ulcinj in?	Montenegro
How many black people lived in Ulcinj until 1878?	100
How many blacks served in the Ottoman Army during the Austro-Turkish War of 1716-18?	an estimated 30,000
Who has been referred to as "black people"?	Indigenous Australians
What was the original term related to?	skin colour
Since when have Indigenous Australians been referred to as black?	since the early days of European settlement
What does the term relate to know in reference to Australians?	to indicate Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander ancestry
What was established to control the Indigenous Australians?	Aboriginal Protection Boards
What did the Aboriginal Protection Boards control?	where they lived, their employment, marriage, education and included the power to separate children from their parents.
Were Aborigines allowed to vote?	Aborigines were not allowed to vote
Who reported how the Aborigines were treated?	Sir Baldwin Spencer
What year was his report from?	1913
Which race was growing faster after the First World War?	mixed-race people
What did people fear in 1930?	"half-caste menace"
What did this menace undermine?	the White Australia ideal
Who noted this particular fear?	Dr. Cecil Cook
Who is Dr. Cecil Cook?	the Northern Territory Protector of Natives,
Who did the government want raised as white?	"half-caste" individuals
What was the goal of removing mixed races from their homes?	Eliminate the full-blood and permit the white admixture to half-castes and eventually the race will become white"
What were the mixed race individuals kept from doing?	speaking their native language and practising traditional customs
What was this process referred to?	the Stolen Generation
When did human rights for Aboriginal people begin to improve?	The second half of the 20th century
What year was constitutional discrimination ended?	1967
What else was included in the 1967 referendum?	to include Aborigines in the national census.
What term was embraced during this period?	"black"
Who said the Aboriginal people started to embrace their ancestry?	Activist Bob Maza
Who wrote "Living Black?	Kevin Gilbert
What year was Gilbert awarded for his efforts?	1978
What was Living Black about?	a collection of Aboriginal people's stories
What award did Gilbert refuse in 1998?	the Human Rights Award for Literature
What was the award in 1998 for?	Inside Black Australia
What did the improvements in quality of life increase?	people self-identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
What has the reappropriation of the word "black" done?	resulted in its widespread use in mainstream Australian culture,
In what year were there several cases that helped to redefine Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander?	2012
What well known boxer was criticized for question someone's blackness?	Anthony Mundine
Which Journalist was sued for publishing discriminatory comments?	Andrew Bolt
Who described slaves as negars?	John Rolfe
Where was John Rolfe?	Colonial America
Where were slaves shipped to from West Africa?	Virginia colony
What was the name of the African burial ground in New York City?	"Begraafplaats van de Neger"
What does "Begraafplaats van de Neger" mean?	Cemetery of the Negro
When did "nigger" become a pejorative word?	By the 1900s
What term replaced negro as mainstream?	colored
What term followed "negro" and "colored"?	"black"
What movement sprouted this change in rhetoric?	the African-American Civil rights movement
Who led the Civil Rights movement?	Reverend Martin Luther King
How did black people identify in early America?	by their specific ethnic group
What was not acknowledged by English colonists?	individual ethnic affiliations
How vast was the backgrounds of the captives?	West African coastline stretching from Senegal to Angola and in some cases from the south-east coast
How was the new African American identity defined?	This new identity was based on provenance and slave status
Which colonists recorded more complete identities of the West Africans?	French and Spanish colonists
What type of skin pigment does "Black" refer to?	the darkest through to the very lightest skin colors
In the United States the term "black people" is an indicator for?	socially based racial classification related to being African American,
Where does the US base family history of African Americans from?	a family history associated with institutionalized slavery.
How are people defined as "black" or "white"?	they fulfill the social criteria
Why did the use of "African" become an issue?	the majority of black people in the United States were native-born
Why did blacks fear to identify as African?	would be a hindrance to their fight for full citizenship in the US.
What year did Black leaders call for this change in language?	1835,
What group decided to keep the "African" in their name?	the African Methodist Episcopal Church
What terms did African Americans use instead?	"Negro" or "colored"
Who argued for Americans to use the term "African American"?	Jesse Jackson
What year did Jesse Jackson make this argument?	1988
Why did Jackson want this term to be used?	it had a historical cultural base and was a construction similar to terms used by European descendants
Who also argued for the term "African American"?	African-American
Why did some argue that "black" was the better term?	because "African" suggests foreignness
How does the U.S. census define "black" Americans?	having origins in any of the black (sub-Saharan) racial groups of Africa
What classification are given?	socio-political constructs
What percentage of African Americans have European ancestry?	17–18%
What is the Census definition not based on?	scientific or anthropological
What did the "one-drop" rule do?	classify as black a person of any known African ancestry
When was the "one-drop" rule put into place?	early 20th century.
When was racial definition more flexible?	18th and 19th centuries
What war changed the way the United States looked at race?	the American Civil War
When did Virginia adopt The Principle of Partus Sequitur Ventrem?	1662
How is blackness described in the US?	the degree to which one associates themselves with mainstream African-American culture, politics, and values.
What defines "blackness"?	political orientation, culture and behavior
What is the opposite of "blackness"?	"acting white"
How does one "act white"?	black Americans are said to behave with assumed characteristics of stereotypical white Americans
In what regards can one "act white"?	with regard to fashion, dialect, taste in music,
Who described Bill Clinton as "Black"?	Toni Morrison
Who was offended by Clinton being referred to as black?	Christopher Hitchens
Who is Toni Morrison?	Nobel Prize-winning novelist
Why were people offended by this comment?	Clinton used his knowledge of black culture to exploit black people for political gain
What horrible event was on-going during Clinton's term that made people upset?	Rwandan Genocide
Who is Obama possibly an ancestor of?	John Punch
Who is John Punch?	the first African slave in the Virginia colony
When was Punch indentured?	1640
Why was he indentured for life?	trying to escape
Why were his children free?	they were born to free English women
How many Africans were shipped to the US between 1492 to 1888?	12 million
How many were shipped to South America and the Caribbean?	11.5 million
How many slaves were imported by Brazil?	5.5 million
How many slaves were imported by the British Caribbean?	2.76 million
How is black identified in South America?	closely tied to social status and socioeconomic variables,
How are people in Brazil classified?	by appearance
What country has a complex way of acknowledging race?	Brazil
How does one determine ethnicity in Brazil?	based on various combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color
How are people evaluated in Brazil?	like the colors of the spectrum
What type of skin color has a better chance of a good life in Brazil?	lighter skin
What are poor whites considered in Brazil?	black
What are wealthy blacks considered in Brazil?	white
What does Preto mean?	(black)
How many slaves were shipped from Africa to Brazil between 1500 and 1850?	estimated 3.5 million
How much of the Brazilian population are descendants of slavery?	more than half
Second to Africa, what is Brazil have the largest population of?	Afro-descendants
What was not passed in Brazil during slavery?	segregation laws
What was prevalent in Brazilian culture during slavery?	intermarriage
How much of the Brazilian population identified as black in 2000?	6.2%
How much identified as mixed race?	40%
How much identified as white?	55%
How much of the Brazilian population had connections to African ancestry in 2007?	29%
What has Brazil avoided?	the binary polarization of society into black and white
What is happened in the US that did not happen in Brazil when slavery ended?	civil war
How do the US and Brazil vary after slavery has ended?	violent racial tensions that have divided the US are notably absent in Brazil.
Who is the Brazilian Prime Minister for racial equality?	Elio Ferreira de Araujo
Who is responsible for the growing pride in Brazilian communities?	black and indigenous communities.
In the US, how much of what white people earn, do blacks earn?	75%
In Brazil, how much less do blacks earn compared to whites?	50%
What rule is Brazil accused of practicing?	one-drop rule
What does the one drop rule do?	discrimination against people who are not visibly European in ancestry.
What other patterns are consistent with unequal living standards?	illiteracy and education levels
What race has a very low rate of holding public office in Brazil?	blacks
How much of the population of Salvador, Bahia is black or mixed race?	80%
When did the US institute the Voting Rights Act?	1965
When did New Orleans elect it's first black Mayor?	1970s
What large hurricane hit New Orleans?	Hurricane Katrina
What do critics claim people of color have?	limited media visibility
What has the Brazilian media been accused of?	hiding or overlooking the nation's Black, Indigenous, Multiracial and East Asian populations.
What ethnicity of actors are mainly used for shows in Brazil?	northern Europeans
What is another word for "Light Skinned"	mulatto
What would scholars like the term "Negro" to include?	all African-descended people
What does this aim to stimulate?	a "black" consciousness and identity.
What does the term "pardo" include?	a wide range of multiracial people
What does caboclos mean?	mestizos
The Times is based in what major British city?	London
What year did the initial incarnation of The Times start?	1785
What was the original name of The Times before changing its name?	The Daily Universal Register
The Times and its sister paper The Sunday Times are published by what company?	Times Newspapers
The Times, owned by News UK, is itself owned by what major corporation?	News Corp group
The Times and its sister paper The Sunday Times are published by what company?	Times Newspapers
What year did The Times change its name from The Daily Universal Register?	1788
What year did The Daily Universal Register initially start?	1785
What year did The Times of India start?	1838
What year did The Strait Times (Singapore) start?	1845
What year did The New York Times start?	1851
What year did the Irish Times start?	1859
What year did the Cape Times (South Africa) start?	1872
What major typeface font was started by The Times?	Times Roman
Who was the creator of typeface font used by The Times?	Stanley Morison
In November 2006, The Times changed its font to what new font typeface?	Times Modern
How long was The Times printed in broadsheet format?	219 years
In what year did The Times change its broadsheet format to a compact size?	2004
Traditionally, what political spectrum did The Times support?	moderate
What party did The Times support in 2001 and 2005 general elections?	Labour Party
In March 2014, The Times had an average daily circulation of how many people?	394,448
The complete historical file of the digitized paper of The Times is online and published by what publisher?	Gage Cengage
What political party has the highest readership of The Times?	Conservative Party
The Times was founded by what publisher who also was the editor?	John Walter
The Times was known as what name before it became The Times?	The Daily Universal Register
What year was the very first publication of The Times?	1785
The first publisher and editor of The Times when to prison for what crime when printed in his newspaper?	libel
Before the newspaper changed its name to The Times, how many editions were printed?	940
In 1815, The Times had a circulation of how many people?	5,000
Beginning in 1814, The Times was printed using what new kind of press?	steam-driven cylinder press
The Times used contributions from significant figures to build what?	reputation
Who developed the new press type in 1814 for The Times?	Friedrich Koenig
Who was appointed general editor for The Times in 1817?	Thomas Barnes
In 1817, The Times paper's printer James Lawson passed his business to which family member?	his son
Peter Fraser and Edward Sterling, two noted The Times journalists, gained what nickname for themselves?	The Thunderer
What kind of printing press helped increase the circulation and influence of The Times back in 1817?	steam-driven rotary printing press
Who succeeded Thomas Barnes as editor of The Times in 1841?	John Thadeus Delane
The Times was the first newspaper to send correspondents to what kind of event?	war
Who was The Times first correspondent with an army?	W. H. Russell
Which war did The Times first cover using correspondents?	Crimean War
What major event did The Times reluctantly support in the nineteenth century despite being initially opposed?	Irish Potato Famine
The Times greatly supported what bill in 1832 which reduced corruption and increased the electorate?	Great Reform Bill of 1832
Many demonstrations in the nineteenth century convinced The Times editorial board to finally support the repeal of what laws?	Corn Laws
During the American Civil War, what classes of people did The Times support?	wealthy classes
The Times favoured which political side of the American Civil War?	the secessionists
What year did the founder's grandson succeed his father as editor of The Times?	1847
What is the name of the The Times founder's grandson who succeeded his father as editor?	John Walter
In the 1850s, the Times was beginning to suffer from the rise in competition from what kind of press?	the penny press
Which agency often used The Times for continental intelligence?	the Foreign Office
Which century was The Times first often relied upon for continental intelligence?	19th century
Continental intelligence conveyed by The Times was often superior to what?	official sources
Which editor nearly ruined The Times in 1890?	Arthur Fraser Walter
Which energetic editor rescued The Times from financial collapse in 1890?	Charles Frederic Moberly Bell
Which encyclopedia was The Times aggressively selling to American markets?	Britannica
Who was the creator of the encyclopedia that The Times was known for selling to America?	Horace Everett Hooper
Who later bought the well-known encyclopedia from The Times in 1908?	Alfred Harmsworth
Who was The Times' Chief Editor in 1914?	Wickham Steed
The Chief Editor of The Times in 1914 argued that the British Empire should enter what war?	World War I
What anti-Semitic fabrication did The Times endorse in 1920?	The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion
After publishing anti-Semitic editorials in 1920, what did The Times refer to Jews as being?	the world's greatest danger
What was the name of the anti-Semitic article that The Time's Chief Editor published in 1914?	The Jewish Peril, a Disturbing Pamphlet: Call for Inquiry
A Constantinople correspondent of The Times exposed what anti-Semitic document as a forgery?	The Protocols
Who was the name of the The Times Constantinople correspondent who exposed the anti-Semitic document as a forgery?	Philip Graves
How did The Times respond to the exposing of anti-Semitic documents as forgery?	retracted the editorial
In 1922, who bought The Times?	John Jacob Astor
In 1922, which estate sold The Times?	Northcliffe estate
The Times gained much notoriety in the 1930s because of its advocacy of what?	German appeasement
Which The Times editor was closely allied with the government who practised German appeasement?	Geoffrey Dawson
Which notable government official did The Times ally with in the 1930s whom practised German appeasement?	Neville Chamberlain
Who was the name of the Soviet double agent who was the correspondent for The Times in Spain in the late 1930s?	Kim Philby
A Soviet double agent working for The Times in Spain was a war correspondent during what war in the late 1930s?	Spanish Civil War
During World War II, the Soviet double agent who was corresponding for The Times in Spain in the 1930s later joined what agency?	MI6
In 1963, a notable double agent providing valuable and high-quality reporting for The Times during a war in the late 1930s eventually defected to which country?	Soviet Union
Between 1941 and 1946, which left-wing British historian was Assistant Editor for The Times?	E.H. Carr
The Assistant Editor of The Times in 1941-1946 strongly supported what stance?	pro-Soviet
Which side did The Times support in the fighting that broke out in Athens in 1944?	Communists
Which major political figure condemned The Times in 1944 for not supporting the British Army?	Winston Churchill
During World War II, The Times was nicknamed what in 1944?	the threepenny Daily Worker
In what year did The Times resume printing news on the front page instead of small advertisements?	1966
In 1967, what well-known family sold The Times to a Canadian publishing magnate?	Astor family
In 1967, which Canadian publishing magnate bought The Times?	Roy Thomson
What is the name of the corporation that bought The Times in 1967?	Thomson Corporation
Which other newspaper was brought under the same ownership as The Times in 1967 to form Times Newspapers Limited?	The Sunday Times
In 1979, which corporation was struggling to run The Times?	Thomson Corporation
What crisis in 1979 caused near ruin to The Times?	1979 Energy Crisis
What kind of demands were causing ruin to The Times in 1979?	union demands
A media magnate from which country bought The Times in the 1980s?	Australian
What is the name of the media magnate that bought The Times in the 1980s?	Rupert Murdoch
Who did a media magnate in the 1980s buy The Times from?	Thomson
What corporation bought The Times in 1981?	News International
Who owned the major corporation that bought The Times in 1981?	Rupert Murdoch
During the acquisition of The Times in 1981, John Collier and Bill O'Neill were part of what group that did three weeks of intensive bargaining?	the unions
When The Times was bought in 1982, who resigned as editor?	William Rees-Mogg
How many years as an editor was editor who resigned from The Times in 1982?	14 years
In 1982, what is the name of the editor who replaced the previous editor of The Times?	Harold Evans
What printing process for The Times was replaced by computers in 1982?	hot-metal Linotype printing process
In 1982, the allowed print room staff at The Times and The Sunday Times was reduced by how much?	half
Which major journalist resigned as foreign correspondent of the Times in 1988?	Robert Fisk
The foreign correspondent who resigned from The Times in 1988 won how many major journalism awards?	seven
The foreign correspondent for The Times who resigned in 1988, resigned for what reason?	political censorship
What airplane was shot down in July 1988 that a famous foreign correspondent from The Times wrote an article about that later lead to his resignation?	Iran Air Flight 655
What stance did The Times take that cause a famous foreign correspondent to resign in 1988?	pro-Israel stance
In what year did The Times ceased its policy of using courtesy titles for living persons before full names on first reference?	1990
What kind of style is now confined to the "Court and Social" page of The Times when referring to the use of courtesy titles?	formal style
When The Times ceased its policy of using courtesy titles, it continued to use them for what kind of name on references after the first?	surnames
In what year did News International begin producing The Times in both broadsheet in tabloid sizes?	2003
When The Times began producing its newpaper in both broadsheet and tabloid sizes, which region did The Times withdraw its broadsheet from sale?	Northern Ireland
The Times is printed solely in what format since 2004?	tabloid format
On 6 June 2005, The Times redesigned what page of its newspaper?	Letters page
In 2005, The Times dropped the practice of printing what kind of feature of its correspondents?	full postal addresses
Which author and solicitor has had more letters published on the main letters page of The Times than any other known contributor?	David Green of Castle Morris Pembrokeshire
The leading author and solicitor of the letters page in The Times had how many articles published?	158
What is the name of the leading article that referenced the removal of a major feature in The Times in 2005?	From Our Own Correspondents
In what year was the meeting of the House of Lords Select Committee on Communications that was investigating media ownership and the news?	2007
In the 2007 meeting with the government, Rupert Murdoch, owner of The Times, stated that the law and the independent board prevented him from doing what?	exercising editorial control
What government committee was investigating Rupert Murdoch and The Times in 2007?	House of Lords Select Committee on Communications
In May 2008, The Times switched from what plant to new plants in Broxbourne, Merseyside, and Glasgow?	Wapping
In 2008, The Times switched to a new plant in Broxbourne, which is on the outskirts of what city?	London
In May 2008, The Times switched to new plants which allowed for what kind of feature to be printed on every page for the first time?	full colour
What major event took place in London in 2012?	London 2012 Olympics
What kind of front cover did The Times issue on 26 July 2012?	souvenir
In 2012, The Times added what suffix to its masthead?	of London
The Times features what in the first half of its newspaper?	news
What section begins after the first half of The Times newspaper?	Opinion/Comment section
What is The Times current price for the daily edition?	£1.20
What feature begins on the centre spread of The Times?	business pages
What section is featured at the end of the main paper of The Times?	sport section
What is the name of the lifestyle column of The Times?	times2
The Times features a puzzles section called what?	Mind Games
What is the name of the sudoku game in The Times?	Killer Sudoku
What sports activity is featured in The Times on Mondays?	football
What kind of football game is featured in the Scottish edition of The Times?	Scottish Premier League
What is the name of the section that features football on Mondays in The Times?	The Game
What is the name of the section of the Saturday edition of The Times that features travel and lifestyle?	Weekend
Arts, books, and ideas are featured in what section in the Saturday edition of The Times?	Saturday Review
An entertainment listings guide in the Saturday edition of The Times is called what?	Playlist
What is the name of the notable contributor to The Times Magazine columns that became the Food and Drink Writer of the Year in 2005?	Giles Coren
What is the name of the winner of BBC's The Great British Bake Off who is also a column writer in The Times Magazine section?	Nadiya Hussain
In what year did notable Times Magazine contributor, Gile Coren, become Food and Drink Writer of the Year?	2005
Nadiya Hussain, a Times Magazine column writer, is known for being the winner of what BBC contest?	The Great British Bake Off
What is the name of the section that features columns touching on subjects such as celebrities, fashion and beauty, food and drink, homes and garden or simply writers' anecdotes?	The Times Magazine
Since what year has The Times and The Sunday Times had an online presense?	1999
What is the URL of online website for The Times?	timesonline.co.uk
The website, thetimes.co.uk, is aimed at what kind of reader?	daily readers
The website, thesundaytimes.co.uk, provides what kind of content?	weekly magazine-like content
How much does a non-subscriber of The Times need to pay to read the online versions?	£2 per week
What is the name of the digital archive that holds The Times historical archive?	The Times Digital Archive
The Times historical archive is freely accessible online from what database?	Gale databases
What kind of reader can subscribe to the digital archive of The Times?	academic
Visits to The Times website have decreased by how much since October 2011?	87%
What is the reason for the dramatic drop in visits to The Times website?	paywall
In April 2009, how many readers did the timesonline website have per day?	750,000
As of October 2011, how many subscribers does The Times' digital product currently have?	111,000
What year was Harold Evans appointed to editor of The Times?	1981
The Times has a traditional rival with what other major British newspaper?	The Daily Telegraph
What is the name of the highest-selling tabloid daily newspaper in the United Kingdom?	The Sun
What is the name of the highest-selling middle market British daily newspaper?	Daily Mail
Which newspaper has a significantly higher circulation, The Sunday Times or The Times?	The Sunday Times
As of January 2013, The Times has a circulation of how many people?	399,339
As of January 2013, The Sunday Times has a circulation of how many people?	885,612
In a 2009 national readership survey, what newspaper has the highest number of ABC1 25-44 readers?	The Times
What newspaper has the highest number of readers in London of any of the "quality" papers?	The Times
The Times is found to have the highest number of readers from what age group?	25–44
The Times commissioned what serif typeface in 1931?	Times New Roman
Who is the creator of the serif typeface created in 1931 for The Times newspaper?	Victor Lardent
Who commissioned the change of the typeface of The Times in 1931?	Stanley Morison
What is the name of the typeface that Times New Roman is based on?	Plantin
How many years has The Times stayed with Times New Roman?	40
At the 1945 general election, The Times adopted a stance that was referred to by what name?	peculiarly detached
What kind of political coalition did The Times support in 1974?	Con-Lib coalition
After 1945, The Times supported what party for 5 years afterwards?	Tory
From the 1970s until 1997, The Times supported what political party?	Conservatives
After 1997, The Times declined from making any party endorsements however, they supported individual candidates known by what name?	Eurosceptic
In the 2001 general election, The Times declared support for what political party?	Labour
What is the name of the political party's leader that The Times supported in the 2001 general election?	Tony Blair
For the 2010 general election, which political party did The Times support?	Tories
What political party did the Tories have to form a coalition with in 2010?	Liberal Democrats
What political party was re-elected by a landslide in 2001?	Labour
What is the name of the newspaper with the most varied political support in British history?	The Times
Which political party is The Times columnist, Daniel Finkelstein, associated with?	Conservative Party
Which political party is The Times columnist, David Aaronovitch, associated with?	Labour Party
In what year did The Times make an endorsement for Barack Obama?	2012
Who did The Times support in 2012 for the election of the U.S. president?	Barack Obama
What kind of policy did The Times express reservation for when concerning the political stances of Barack Obama?	foreign policy
What film festival does The Times support that is also supported alongside the British Film Institute?	London Film Festival
What festival is featured at Asia House, London?	Asia House Festival of Asian Literature
The Cheltenham Literature Festival is supported by what major newspaper?	The Times
What is the name of the supplement that first appeared in 1902 as a supplement to The Times?	Times Literary Supplement
In 1914, a separately paid-for supplement for The Times was a magazine that featured what kind of content?	weekly literature
The editorial offices of The Times Literary Supplement is based in what location in London?	Times House, Pennington Street
In what year did The Times Literary Supplement begin publishing online?	2012
The Times began producing what kind of non-newspaper product in 1895?	Atlases
What publisher prints The Times atlas?	HarperCollins Publishers
What is the name of The Times' atlas?	The Times Comprehensive Atlas of the World
What is the name of the travel magazine sold by The Times?	Sunday Times Travel Magazine
In what year was The Times' travel magazine first sold?	2003
How many pages is The Times' travel magazine?	164
What is the name of Britain's best-selling travel magazine?	Sunday Times Travel Magazine
In what novel was The Times featured as an organ of a totalitarian ruling party?	Nineteen Eighty-Four
What is the name of the author of Nineteen Eighty-Four?	George Orwell
What kind of future world did George Orwell create in his novel, Nineteen Eighty-Four?	dystopian
The author, Rex Stout, created a fictional detection that is fond of solving London Times' crossword puzzles that goes by what name?	Nero Wolfe
In what part of the world did the fictional detective, Nero Wolfe, live in?	New York
The fictional detective, Nero Wolfe, preferred what newspaper to American newspapers?	London Times
The fictional detective, Nero Wolfe, is described as fond of solving what kind of puzzle in the London Times newspaper?	crossword
The author, Ian Fleming, created a fictional character named James Bond who prefers to only read what newspaper?	The Times
What is the name of the spy and hero in Ian Fleming's books?	James Bond
In what Ian Fleming novel is James Bond described as only reading The Times newspaper?	From Russia, with Love
In what children TV series is there is a fictional character named Uncle Bulgaria that asks others to bring him copies of The Times found amongst the litter?	The Wombles
What is the name of the episode where the newspaper, The Times, is featured and plays a central role in an episode of The Wombles?	Very Behind the Times
In the children's TV show, The Wombles, what character asks others to bring him any copies of The Times that they find amongst the litter?	Uncle Bulgaria
In what territory is New Delhi located?	Delhi
What municipality serves as the capital of India?	New Delhi
For what territory does New Delhi serve as the seat of Government?	Delhi
What municipality serves as the seat of Government for India?	New Delhi
What municipality serves as the seat of government of Delhi?	New Delhi
Who laid the foundation stone of New Delhi?	George V
In what year was the foundation stone of New Delhi laid?	1911
Who designed the foundation stone of the city of New Delhi?	Sir Edwin Lutyens and Sir Herbert Baker
On what date was New Delhi inaugurated?	13 February 1931
Who inaugurated the city of New Delhi?	Viceroy Lord Irwin
What are the two terms colloquially used to refer to the jurisdiction of NCT of Delhi?	Delhi and New Delhi
New Delhi is a small part of what larger territory?	Delhi
Delhi and New Delhi are colloquially used to refer to what jurisdiction?	NCT of Delhi
What is one name used to refer to the jurisdiction of NCT of Delhi?	New Delhi
What is one name used to refer to the jurisdiction of NCT of Delhi?	Delhi
How many Indian cities have been selected to be developed as a smart city?	hundred
What is the name of the mission to develop Indian smart cities?	Smart Cities Mission
Who is responsible for India's smart city initiative?	PM Narendra Modi
What is one Indian city that has been selected to be developed as a smart city?	New Delhi
What city was the capital of India until December 1911?	Calcutta
What is the name of the city formerly known as Calcutta?	Kolkata
What is the name of the empire for which Delhi served as the political and financial capital from 1649 to 1857?	Mughal Empire
In the early 1900s, the capital of the British Indian Empire was shifted from Calcutta to what city?	Delhi
In what part of India is Delhi located?	the centre of northern India
Who announced that the capital of India would be moved from Calcutta to Delhi?	George V
On what date was it announced that the capital of India would be moved to Delhi?	12 December 1911
Who laid the foundation stone of New Delhi?	King George V and Queen Mary
Who is responsible for designing large parts of New Delhi?	Edwin Lutyens
On what date did inauguration ceremonies for New Delhi begin?	10 February 1931
Who rejected the proposals of Brodie and Lutyens?	the Viceroy
Which site was eventually chosen by the Delhi Town Planning Committee?	the South site
Raisina Hill lay directly opposite what religious site?	Dinapanah citadel
The Rajpath was also known by what name?	King's Way
Who designed the Parliament House of New Delhi?	Herbert Baker
The construction of Connaught Place was completed in what year?	1933
On what hill did construction of Lutyen's Bungalow Zone begin?	Raisina Hill
The Imperial Delhi Railway was built to transport workers and materials for how many years?	twenty years
In what year did the Imperial Delhi Railway line begin operating?	1924
In what year did the New Delhi Railway Station open?	1926
A temporary secretariat building was built in New Delhi in what year?	1912
In what year what New Delhi inaugurated as the capital of India?	1931
Housing for employees was built in what area during the 1920s?	Gole Market area
What was the name of the last residential area built by the British Raj?	Lodhi colony
During what decade was the Lodhi colony built?	the 1940s
In what year did India gain independence?	1947
In what year was Delhi converted into a union territory?	1956
What is the name of the act that caused the Union Territory of Delhi to become formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi?	The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act
The enforcement of the legislation of the Constitution Act began in what year?	1993
In 1956, Delhi was converted into what type of territory?	a union territory
In what decade did New Delhi first extend significantly from Lutyen's Delhi?	the 1950s
What organization developed land to expand New Delhi in the 1950s?	the Central Public Works Department
What was the name of the enclave created by the Central Public Works Department?	Chanakyapuri
In which direction did Chanakyapuri extend from New Delhi?	southwest
What was one use of the uses for the newly developed land of Chanakypuri?	residences of ambassadors
What is the total area of New Delhi in square miles?	16.5 sq mi
On what plain is New Delhi located?	the Indo-Gangetic Plain
The Delhi Ridge is also referred to by what name?	the Lungs of Delhi
New Delhi is located on the floodplains of what river?	Yamuna River
What seismic zone does New Delhi fall under?	seismic zone-IV
What was the magnitude of the notable 2015 earthquake that shook New Delhi?	5.4 magnitude
A 4.7 magnitude earthquake that affected New Delhi occurred on what date?	25 November 2007
What was the magnitude of the earthquake that affected New Delhi on September 2011?	4.2-magnitude
How many earthquakes occurred on March 5, 2012?	twelve
What is the geographical feature New Delhi lies on that is responsible for frequent earthquakes?	fault lines
In what type of climate is New Delhi located?	subtropical climate
Between which months do New Delhi's long summers last?	April to October
When does the monsoon season occur in New Delhi?	the middle of the summer
What is the annual mean temperature of New Delhi?	25 °C (77 °F)
What is the highest ever recorded temperature in New Delhi?	49.1 °C (120.4 °F)
What is New Delhi's rank in Mercer's 2015 quality of living survey?	154
What is the main cause of New Delhi's relatively low ranking in Mercer's quality of life survey?	bad air quality and pollution
New Delhi was ranked as the world's worst polluted city by what organization?	The World Health Organization
How many cities were tracked for pollution by the World Health Organization in 2014?	1,600
How many cities were studied in Mercer's 2015 quality of living survey?	230
In what season does New Delhi's air pollution worsen?	winter
What method was introduced in December 2015 to reduce New Delhi's air pollution?	alternate-day travel
New Delhi's alternate-day travel scheme allowed trucks to enter the city after what hour?	11 p.m
How long is the initial trial period for New Delhi's driving restriction scheme?	15 days
On what day of the week will travel remain unrestricted by New Delhi's alternate day driving scheme?	Sundays
On what date did the Supreme Court of India enact restrictions on Delhi's transportation system to reduce pollution?	December 16, 2015
The Supreme Court restricted registration of some vehicles with engines of 2000 cc and over until what date?	March 31, 2016
All taxis in Delhi were ordered to switch to what type of fuel by March 1, 2016?	compressed natural gas
Which transportation vehicles were banned from entering New Delhi?	vehicles that are more than 10 years old
New restrictions on New Delhi's transportation system were enacted by the Supreme Court to accomplish what goal?	curb pollution
New Delhi is the capital of what National Capital Territory?	Delhi
What is the national capital of India?	New Delhi
The local Government of Delhi and the Central Government of India jointly administer what city?	New Delhi
What city is the official capital of the National Capital Territory of Delhi?	New Delhi
What is the name of one government body that oversees the capital of New Delhi?	the Central Government of India
The government structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council includes three members from what government body?	New Delhi's Legislative Assembly
What government body is responsible for nominating five members to the New Delhi Municipal Council?	the central government
What government official is responsible for nominating two members to the New Delhi Municipal Council?	Chief Minister of the NCT of Delhi
The Chief Minister of what NCT is responsible for nominating two members to the New Delhi Municipal Council?	NCT of Delhi
What is the name of the government structure created for New Delhi that is comprised of ten representatives?	New Delhi Municipal Council
What is the official title of Delhi's head of state?	Lieutenant Governor of the Union Territory of Delhi
Who is responsible for appointing the Lieutenant Governor of the Union Territory of Delhi?	President of India
Which takes precedent when a law passed by Parliament conflicts with a law passed by Delhi's Legislative assembly?	the law enacted by the parliament
What government body advises the president on appointing a Lieutenant Governor?	the Central government
Which government position is given most of the executive powers over Delhi?	Chief Minister of the Union Territory of Delhi
What is the name of the municipal government by which New Delhi is governed?	New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC)
What government body is responsible for administering other urban areas of the metropolis of Delhi?	Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
What is the name commonly used to refer to the entire metropolis of Delhi?	New Delhi
The New Delhi Municipal Government oversees what large Indian city?	New Delhi
What form of government is responsible for the municipality of New Delhi?	a municipal government
What British architect was responsible for designing much of New Delhi?	Edwin Lutyens
What are the names of the two central promenades around which New Delhi is structured?	Rajpath and the Janpath
Which of the two promenades is referred to as The King's Way?	the Rajpath
Which promenade was formerly known as the Queen's Way?	The Janpath
The largest diplomatic enclave in India which contains 19 foreign embassies is located along which promenade?	Shantipath
Formerly known as the Viceroy's House, which large building is located at the heart of New Delhi?	Rashtrapati Bhavan
The Rashtrapati Bhavan was formerly known by what name?	Viceroy's House
Connaught Place in New Delhi is modeled after what area of England?	the Royal Crescent
How many roads lead out of the outer ring of Connaught Place?	Twelve
What major airport is located to the southwest of Delhi?	Indira Gandhi International Airport
Approximately how many passengers used Indira Gandhi Airport from 2012-2013?	35 million
How much money did Terminal 3 of Indira Gandhi International Airport cost to construct?	₹96.8 billion
How many passengers use Terminal 3 of Indira Gandhi Airport each year?	37 million
What year was construction of Terminal 3 of Indira Gandhi airport finished?	2010
The Delhi Flying Club was established in what year?	1928
When established in 1928, which airport served as the base of the Delhi Flying Club?	Safdarjung Airport
In what year did the government close Safdarjung Airport due to security concerns?	2002
In what year did the Delhi Flying club begin operations?	1929
What type of aircraft was first used by the Delhi Flying Club after its founding?	de Havilland Moth aircraft
In what year did Indira Gandhi International Airport earn an award for being forth best airport in the world in the 15-25 million category?	2010
What organization is responsible for awarding Indira Gandhi International Airport as Best Improved Airport in the Asia-Pacific Region?	Airports Council International
What year did Indira Gandhi International Airport win an award for Best airport in the world in the 25-40 million passenger category?	2015
How many awards did Indira Gandhi International Airport win at the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2015?	two
In 2015, the Airports Council International gave what award to Indira Gandhi International Airport?	Best airport in the world in the 25–40 million passengers category
What state-owned organization operates New Delhi's bus transport system?	Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC)
Delhi Transport Company owns the world's largest fleet of buses powered by what type of fuel?	compressed natural gas
What city has the highest number of registered cars of any city in India?	New Delhi
What large metropolis has some of the highest road density in India?	New Delhi
What type of vehicle transport system is owned by the Delhi Transport Corporation?	Buses
What Indian city is the headquarters of the Northern Railway?	New Delhi
How many main stations of the Northern Railway serve the New Delhi area?	five
What organization is responsible for building and operating the Delhi Metro system?	Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
What is the total length of the Delhi Metro?	189 km
The Delhi Metro consists of how many stations?	146
What is the total length of the Delhi Metro?	189.63 kilometres
How many stations are there on the Delhi Metro?	142
What is the name of the world's 12 largest metro system by length?	The Delhi Metro
How many of the Delhi Metro's stations are located underground?	35
How many of the New Delhi Metro's stations are located at ground level?	five
What organization operates the Delhi Metro system?	Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation operates under the administrative control of what government body?	Ministry of Urban Development
The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by what Indian government figure?	Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan
Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan was popularly known by what nickname?	"Metro Man"
What major award was given to Padma Vibhushan E. Sreedharan for his contribution the the Delhi Metro?	Legion of Honour
What is the population of New Delhi?	249,998
What are the most common languages spoken in New Delhi?	Hindi and Punjabi
What language is used for formal purposes by business and government institutes of New Delhi?	English
What is the literacy rate of New Delhi according to the 2011 census?	89.38%
What city in the territory of Delhi has the highest literacy rate?	New Delhi
What percentage of New Delhi's population is Hindu?	79.8%
What is the most commonly practiced religion in New Delhi?	Hinduism
What percentage of New Delhi's population is Muslim?	12.9%
What percentage of New Delhi's population is Sikh?	5.4%
What percentage of New Delhi's population is Christian?	0.9%
What is the name of the holiday celebrated in India that occurs on Gandhi's Birthday?	Gandhi Jayanti
What is the date of India's Independence Day?	15 August
On Indian Independence Day, the Prime Minister addresses the nation from what location?	the Red Fort
On Indian Independence Day, kites are flown by citizens which symbolize what concept?	freedom
What New Delhi celebration showcases India's cultural diversity and military power?	Republic Day Parade
What religious festival is also known as the festival of light?	Diwali
What cultural event showcases dancers and musicians from all over India?	The Qutub Festival
In what location is The Qutub Festival held?	the Qutub Minar
The Spring Festival which is held each year in Delhi is also known by what name?	Vasant Panchami
What is the name of the fruit related festival held annually in Delhi?	International Mango Festival
The Nipponzan Myohoji decided to build a Peace Pagoda in new Delhi in what year?	2007
The Peace Pagoda built in New Delhi by the Nipponzan Myohoji contained what type of artifacts?	Buddha relics
Which Japanese Buddhist organization built a Peace Pagoda in New Delhi in 2007?	Nipponzan Myohoji
The Peace Pagoda built in New Delhi by the Nipponzan Myohoji was inaugurated by which prominent figure?	Dalai Lama
What structure did the Nipponzan Myohoji decide to build in New Delhi in 2007?	Peace Pagoda
The New Delhi town plan was chosen primarily to symbolize what?	British power and supremacy
The New Delhi town plan was influenced by what type of architecture?	Hindu and Islamic
What town plan was chosen with the chief consideration of displaying British power and superiority?	The New Delhi town plan
What is one type of architecture that heavily influenced the New Delhi town plan?	Hindu
Approximately how long did it take to build New Delhi?	20 years
The architecture of New Delhi borrows from indigenous sources but fits into what tradition?	British Classical/Palladian
What historian is partially responsible for the use of indigenous features in the architecture of New Delhi?	E.B. Havell
Which government official urged that indigenous features be used in the design of New Delhi?	Viceroy Lord Hardinge
Many of the architectural elements of New Delhi borrow from what sources?	indigenous
On what date was the National Museum formally inaugurated?	15 August 1949
How many works of art currently reside in the National Museum?	200,000
The National Museum began in 1947 with a display of what type of art?	Indian art
What length of time do the 200,000 works of art in the National Museum encompass?	5,000 years
In the winter of 1947, the National Museum started with a display of Indian art in what location?	Royal Academy in London
What year was the India Gate built?	1931
The Indian Gate was inspired by what Parisian monument?	Arc de Triomphe
The India Gate commemorates how many soldiers of past wars?	90,000
Which Indian monument, inspired by the Arc de Triomphe, was built in 1931?	The India Gate
The India Gate commemorates the lost soldiers of what army?	Indian Army
The Rajpath was constructed similarly to what famous Parisian street?	the Champs-Élysées
What is the name of the ceremonial boulevard for the Republic of India in New Delhi?	The Rajpath
On what boulevard does the Republic Day parade take place each year?	The Rajpath
What annual parade takes place on the Rajpath each January?	Republic Day parade
On which date is the annual Republic Day parade held in New Delhi?	26 January
In which location did Mahatma Gandhi spend the final 144 days of his life?	Gandhi Smriti
In which city is the Gandhi Smriti located?	New Delhi
On which date was Mahatma Gandhi killed?	30 January 1948
In what location was Mahatma Gandhi cremated?	Rajghat
The Raj Ghat was designed by what architect?	Vanu Bhuta
Who was responsible for constructing the Jantar Mantar?	Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur
In what area of New Delhi is the Jantar Mantar observatory located?	Connaught Place
The Jantar Mantar consists of how many architectural astronomy instruments?	13
What is the name of the observatory built in Connaught Place by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur?	Jantar Mantar
What is one of the primary purposes of the Jantar Mantar observatory?	compile astronomical tables
What is the name of the doll themed museum located in New Delhi?	Shankar's International Dolls Museum
What is the name of the major railroad related museum located in New Delhi?	National Rail Museum
The Supreme Court of India Museum is located in what major city?	New Delhi
The National Philatelic Museum is located in which large Indian city?	New Delhi
What is the name of the modern art museum located in new Delhi?	National Gallery of Modern Art
The Buddha Jayanti Park is located in which Indian city?	New Delhi
A notable New Delhi garden is located adjacent to what metro station?	Jangpura Metro Station
The gardens of New Delhi are particularly stunning in which season?	spring
New Delhi is well known for what type of beautifully landscaped feature?	gardens
What is the name of one of the largest gardens in new Delhi?	Buddha Jayanti Park
New Delhi played host to what major athletic competition in 2010?	Commonwealth Games
New Delhi first hosted the Asian Games in what year?	1951
The Asian Games were most recently held in New Delhi in what year?	1982
New Delhi's bid for the 2019 Asian Games was turned down by the government for what reason?	allegations of corruption
New Delhi is the annual host of what foot-race?	Delhi Half Marathon
What major tennis stadium is located in New Delhi?	R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex
What major sports venue in New Delhi bears the name of the former prime minister Indira Gandhi?	Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium
The Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium is located in which Indian city?	New Delhi
In which Indian city is the Siri Fort Sports Complex located?	New Delhi
The Dhyan Chand National Stadium is located in which major Indian city?	New Delhi
What was the estimated net State Domestic Product of New Delhi for 2010?	₹1595 billion
The per capita income of New Delhi was second only to what Indian municipality?	Goa
What was the 2012-13 current price estimate for GSDP in Delhi?	Rs 3.88 trillion
What is the per capita income of Delhi as of 2013?	Rs. 230000
What was the 2011-12 GSDP estimate for Delhi?	Rs 3.11 trillion
What is the name of the large commercial and financial district located in the northern part of New Delhi?	Connaught Place
New Delhi's service sector has expanded largely due to skilled workers that speak what language?	English
What is one of the key service industries of New Delhi?	information technology
Prior to the expansion of the service sector, what sector was the largest employer in New Delhi?	Government
The large skilled English-speaking workforce of New Delhi has been able to attract what type of organizations to the city?	multinational companies
According to the 2011 World Health Report, where does New Delhi rank in terms of economic activity?	39
New Delhi shares the position as the most targeted retail destination in Asia-Pacific markets with what other city?	Beijing
What organization ranked New Delhi 39th in economic activity in 2011?	World Wealth Report
In which year was New Delhi ranked 39th in economic activity by the World Wealth Report?	2011
Major cities like Jakarta and Johannesburg rank below New Delhi in what key statistic?	economic activity
What government body is responsible for releasing the annual official economic report for Delhi?	The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
New Delhi's Per Capita income grew by what percentage in 2009-10?	16.2%
What was New Delhi's Per Capita GDP in dollars for 2009-10?	$6,860
What was the 2008-09 Per Capita income of New Delhi?	Rs.1,16,886
What was the 2004-05 State Domestic Product of Delhi?	83,085 crores
What was the gross state domestic product of Delhi for 2011-12?	Rs 3.13 lakh crore
The GSDP of Delhi increased by what percentage over the previous year in 2011-12?	18.7
In which fiscal year was the GSDP of Delhi estimated at Rs 3.13 lakh crore?	2011-12
Did the GSDP of Delhi in 2011-12 increase or decrease from the previous fiscal year?	increase
In what city is the Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology located?	New Delhi
What major city is home to most regional UN offices in India?	New Delhi
What is one regional UN office located in New Delhi?	UNDP
The regional office of the World Bank in India is located in what city?	New Delhi
The regional offices of the IMF, UNICEF, and UNESCO are all located in what major Indian city?	New Delhi
Who do the Shia believe are the rightful successors of Muhammad?	Imams
What is the Shia Islam doctrine of religious, spiritual and political leadership of the Ummah?	Imamah
Who do the Iamas provide guidance to?	their tariqa followers
What are Imams possessed of?	divine knowledge and authority
Whose family are the Ahl al-Bayt a part of?	Muhammad
What is the Shia Islam doctrine called?	Imamah
Who do the Shia believe are the true successors of Muhammad?	Imams
What is the role of Imams?	providing commentary and interpretation of the Quran
Who do the Shia believe are possessed of divine knowledge and authority?	Imams
Who believe that Imamah is of the Principles of Faith?	Shias
On what day was Ali appointed as the prophet's successor?	Ghadir Khumm
What verse in the quran expresses the necessity to the appointment of the prophets?	4:165
Who must assign a successor after the demise of a prophet?	Allah
What must a prophet do?	guide the people
Why did different sects come about within Shiism?	they differed over their Imams' successions
What great separation came to be from a dispute over the succession to Muhammad?	Shia - Sunni
What does each Shia tariqah follow?	its own particular Imam's dynasty
What is the literal meaning of tariqah?	path
What is it called when the last Imam or his unborn successor goes into concealment?	The Occultation
What is the basic characteristis of Muhammad and the prophets?	their nobility
What religion were all of Muhammad's ancestors?	Muslims
Who does the Quran say was also from a pious family?	Jesus
What is forbidden for the Divine Leader?	not to be from the family of Muhammad
What is the sign that indicates the Divine Leader?	his well-known ties of kinship with Muhammad
What word literally means a person who stands or walks in front?	Imām
For Sunni Islam, what does the word Imam commonly mean?	a person who leads the course of prayer in the mosque
What does the word madhhab mean?	school of thought
What does Imam mean in its proper religious context?	members of the house of Muhammad designated as infallible
What group do the Shia tariqahs belong to?	Shia
What has happened to some of the Shia tariqahs last Imams?	Occultation
Who deny the concept of Occulation?	Shia Nizari Ismailis
What kind of Imam do Shia Nizari Ismailis have?	present and living
What would happen to the Nizari Ismaili if the Imam fails to leave a successor?	come to an end
How many great prophets has Allah sent?	seven
What are the seven great prophets known as?	Nātıq
What are the seven great prophets supposed to do?	disseminate and improve his Dīn of Islam
What is the great prophets assistant called?	Sāmad (Silent) Imām
In Shia tariqah, what are the Twelvers commonly known as?	the "Shia"
What are the Nizari Ismailis more commonly known as?	Ismailis
What are the Mustalian Ismailis commonly known as?	Bohras
Which tariqah no longer exists?	The Shia Sevener
Which tariah is known as the Fivers?	Zaidi Shias
How did al-Mahdi maintain contact during his Occultation?	via deputies
How did deputies represent al-Mahdi?	acted as agents between him and his followers
What would believers do when they had a problem?	write their concerns and send them to his deputy
What would the deputy endorse the concerns with?	seal and signature
What did the deputies collect in the Imam's behalf?	zakat and khums
How do Ismailis differ from Twelvers?	living imams
Who is the elder brother of Musa al-Kadhim?	Isma'il ibn Jafar
Who is the father of Isma'il ibn Jafar?	Ja'far al-Sadiq
What did Imam Ismail pass on to his son?	mantle of the imamate
What are the Mustali Ismaili Shia Muslims also known as?	Bohras/Dawoodi Bohra
What do Bohras believe happened to Taiyab abi al-qasim?	went into a Dawr-e-Satr
Who are the Bohras led by in the absence of an imam?	Dai-al-Mutlaq
What does a Dai-al-Mutlaq do?	manages the affairs of the Imam
Who is Dawoodi Bohra's present 53rd Da'i al-Butlaq?	Syedna Mufaddal Saifuddin
Who do Muslims believe said "To whomsoever I am Mawla, Ali is his Mawla?	Muhammad
How many books can this quote be found?	45
What is the point of conflict between Sunni and Shia?	the word 'Mawla'
What does the work Mawla mean to Sunnies?	beloved
What does the word Mawla mean to Shia?	Lord and Master
By what Quran verse to Shias believe that Imamah is a divine position?	2:124
What does the Quran verse 17:71 say?	no age can be without an Imam
Imamah is a position appointed by who?	God
What is an Imam protected by?	divine protection
Who knows everything that is needed to get to the truth and goal?	Imam
Who was the brother of Hassan ibn 'Ali?	Hussayn ibn 'Alī
Usually, how has each Imam been related to the previous Imam?	son
What bible verse do Shia use to support their belief of succession?	Genesis 17:19–20
Where does migration mainly occur?	the northern hemisphere
Why do birds primarily migrate?	availability of food
Which birds migrate?	Many species
What is bird migration?	the regular seasonal movement, often north and south along a flyway, between breeding and wintering grounds
What is a cause of death to birds during migration?	humans
When was migration first recorded?	3,000 years ago
Who recorded the earliest records of migration?	Homer and Aristotle, and in the Book of Job
Where was Johannes Leche from?	Finland
Which species of birds were recorded 3,000 years ago?	storks, turtle doves, and swallows
What is a major threat to migratory birds?	habitat destruction
Which birds migrate the furthest?	The Arctic tern
Where does the Arctic tern migrate each year?	between Arctic breeding grounds and the Antarctic
Where do Manx shearwaters migrate?	between their northern breeding grounds and the southern ocean
which bird migrates by circling the earth?	albatrosses
What is an example of a shorter migration?	altitudinal migrations on mountains such as the Andes and Himalayas
What causes the timing of migration?	changes in day length
How do migrating birds navigate?	celestial cues from the sun and stars
How else to migrating birds navigate?	the earth's magnetic field
What might help migrating birds navigate?	mental maps
Who recorded early records of migration?	Ancient Greek writers
Where in the bible does it mention migration?	the Book of Job (39:26)
What bird is mentioned in the book of Job?	hawk
Who noted that cranes traveled from Scythia to the Nile?	Aristotle
Who repeats Aristotle's observations?	Pliny the Elder
Where did Pliny the Elder repeat Aristotle's observations?	in his Historia Naturalis
What kind of bird did Aristotle and Pliny the Elder write about?	cranes
Which bird did Aristotle believe hibernated?	swallows
Until what year did the belief of hibernating birds persist?	1878
Who wrote 182 papers dealing with the hibernation of swallows?	Elliott Coues
Who wrote "The Natural History of Selborne"?	Gilbert White
When was migration finally accepted?	the end of the eighteenth century
Who wrote A History of British Birds?	Thomas Bewick
What year was Thomas Bewick's book published?	1797
Where were Swallows seen flying?	between the islands of Minorca and Majorca
Which directions were the Swallows flying?	northward
Who describes an experiment with swallows?	Bewick
Where did this experiment take place?	Britain
How did the experiment succeed?	they remained warm and dry through the winters
How long did the birds stay alive?	several years
Why do birds migrate?	response to changes in food availability, habitat, or weather
What are non=migratory birds called?	resident or sedentary
How many species of birds are there?	10,000
How many bird species are long distance migrants?	1800
Which direction do birds primarily migrate?	north and south
Along where do many birds migrate?	a flyway
What is the most common directionof migration in autumn?	south
What is the most common pattern of migration in the spring?	flying north
Why do the birds fly north?	to breed
What is the primary motivation for migration?	food
Which birds will not migrate if they are well fed through winter?	hummingbirds
When do the birds return to warmer regions?	autumn
what do the longer days of summer provide the birds?	time for breeding birds to feed their young.
What do diurnal birds produce as opposed to non migratory species?	larger clutches
What is hightened during migration?	Predation
Where do Eleonora's falcon breed?	Mediterranean islands
What do Eleonora's falcon feed their young?	southbound passerine migrants
What preys on nocturnal passerine migrants?	the greater noctule bat
What makes birds prone to parasites and pathogens?	higher concentrations of migrating birds
What is partial migration?	not all populations may be migratory
Where is partial migration most common?	the southern continents
In Australia, what percent of non-passerine birds are partially migratory?	44%
In Australia, what percent of passerine species are partially migratory?	32%
What is leap frog migration?	birds that nest at higher latitudes spend the winter at lower latitudes
Which sex of the chaffinches Fringilla coelebs migrate earlier?	Female
Where are chaffinches Fringilla coelebs from?	Eastern Fennoscandia
When do the chaffinches Fringilla coelebs migrate?	autumn
How do most migrations begin?	the birds starting off in a broad front
What to the migrating birds usually follow?	mountain ranges or coastlines
What obsticals will migrating birds avoid?	large stretches of open water
What is a common pattern in North America migration?	clockwise
What are the preferred routes for migration called?	flyways
How do most birds migrate?	in flocks
How much energy do geese conserve flying in a flock?	12–20%
How much faster do Red knots and dunlins fly in a flock?	3.1 mph
What does flying in flocks reduce?	energy cost
How do birds conserve energy?	a V-formation
What part of birds was found on an expedition to Mt. Everest?	skeletons
Which birds have the highest rates of climb to altitude?	Bar-headed geese Anser indicus
What kind of birds fly low over water?	Seabirds
What altitude range is most migration recorded?	150 to 600 m
Where do most in air collisions occur?	below 600 m
How do penguins migrate?	by swimming
How far do penguins travel when they migrate?	over 1,000 km
How do Dusky grouse migrate?	mostly by walking
How do Emus migrate long distances during droughts?	on foot
Where are Emus from?	Australia
Where do the pink-footed goose migrate?	from Iceland to Britain
Where do the dark-eyed junco migrate?	arctic climates to the contiguous United States
Where do the European pied flycatcher breed?	Asia and Europe
Where does the European pied flycatcher spend the winter?	Africa
How do young learn migratory routes?	during their first migration with their parents
What route does a migrating bird usually follow?	an hooked or arched line
What geographical barriers to land birds try to avoid?	large water bodies or high mountain ranges
Why do migrating land birds avoid large water bodies or mountain ranges?	the lack of stopover or feeding sites
Why do broad winged birds avoid geographical barriers?	lack of thermal columns
What do water birds avoid while migrating?	a large area of land without bodies of water
Where do brent geese migrate from?	the Taymyr Peninsula
Where do brent geese migrate to?	the Wadden Sea
How do brent geese migrate?	via the White Sea coast and the Baltic Sea
What are waders called in North America?	shorebirds
Where do dunlin Calidris alpina migrate to?	warmer locations in the same hemisphere
Where do semiplamated sandpiper C. pusilla migrate to?	the tropics in the Southern Hemisphere
Where do western sandpiper Calidris migrate from?	Arctic breeding grounds
What does successful migration depend on for some waders?	the availability of certain key food resources
Where do migrants refuel?	stopover points along the migration route
Where is an important stopover location?	the Bay of Fundy
What is another stopover location?	Delaware Bay
Which bird has the longest migration?	bar-tailed godwits
How far do bar-tailed godwits travel to migrate?	11,000 km
Where do bar-tailed godwits migrate from	Alaska
Where do bar-tailed godwits migrate to?	New Zealand
How much of the bar-tailed godwits bodyweight is stored as fat before migration?	55 percent
Which seabird has the longest-distance migration?	The Arctic tern
Which bird sees more daylight than any other during migration?	The Arctic tern
How long did one Arctic tern take to migrate?	three months
How far did the Arctic tern chick travel?	22,000 km
Where do tubenosed birds breed?	the southern hemisphere
Which species are great wanderers?	pelagic
How far did a Manx shearwater fly over it's lifespan?	8 million km
Which bird broke a record in how far it flew over it's life?	Manx shearwater
How long did the Manx shearwater live?	50 year
How far will Puffinus griseus migrate each year?	14,000 km
What do some large broad-winged birds rely on to help them soar?	thermal columns of rising hot air
When do large birds of pray migrate?	daytime
What is one of the heaviest migratory funnels?	Batumi bottleneck
How much of their body weight do honey buzzards lose during migration?	10 to 20%
How many birds funnel through Batumi, Georgia each year?	hundreds of thousands
When do many insectivorous birds migrate?	usually at night
Which kinds of birds land for a few days before resuming migration?	smaller insectivorous birds
What are smaller insectivorous birds referred to?	passage migrants
How long do passage migrants stop and feed before resuming migration?	a few days
What is a benefit of nocturnal migration?	minimize predation
What is a cost of nocturnal migration?	loss of sleep
How do nocturnal migrants compensate for loss of sleep?	Migrants may be able to alter their quality of sleep
What is another benefit of nocturnal migration?	avoid overheating
What are many long distance migrants genetically programmed to do?	respond to changing day length
How do species that move short distances know when to migrate?	response to local weather conditions
Why do mountain and moorland breeders move only altitudinally?	to escape the cold higher ground
Where do the merlin Falco columbarius migrate to?	the coast or towards the south
How far do British chaffinch more in their lives?	5 km
How many evolutionary origins do short distance passerine migrants have?	two
Which species have long-distance migrants in the same family?	the common chiffchaff Phylloscopus collybita
Why have some specied progressively shortened their return migration?	to stay in the northern hemisphere
What species has no long-distance migratory relatives?	the waxwings Bombycilla
What are the waxwings Bombycilla moving in response to?	winter weather and the loss of their usual winter food
Why are the waxwing Bombycilla not migrating for?	enhanced breeding opportunities
Where is there little variation in the length of day throughout the year?	In the tropics
Why does altitudinal migration occur in some tropical birds?	to obtain more of their preferred foods
What are tropical birds preferred foods?	fruits
Where is it always warm enough for food supply?	In the tropics
For what reason would birds mor far beyond the normal range?	a good breeding season followed by a food source failure
How many times did Bohemian waxwings come to Britain in the nineteeth century?	five
How many times did Bohemian waxwings come to Britain between 1937 and 200?	18
What years did Red crossbills invade England?	1251, 1593, 1757, and 1791
In which hemisphere does bird migration primarily happen?	Northern
Where do birds from high northern latitutes migrate to?	south
Why do birds migrate south in winter?	food becomes scarce
Which species of seabirds are more likely to migrate?	species of the Southern Hemisphere
Why are seabirds from the southern hemisphere more likely to migrate?	there is a large area of ocean in the Southern Hemisphere
What controls a birds migration?	a primitive trait
How do birds navigate and orient themselves during migration?	endogenous programs as well as learning
What is a primitive trait present even in non migrating birds?	migration
What is a complex phenomenon in regards to migration?	The ability to navigate
What is the primary cue for migration?	changes in the day length
How do birds act in the period before migration?	higher activity
What does Zugunruhe mean in English?	migratory restlessness
What do caged birds display that corresponds with migratory direction in nature?	preferential flight direction
When do caged birds change their preferential direction?	the same time their wild conspecifics change course
What is it called when males return earlier to the breeding sites than females?	protandry
What happens in polygynous species with sexual dimophism?	males tend to return earlier to the breeding sites
Why do males in polygynous species return before the females?	sexual dimorphism
What is navigation based on?	a variety of senses
What do many birds use as a compass?	sun
What does using the sun for direction involve?	the need for making compensation based on the time
What else is navigation based on?	use visual landmarks
What is magnetoception?	the ability to detect magnetic fields
When do long distance migrants disperse?	as young birds
What do young birds form attachments to?	potential breeding sites
What else do young birds form attachments to?	wintering sites
What happens when the site attachment is made?	they show high site-fidelity
Where do migrating birds visit?	the same wintering sites year after year
What are older migrating birds better at?	making corrections for wind drift
How was the migrating of ospretys and honey buzzards tracked?	Satellite
What do the birds do to successfully perform long distance migration?	recognize habitats and form mental maps
What are examples of day migrating raptors?	ospreys and honey buzzards
What two electromagnetic tools do birds use to find their destinations?	one that is entirely innate and another that relies on experience
Where is the neural connection that is active during migration located?	between the eye and "Cluster N"
What is Cluster N?	the part of the forebrain that is active during migrational orientation
What is a young bird on it's first migration compared to?	a boy scout with a compass but no map
How does the magnetic field help the bird at different latitudes?	let it know when it has reached its destination
How can migrating birds lose their way?	flying past their destinations
What is flying past their destinations called?	spring overshoot
What location has become famous for bird overshooters?	Point Pelee National Park
What other location is famous for spring overshoot?	Spurn in England
Where do bird overshooters end up?	further north than intended
What is it called when the genetic programing of young birds fail?	Reverse migration
What is reverse migration?	where the genetic programming of young birds fails to work properly
What does reverse migration lead to?	rarities turning up as vagrants thousands of kilometres out of range
How far out of range can rarities get?	thousands of kilometres
What is it called when birds from one region join birds from a different region?	abmigration
What kind of bird is most likely to abmigrate?	waterfowl
Who do abmigrating birds return with?	the new population
What is a re-introduction scheme?	to teach a migration route to a flock of birds
What did they use to teach birds a migration route?	microlight aircraft
Which birds did they reintroduce to the US?	whooping cranes
Which birds did they use as a trial run?	Canada geese
What do birds need to change to meet the demands of migration?	their metabolism
How often do birds molt?	usually once a year
How do birds store energy?	through the accumulation of fat and the control of sleep
Why do birds need to molt?	feathers of a bird suffer from wear-and-tear
When do birds molt?	varies with some species
How was migration developed?	independently
What is highly labile?	Migration in birds
What causes the behavioral adaptations necessary for migration?	genetic control
What exists in nearly all avian lineages?	genetic framework for migratory behavior
What percentage increase in flight distance will often be adaptive?	20%
What kind of bird flies less efficiently?	a bird that loads itself with food
What type of bird show circuitous migratory routes?	Swainson's thrush
Where do Swainson's thrush fly from?	far east across North America
What is expected to have an effect on migration timing?	climatic changes
What have studies shown regarding climate change?	timing changes in migration
What else is climate change been shown to change?	breeding as well as population variations
What other species does migration help?	ectoparasites such as ticks and lice
What is a greater threat of disease transmission?	import of pet and domestic birds
What has been studied as a mechanism of disease transmission?	bird migration
What has a role in the dispersal of propagules of plants and plankton?	Birds
What virus is maintained in birds without lethal effects?	West Nile Virus
Who takes advantage of migrating birds?	Greater noctule bats
What do greater noctule bats feed on?	nocturnal migrating passerines
What do some birds of prey specialize on?	migrating waders
What is the oldest way to study migration?	marking
How have swans been marked?	a nick on the beak
Who was scientific ringing pioneered by?	Hans Christian Cornelius Mortensen
Since when have swans been marked?	1560
What are other forms of studying migration?	radar and satellite tracking
How are orientation behavior studies traditionally carried out?	the Emlen funnel
What shape is the cage in the Emlen funnel?	circular
What is studied quantitatively inside the cage?	The orientation behaviour
What does the bird leave on the walls of the cage?	marks
Where does the homing pigeon vanish?	on the horizon
What threatens some bird species?	Hunting along migration routes
What species declined due to hunting in Afghanistand and Asia?	Siberian cranes
When were birds last seen in Keoladeo National Park?	2002
What can power lines, wind farms and oil rigs affect?	migratory birds
What are other migration hazards?	pollution, storms, wildfires, and habitat destruction
What is the name of the island on which Atlantic City is located?	Absecon Island
In what year was Atlantic City incorporated?	1854
What are the names of the two townships that became part of Atlantic City when it was incorporated?	Egg Harbor Township and Galloway Township
How many other towns share a border with Atlantic City?	Absecon, Brigantine, Pleasantville, Ventnor City and West Atlantic City
Which coast is Atlantic City located on?	Atlantic
What is the name of the first commercial hotel built in Atlantic City?	The Belloe House
In what year was the first commercial hotel built in Atlantic City?	1853
What are the names of the two avenues at which The Belloe House is located?	Massachusetts and Atlantic Avenue
What are the two geographical features that Atlantic City is located between?	marshlands and islands
What were the two potential aspects of Atlantic City that originally attracted developers?	prime real estate and a potential resort town
What other US city was linked to Atlantic City by the Camden and Atlantic Railroad train service?	Philadelphia
By 1874, how many passengers were coming to Atlantic City by rail each year?	500,000
What is the name of the lighthouse that is located on the Atlantic City coast?	Absecon Lighthouse
Who is considered to be "Atlantic City's Godfather?"	Nelson Johnson
In what year was the first boardwalk built in Atlantic City?	1870
Why was the first boardwalk built in Atlantic City?	to help hotel owners keep sand out of their lobbies
What year was the Great Atlantic Hurricane?	1944
What was the historic length of the boardwalk before the Great Atlantic Hurricane?	about 7 miles
Before the Great Atlantic Hurricane the boardwalk extended from Atlantic City to what other city?	Longport
The first road connected Atlantic City to which mainland town?	Pleasantville
The first road that connected Atlantic City to the mainland was completed in what year?	1870
How much of a toll was charged on the first road to connect Atlantic City to the mainland?	30-cent
What was the name of the first road to the mainland that did not charge a toll?	Albany Avenue
By what year was demand so great that one railroad line could no longer keep up with the demand?	1878
What was the name of the new railway that was constructed to transport tourists to Atlantic City after 1878?	Philadelphia and Atlantic City Railway
What was the name of the hotel that took up a full city block?	The United States Hotel
Besides massive hotels, what else was appearing all over Atlantic City during this period?	rooming houses
What were the names of the four avenues that surrounded The United States Hotel?	Atlantic, Pacific, Delaware, and Maryland Avenues
When did Atlantic City go through a radical building boom?	early part of the 20th century
What replaced many of the modest boarding houses?	large hotels
What were the names of two of the city's most distinctive hotels?	Marlborough-Blenheim Hotel and the Traymore Hotel
What happened to Atlantic City in the early part of the 20th century?	a radical building boom
Where were the modest boarding houses located before they were replaced by large hotels?	the boardwalk
In what year did Josiah White III by land to build a hotel?	1903
What was the name of the hotel built by Josiah White III?	Marlborough House
In what style was the Malborough House buit?	Queen Anne
In what year was reinforced concrete invented?	1848
What was the name of the second hotel built by Josiah White III?	Blenheim
What was the name of the hotel located at the corner of Illinois Avenue and the boardwalk?	The Traymore Hotel
What year was The Traymore Hotel begun?	1879
Who was the owner of The Traymore Hotel?	Daniel White
How many stories was The Traymore Hotel after its renovation?	16
What was the name of the firm commissioned to build The Traymore Hotel?	Price and McLanahan
What year did the Quaker-owned Chalfonte House open?	1868
What year did the Haddon House open?	1869
How many stories was the modern Chalfonte Hotel when it opened in 1904?	eight
How many rooms were in the merged Chalfonte-Haddon Hall Hotel?	nearly 1,000
What was the name given to the 24 story tall, 400-room Claridge?	Skyscraper By The Sea
In what year was salt water taffy conceived?	1883
Who was the creator of salt water taffy?	David Bradley
What happened to David Bradley's shop that led to the creation of salt water taffy?	Bradley's shop was flooded after a major storm
Who did Bradley sell salt water taffy to for the first time?	a girl
Where did the water come from for the creation of the first salt water taffy?	Atlantic Ocean
What years do many historians consider Atlantic City's golden age?	1920s
What year was Prohibition enacted nationally?	1919
During Prohibition what name was given to Atlantic City?	The World's Playground
During Prohibition how high was Nucky Johnson's income?	as much as $500,000 annually
How long did Prohibition last?	until 1933
During the 1920s, who was the mayor of Atlantic City?	Edward L. Bader
What three contributions to Atlantic City was Edward L. Bader known for?	construction, athletics and aviation
What year did Edward L. Bader lead the initiative to construct the Atlantic City High School?	1923
How much was the bond for that was to be used to purchase land for a Convention Center?	$1.5 million
What year was Boardwalk Hall finished?	1924
Who was a meeting organized for in 1929 in Atlantic City?	organized crime figures from all across America
What family was Charles	Charles "Lucky" Luciano and former Chicago South Side Gang boss Johnny "the Fox" Torrio
In what year was there a conference for organized crime figures in Atlantic City?	1929
For which family was Charles "Lucky" Luciano a lieutenant?	Masseria family
What was Charles Luciano's nickname?	Lucky
Who was a former Chicago South Side Gang boss?	Johnny "the Fox" Torrio
What was Johnny Torrio's nickname?	the Fox
Which Atlantic City neighborhood became particularly impoverished in the mid-to-late 20th century?	the "Inlet"
What was the biggest factor in the decline in Atlantic City's popularity?	cheap, fast jet service
What were two other locations people began to fly to instead of going to Atlantic City?	Miami Beach and the Bahamas
After the war, what form of transportation became more readily available to many Americans?	automobile
What two luxuries that people could have at their own homes led to a diminished interest in luxury beach resorts?	home air conditioning and swimming pools
What event was hosted by Atlantic City in 1964?	Democratic National Convention
Who was nominated for Vice President during the 1964 Democratic National Convention?	Hubert Humphrey
Who was nominated for President during the 1964 Democratic National Convention?	Lyndon Johnson
Who was the Governor of New Jersey in 1964?	Richard J. Hughes
Despite being in the midst of a long period of economic decline many felt that the Convention was only held in Atlantic city because of a friendship between what two men?	Johnson and Governor of New Jersey Richard J. Hughes
By what years were many of the great hotels suffering from high vacancy rates?	the late 1960s
Prior to and during the advent of legalized gaming, what happened to many of the hotels in Atlantic City?	demolished
When were many of the large hotels demolished?	1970s and 1980s
After the Ambassador Hotel was gutted what did it become?	Tropicana Casino and Resort Atlantic City
Who purchased the old Ambassador Hotel in 1978?	Ramada
In what year did New Jersey voters pass a referendum approving casino gambling for Atlantic City?	1976
The owners of the Chalfonte-Haddon Hall Hotel converted it into what?	Resorts International
What was the name of the first legal casino in the eastern United States?	Resorts International
What year did Resorts International open?	1978
How many casinos are there in Atlantic City today?	eleven
Atlantic City's tourism began to decline due to what failure?	to diversify away from gaming
Who did the Atlantic City Redevelopment Authority partner with in 1999?	Steve Wynn
Why did the Atlantic City Redevelopment Authority partner with Steve Wynn?	to develop a new roadway
What was the project involving Steve Wynn nicknamed?	The Tunnel Project
"The Tunnel Project" was later officially named what?	Atlantic City-Brigantine Connector
In what year did the tunnel open?	2001
What was the name of Atlantic City's newest casino?	The Borgata
When did The Borgata open?	July 2003
In what year was Wynn's plans for development scrapped?	2002
The new roadway prompted a partnership between which two companies?	Boyd Gaming in partnership with MGM/Mirage
When did the Sands Atlantic City close permanently?	November 11, 2006
What happened to the Sands Atlantic City a year after it closed?	demolished in a dramatic, Las Vegas styled implosion
What did Pinnacle Entertainment intend to replace the Sands Atlantic City with?	$1.5–2 billion casino resort
Why did many of the proposed mega casinos never get further than the initial planning stages?	economic conditions and the late 2000s recession
Who purchased the Sands Atlantic City?	Pinnacle Entertainment
In what year did Morgan Stanley purchase land for a new casino resort?	2006
How much land did Morgan Stanley purchase?	20 acres
Who was named as the developer for Morgan Stanley's casino resort?	Revel Entertainment Group
What percentage of ownership did Morgan Stanley hold in Revel Entertainment Group?	90%
Who offered Revel $261 million in state tax credits?	Governor Chris Christie
How long had Atlantic City held a monopoly on casino gambling?	40-year
Who said that the state would consider a referendum to end the monopoly that Atlantic City holds on casino gambling?	Governor Christie
When did Governor Christie say that the state would consider a referendum?	September 2014
How much was casino revenue in 2006?	$5.2 billion
How much was casino revenue in 2013?	$2.9 billion
When did "Superstorm Sandy" strike Atlantic City?	October 29, 2012
"Superstorm Sandy" produced an all-time record low barometric pressure reading of what?	943 mb
Although "Superstorm Sandy" left minimal damage to any of the tourist areas it did cause what two other things to occur?	flooding and power-outages
What was the source of the misinformation concerning damage to the city's boardwalk?	photograph
Why was there a photo of the Boardwalk if it wasn't actually damaged in the storm?	the Boardwalk that was slated for repairs, prior to the storm
According to the United States Census Bureau, what is the total area in square miles?	17.037 square miles
What is the area of land?	10.747 square miles
What is the area of water?	6.290 square miles
What percentage of the city is made up of water?	36.92%
What organization provided data detailing the size of the city?	United States Census Bureau
Besides Chelsea, City Island, and Great Island, what other community, locality, or place name is included in the city?	Venice Park
Besides Chelsea, City Island, and Venice Park, what other community, locality, or place name is included in the city?	Great Island
Besides Chelsea, Venice Park, and Great Island, what other community, locality, or place name is included in the city?	City Island
Besides Venice Park, City Island, and Great Island, what other community, locality, or place name is included in the city?	Chelsea
Besides localities and place names, what else is located partically or completely within the city?	Unincorporated communities
What is the daily average temperature in July?	75.6 °F
Atlantic City is a prime place to beat the heat from June through what month?	September
What is the average temperature for January in Atlantic City?	35.5 °F
What is the extreme low temperature of Atlantic City?	−9 °F
How many days long is the growing season?	239 days
How many inches of precipitation does Atlantic City receive annually?	40 inches
What is the average number of inches of snow received at the airport annually?	16.5 inches
Atlantic City's lack of snowfall is due to its location in South Jersey and its proximaty to which body of water?	Atlantic Ocean
Atlantic City's lack of snowfall is due to its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean and its location where?	South Jersey
Atlantic City is different from the northern and western parts of the state in the winter due to its tendency to receive which type of precipitation?	rain
How many people were residing in Atlantic City during the 2010 United States Census?	39,558
How many housing units were in Atlantic City during the 2010 United States Census?	20,013
During the 2010 United States Census what percentage of Atlantic City's population was Hispanic or Latino?	30.45%
During the 2010 United States Census what percentage of Atlantic City's population was White?	26.65%
How many families were residing in Atlantic City during the 2010 United States Census?	8,558
How many households were there in Atlantic City during the 2010 United States Census?	15,504
What percentage of households in Atlantic City had children under the age of 18 living with them?	27.3%
What percentage of households in Atlantic City were comprised of non-families?	44.8%
What percentage of households in Atlantic City were made up of individuals?	37.5%
What was the average family size in Atlantic City?	3.34
What percentage of the population was under the age of 18?	24.6%
What percentage of the population was 65 years of age or older?	12.7%
What was the median age?	36.3 years
For every 100 females, how many males were there?	96.2
For every 100 females age 18 and over, how many males were there?	94.4
How much was the median household income according to the American Community Survey?	$30,237
How much was the median family income according to the American Community Survey?	$35,488
How much was the median income for males according to the American Community Survey?	$32,207
What was the per capita income for the city?	$20,069
What percentage of the population was below the poverty line?	25.3%
According to the 2000 United States Census, how many people were living in Atlantic City?	40,517
According to the 2000 United States Census, what was the population density?	3,569.8 people per square mile
According to the 2000 United States Census, how many housing units were there in Atlantic City?	20,219
According to the 2000 United States Census, what percentage of the population of Atlantic City were Hispanic or Latino?	24.95%
According to the 2000 United States Census, what percentage of the population of Atlantic City were white?	26.68%
How many households had children under the age of 18 living with them?	27.7%
How many households were there in Atlantic City?	15,848
How many households were made up of individuals?	37.2%
What was the average household size in Atlantic City?	2.46
What was the average family size in Atlantic City?	3.26
What was the median age of Atlantic City?	35 years
For every 100 females, how many males were there?	96.1
For every 100 females age 18 and over, how many males were there?	93.2
What percentage of the population of Atlantic City was under the age of 18?	25.7%
What percentage of the population of Atlantic City was 65 years of age or older?	14.2%
What was the median income for a household in the city?	$26,969
What was the median income for a family in the city?	$31,997
What was the per capita income for the city?	$15,402
What percentage of families in the city were living below the poverty line?	19.1%
What percentage of the population in the city were living below the poverty line?	23.6%
As of September 2014, the greater Atlantic City area had one of the highest rates in the country of what?	unemployment
What was the unemployment rate for the greater Atlantic City area, as of September 2014?	13.8%
As of September 2014, what was the overall size of the labor force of the greater Atlantic City area?	141,000
Out of a labor force of about 141,000 what was the unemployment rate?	13.8%
In 2010, who stated that a state takeover of the city and local government of Atlantic City was imminent?	Governor Chris Christie
What item were the regulations in Atlantic City compared to?	antique car
What was the name of the district that would encompass the boardwalk casinos, the marina casinos, the Atlantic City Outlets, and Bader Field?	Atlantic City Tourism District
According to a poll, what percentage of New Jersey voters opposed the takeover of Atlantic City by the state?	43%
According to a poll, what percentage of New Jersey voters favored the takeover of Atlantic City by the state?	29%
What year were the boundaries for the state-run tourism district finally set?	2011
What were the three major things that the district would include?	The district would include heavier police presence, as well as beautification and infrastructure improvements
Who would oversee all functions of the new district?	The CRDA
Who would make the changes within the district to attract new businesses and attractions?	The CRDA
What two qualities were mentioned in regards to new construction?	would be ambitious and may resort to eminent domain
How many roadways will be included in the district?	10
What place is home to the Atlantic City Aquarium?	Gardner's Basin
What place was originally left off of the tourism district?	Gardner's Basin
Where was the residential neighborhood that was removed from the final boundaries of the district?	Chelsea
Who cast the lone "no" vote on the creation of the district citing Bader Field's inclusion?	mayor Lorenzo Langford
What is Atlantic City known for?	Gambling Capital of the East Coast
How many large casinos are located in Atlantic City?	eight
Approximately how many people did New Jersey casinos employ in 2011?	33,000
Approximately how many people visited New Jersey's casinos in 2011?	28.5 million
What two entities regulate New Jersey's casino?	New Jersey Casino Control Commission and the New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement
How many casino closures took place in Atlantic City in 2014?	four
What was the name of the poorest performing casino in the city that ultimately closed in 2014?	Trump Plaza
What year did Trump Plaza originally open?	1984
What was the name of Atlantic City's second-newest casino that ultimately closed in 2014?	Revel
What was the name of the first casino to close in 2014?	Atlantic Club
What did Trump Entertainment Group say they were considering doing with the Trump Taj Mahal?	selling
What is the sole remaining property owned by Trump Entertainment Group?	Trump Taj Mahal
In what year did executives at Trump Entertainment Group say they were considering selling the Taj?	2013
Why did executives say they were considering selling the Taj?	winding down and exiting the gaming and hotel business
Who spoke for the Trump Entertainment Group in regards to the Taj and what might be done in the future?	Executives
How many remaining properties belong to Caesars Entertainment?	three
What are the names of the three remaining Caesars Entertainment properties?	Bally's, Caesars and Harrah's
What type of bankruptcy did Caesars Entertainment file for?	Chapter 11
What year did Caesars Entertainment file for bankruptcy?	2015
Which unit of Caesars Entertainment filed for bankruptcy in 2015?	casino operating unit
What was Boardwalk Hall formerly known as?	Historic Atlantic City Convention Hall
What is the Boardwalk Hall?	an arena
In what year did the newer Atlantic City Convention Center open?	1997
How many sq ft of showroom space is included in the Atlantic City Convention Center?	500,000 sq ft
What hotel is adjacent to the Atlantic City Convention Center?	Sheraton hotel
What is Atlantic City sometimes referred to?	Monopoly City
The names of many properties near Atlantic City are used in which popular board game?	Monopoly
Who learned the game of Monopoly and took it to Atlantic City?	Ruth Hoskins
What location was originally featured in the  Monopoly game?	Indianapolis
Who did Ruth Hoskins teach the game of Monopoly to?	a group of local Quakers
What popular property in Monopoly was actually a misspelling?	Marvin Gardens
What is the name of the original property that Marvin Gardens takes its name from?	Marven Gardens
Whose game did Parker Brothers model the board game after?	Charles Darrow
In what year did Parker Brothers acknowledge and apologize for a spelling error in the game?	1995
Who copied Charles Todd's Monopoly board?	Charles Darrow
In general, what does immunology study?	immune systems in all organisms
Immunology studies the functioning of the immune system in which two states of being?	both health and diseases
Name three types of immunological disorders?	autoimmune diseases, hypersensitivities, immune deficiency, and transplant rejection
Immunology studies the immune system in which three stages of existence?	in vitro, in situ, and in vivo
What disciplines in medicine have particularly strong immunology applications?	organ transplantation, oncology, virology, bacteriology, parasitology, psychiatry, and dermatology
The term immunology is derived from a Latin word that means what?	exempt
What are the major organs of the immune system?	thymus and bone marrow, and chief lymphatic tissues such as spleen, tonsils, lymph vessels, lymph nodes, adenoids, and liver
Who originally discovered these parts of the immune system?	early physicians
How do physicians study a patient's immune system organs in emergency situations?	surgically excised for examination while patients are still alive
Which portions of the immune system can be safely removed in these emergency cases?	thymus, spleen, bone marrow, lymph nodes and other lymphatic tissues
The structure of immune system components can be described as what?	typically cellular in nature
Are immune tissues typically fixed with specific organs usually?	not associated with any specific organ
What is one way the cellular structures of the immune system are housed in the body?	embedded
What is another way these tissues are housed within the body?	circulating
Which two fields of study are associated with immunology?	epidemiology and medicine
Immunology studies how which three areas impact one another?	the body systems, pathogens, and immunity
When was the first written mention of immunity as it pertains to the body?	430 BCE
Which Greek historian made that notation?	Thucydides
When did immunology start to become codified as a scientific theory?	19th and 20th centuries
What is the basic, primitive part of the immune system known as?	innate immune system
Vertebrates also have what type of immune system component?	acquired or adaptive immune system
What is one type of adaptive immune system component?	humoral (or antibody)
Name the other type of adaptive immune system component?	cell-mediated
The total immune system is generally composed of what types of structures?	molecular and cellular components
Humoral immunology involves the interaction of what two elements?	antibodies and antigens
What are antibodies comprised of?	specific proteins
What cells produce antibodies?	B lymphocytes
The term "antigen" is rooted in what two words?	"anti"body "gen"erators
Immunology is the study of what type of responses to antibodies and antigens?	cellular response
In the field of immunology, what aspect is becoming more specialized?	research
What new areas are immunologists studying with more frequency?	non-classical models of immunity
The latest research into newer aspects of immunology is focused on what three elements of the body?	cells, organs and systems
These three elements of the body are of new interest for what reason?	not previously associated with the immune system
The study of diseases caused by immune system disorders is called?	Clinical immunology
What are three problems of the immune system studied by clinical immunology?	failure, aberrant action, and malignant growth
Where can these three elements occur in the immune system?	cellular elements
What else does clinical immunology concern itself with?	diseases of other systems
Why does clinical immunology extend to those areas?	immune reactions play a part in the pathology and clinical features
What is a type of immune system disorder?	hypersensitivities
What are some examples of hypersensitivities?	asthma and other allergies
What characterizes a hypersensitivity?	respond inappropriately to otherwise harmless compounds.
What is the most famous immune system disease?	AIDS
What kind of disease is AIDS?	an immunodeficiency
Which types of cells are suppressed by AIDS?	CD4+ ("helper") T cells, dendritic cells and macrophages
What virus specifically suppresses those cells?	Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
What are the four factors that determine how the body reacts to an antigen?	person's age, antigen type, maternal factors and the area
Newborns are particularly susceptible to infections caused by?	low virulence organisms like Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas
What activity is also greatly reduced in newborn infants?	phagocytic
Why are newborns described as being physiologically immunodeficient?	both their innate and adaptive immunological responses are greatly suppressed
Antigen cells in newborns are also struggle to do this?	activate T cells
In babies, what is another element impacting immune response?	Maternal factors
Newborns can acquire antibodies from the mother through what means?	breast milk
For how long do these antibodies have an effect on infants?	up to 18 months
At 6 to 9 months, an infant's immune system begins to respond to which proteins?	glycoproteins
The difference in responses in infant immune systems is the cause of what?	distinct time frames found in vaccination schedules
What is the primary trigger for immunological changes in teens?	hormones
What specific hormone catalyzes these changes in females?	17-β-oestradiol (an oestrogen)
Which specific hormone precipitates the change in immunology in males?	testosterone
Adolescent immunological changes can also result in what?	increased risk in developing pubescent and post-pubescent autoimmunity
Evidence suggests that receptors on B cells may do what?	detect sex hormones in the system
The routine practice of immunology can best be characterized as?	strongly experimental
What are two opposing theories of early 20th century immunology?	"cellular" and "humoral"
Cellular immunology expressed the theory that what cells caused immune responses?	phagocytes
Humoral immunology theorized that the origin of the immune system lay in what?	soluble components (molecules)
Rather than cells, in humoral immunology where did the molecules that cause immune response reside?	the organism’s “humors”
What medical scientist first proposed the clonal selection theory of immunology?	Frank Burnet
What triggers an immune response according to CST?	self/nonself distinction
In CST, what triggers a destructive immune response?	"nonself" entities (e.g., pathogens, an allograft)
What property of T cells caused modification of CST?	the complex "two-signal" activation
When was clonal selection theory first proposed?	In the mid-1950s
What discipline can undergraduate students interested in general health study?	Bioscience
Immunology is a branch of what larger field of study?	bioscience
The goal of an immunologist is to study what beings?	humans and animals
The biggest part of an immunologist's job is what?	research
What two conditions apply to good immunological study?	effective yet consistent research
Most graduate schools specializing in immunology follow what organization's parameters?	AAI courses
What is the name of the immunology school at Mount Sinai?	Icahn School of Medicine
AAI immunology courses include what two components?	Introductory Course and an Advance Course
What does the introductory AAI immunology course do?	gives students an overview of the basics of immunology
The Langone Medical Center is part of what college?	New York University
Part 1 of the AAI introductory immunology course is meant to be what?	an introduction to the basic principles of immunology
Part 2 of the AAI introductory immunology course revolves around what?	clinically-oriented lecture series
What pre-requisite should enrollees in the advanced immunology course have?	a background of the principles of immunology
How long does it typically take to earn a Master's degree?	two years of study
What program requires an additional two years of study?	a doctoral programme
What is the common name for MPEG-2 Audio Layer III?	MP3
What kind of audio is the coding format for?	digital
Other than storage, what is the common audio format used for?	consumer audio streaming
What does MP3 use to format it's data?	lossy data compression
Where will MP3 files most commonly be found?	digital audio players
What is the main goal aside from reducing the amount of data required to store the audio?	sound like a faithful reproduction
What kind of compression is used?	created
If a file is created using 128 kbit/s, what size is the file going to be compared to a CD?	1/11
How many total bit/s would a CD have?	1,411,200
How many total bit/s would an MP3 compressed at 128 kbit/s have?	128,000
What does the compression target in the song?	accuracy
The targetting focuses on what aspect that is beyond the ability of most people?	auditory resolution
What is this method commonly referred to as?	perceptual coding
What kind of model is used in this kind of compression?	psychoacoustic
These models ensure that the precision is reduced for the components that are what to human hearing?	less audible
Who designed MP3?	Moving Picture Experts Group
What was the first standard that this group had?	MPEG-1
The first standard later developed into which standard?	MPEG-2
When was the draft passed to have MPEG-1 Audio approved as a standard?	1991
When was MPEG-2 Audio finally published?	1995
What does the MP3 compression take advantage of?	perceptual limitation
What is the limitation in human hearing referred to as?	auditory masking
Who was the physicist to report that a tone could be rendered inaudible.	Alfred M. Mayer
When were audio curves described by Richard Ehmer?	1959
The initial work was aimed at determining critical ratios and what else?	critical bandwidths
What was first proposed in 1979?	The psychoacoustic masking codec
Which country were the researchers located in?	United States
Who was the first to produce hardware for speech?	Krasner
What does LPC stand for?	linear predictive coding
What was reported in IEEE's Journal on Selected Areas in Communications?	audio compression algorithms
What does OCF stand for?	Optimum Coding in the Frequency Domain
What does PXFM stand for?	Perceptual Transform Coding
What was the name of the codec that OCF, PFXM and other contributes merged into?	ASPEC
Which competition did ASPEC win?	quality
What was the first practical implementation based on?	Motorola 56000 DSP chips
What kind of student was Karlheinz Brandenburg?	doctoral
When did Karlheinz start working on digitmal music compression?	early 1980s
Where did Bradenburg become an assistant professor at?	Erlangen-Nuremberg
Who did Brandenburg work with in music compression?	Fraunhofer Society
When did Brandenburg join the Fraunhofen Institute?	1993
What was the name of the first song used to develop the MP3?	Tom's Diner
Who was the artist of the first song used?	Suzanne Vega
Who adjusted the song?	Karlheinz Brandenburg
The song was listened to multiple times to try and refine what?	scheme
What particular aspect of the artists voice was he trying to preserve?	subtlety
How many proposals were available in 1991?	two
Other than ASPEC what was another proposal?	Musicam
The Musicam format was proposed by Philips, based in which country?	Netherlands
Which other quality alongside simplicty was key in selecting this proposal?	error robustness
What was the Musican format based on?	sub-band coding
What was only incorporated into Layer III and not Layers I or II?	filter bank
Who was the chair that oversaw the editing of the standard?	Professor Musmann
Who's responsibility was it to edit the standard for Layer I?	Leon van de Kerkhof
Who's responsibility was it to edit the standard for Layer II?	Gerhard Stoll
What was the name given to the proposal?	ASPEC
What did the joint proposal provide?	the highest coding efficiency
Other than Thomson Consumer Electronics, Fraunhofer Society and CNET, who else was a part of the joint proposal?	AT&T Bell Laboratories
What did the working group integrate their ideas with?	filter bank
Where was the filter bank taken from?	Layer 2
What did the working group take ideas from?	ASPEC
What did the working group eventually create?	MP3
What quality were they hoping to match at 128 kbit/s?	MP2 at 192 kbit/s
When were the algorithms approved?	1991
When were the approved algorithms finalized?	1992
What was the first started suite by MPEG?	MPEG-1
What was the official name of the internation standard?	ISO/IEC 11172-3
When was the international standard published?	1993
Further work on MPEG was finalized as a part of which MPEG standard?	second suite
What was the official name of ISO/IEC 13818-3 better known as?	MPEG-2
At what rate were the new sampling rates defined in comparison to MPEG-1 Audio?	half
Apart from cutting the frequency fidelity in half, what else was cut in half?	bitrate
Allowing the coding of audio programs with more than two channels was a major aspect of what?	MPEG-2 Part 3
As MPEG-3 had a different meaning, what was the name given to the extension of MPEG-2?	MPEG-2.5 audio
Where was this extension developed?	Fraunhofer IIS
The new sampling rates widened the scope of MP3 to be able to include what?	human speech
What is not an ISO recognized standard?	MPEG-2.5
As MPEG-2.5 is unofficial, it is considered what kind of extension to the MP3 format?	proprietary
What defines the compression efficiency of encoders?	bit rate
Compression ratio depends on the sample rate and bit depth of which signal?	input
What does CD stand for?	Compact Disc
Other than CD parameters, what else can be used as parameter references?	Digital Audio Tape (DAT) SP
What can CD parameters be used as references for?	compression ratios
What type of recording did Brandenburg use?	CD
What did Brandenburg use the recording to refine?	the MP3 compression algorithm
What word describes the nature of the song used?	monophonic
As a result of her song being used, Suzanne Vega is sometimes referred to as what?	The mother of MP3
Excerpts were taken from which reference compact disc to assess the subjective quality of the MPEG audio formats?	EBU V3/SQAM
Who developed the reference simulation software?	the ISO MPEG Audio committee
Which language was the reference simulation software written in?	C
When was the reference software approved?	March 1994
When did the reference software become an international standard?	1998
What could the reference software demonstrate?	real time hardware decoding
When was the first software MP3 encoder released?	7 July 1994
What was the name of the first software MP3 encoder?	l3enc
What was the filename extension?	.mp3
What was the name of the first real-time software MP3 player?	WinPlay3
What was the average high end hard drive size?	1000 MB
What was Jonathan Sterne's profession?	sound scholar
Which nationality was the hacker who acquired I3enc?	Australian
What did the hacker use to acquire the software?	stolen credit card
The hacker re-wrote which element of the program?	user interface
How much did the new released program by the hacker cost?	free
Where did MP3s begin to spread?	the Internet
Which audio player was released in 1997?	Winamp
Who released the audio player?	Nullsoft
What was the name of the first portable solid state digital audio player?	MPMan
In which country was the first portable audio player developed?	South Korea
Which website offered MP3s for free?	mp3.com
How many MP3s were offered for free by the website?	thousands
What kind of file sharing became popular due to the file sizes of MP3s?	peer-to-peer
How did people come into possession of MP3s?	ripped from CDs
Which network was the first large peer to peer file sharing network?	Napster
What kind of infringement resulted from sharing MP3s?	copyright
What name did the record companies associate with MP3 file sharing?	music piracy
Who was the target of the record companies?	Napster
What happened to Napster?	shut down and later sold
What kind of MP3 file sharing continues on?	Unauthorized
Beatport, Bleep and Juno records are examples of what kind of service?	authorized
What kind of music is sold by these companies?	unrestricted
Which format is used by the companies that sell the music legally?	MP3
A header and data block together make up what?	MP3 frames
What is a sequence of MP3 frames called?	elementary stream
What is used to identify the begining of a valid frame of an MP3 header?	dard
How many bits are needed to indicate that layer 3 is used?	two
MP3 files today contain what kind of metadeta?	ID3
Which standard does not include a specification for an MP3 encoder?	MPEG-1
Example psychoacoustic models and rate loops can be foundin which part of the original standard?	non-normative
What were implementers of the standard supposed to devise?	their own algorithms
It is easy for a prospective user of an encoder to research the best choice because of what factor?	Comparisons are widely available
An encoder that is proficient at encoding at higher bit rates might be worse at what?	lower bit rates
How many domain samples are taken during encoding?	576
Domain samples are transformed into what?	frequency-domain samples
When are 192 samples taken instead of 576?	there is a transient
When 192 samples are taken instead of 576, it is done in an effort to limit what?	temporal spread
What accompanies a transient?	quantization noise
What kind of structure does a filter bank have?	tree
Due to a specific kind of structure, what kind of problems are made worse?	pre-echo problems
What kind of resolution are the filter banks unable to provide an optimal solution for?	time/frequency
Combining two filter banks' outputs creates what kind of problem?	aliasing
The need to code excess energy in the frequency domain decreases what kind of efficiency?	coding
What is carefully defined in the standard?	Decoding
What are most decoders?	bitstream compliant
The ISO/IEC high standard document states that the decompressed output produced from a given MP3 file will be the same within what standards?	specified degree of rounding tolerance
Decoders are usually compared by examining which factor?	computationally efficient
The efficiency of decoders is examined by seeing how much memory and what other process they use in the decoding process?	CPU time
What is there no official provision for?	gapless playback
What is an example of an encoder that can attach additional metadeta?	LAME
Adding additional metadata allows players to handle gapless playback and deliver what?	seamless playback
For encoders and decoders, what is not defined?	overall delay
A typical trade off when creating an MP3 file is between the amount of space used and what other factor?	sound quality of the result
What would an example of lossy audio encoding be?	creating an MP3 file
Who gets to set the bit rate for an MP3 file?	the creator
What does the bit rate of the file actually mean?	how many kilobits the file may use per second of audio
If the bit rate is higher, the size of the compressed file will be what?	larger
If the bit rate is too low, what might be audible in the reproduction?	compression artifacts
Sounds that were not in the original recording are referred to as what?	compression artifacts
Randomness and sharp attacks are two reasons that may make it harder to to do what to an audio file?	compress
Other than pre - echo, what is another example of what can happen when audio is compressed?	ringing
What kind of sample can display a good example of compression artifacts?	A sample of applause
Other than the bit rate and the difficulty of the signal, what can also affect the quality of an MP3 file?	quality of the encoder
The MP3 standard allows encoders to have a lot of freedom with which aspect of encoding?	encoding algorithms
As a result of the freedom, different encoders can result in different quality even if which aspect of the file is the same?	bit rates
An example shown has a low range quality score of what value?	2.22
To compare qualities, sound files are evaluated on a scale that ranges from 1 to what?	5
How many bit rates does the simplest type of MP3 file use?	one
What does CBR stand for?	Constant Bit Rate
What does VBR stand for?	Variable Bit Rate
Aside from silence, which sections of music highlight parts that are easier to compress?	music containing only a few instruments
What value do users need to know when encoding their music to help avoid them having to do tests on each piece of music?	quality setting
A listening environment is also know by which term?	ambient noise
Other than speakers and headphones, what other piece of equipment affects the listener's perceived quality?	sound cards
Listening environment, listener attention, listener training and listener audio equipment can all affect what kind of quality?	Perceived quality
Who gave students a test to determine their preferences?	Music Professor Jonathan Berger
Where was a test performed to collect data on student preference for MP3 quality?	Stanford University
Data showed that students' preference for MP3 quality music followed which trend?	risen each year
What kind of sound did students seem to prefer?	sizzle
What is the name of the study done by composer Ryan Maguire?	The Ghost in the MP3
What did the study aim to isolate?	sounds lost during MP3 compression
What is the track "moDernisT" an anagram of?	Tom's Diner
Where was an account of the study published?	International Computer Music Conference
Which year was the study published?	2014
What is the name of the sampling theorem?	Nyquist–Shannon
In relation to the sampling frequency, the frequency reproduction is strictly how much less?	less than half
Having an 8 kHz sampling rate would limit the maximum frequency to how much?	4 kHz
What kind of filter requires a larger margin for error?	imperfect filters
A sound reproduction of 24 kHz would represent which value of a maximum sampling rate?	48
What sampling rate is used for CD audio?	44.1 kHz
What is the main source used for creating MP3 files?	CD audio
Where can one find a greater variety of bit rates?	the Internet
The common bit rate on the internet is 128 kbit/s using which compression ratio?	11:1
As technology advances, what is another higher bit rate that is beginning to spread?	320 kbit/s
What is stored on an audio-CD that has a bit rate of 1,411.2 kbit/s?	Uncompressed audio
What does a bit rate of 128 represent in terms of compression ratio?	11:1
What would a bit rate of 160 correspond to in terms of compression ratio?	9:1
What would a bit rate of 192 kbit/s have for a compression ratio?	7:1
The LAME encoder allows bit rates that are what?	Non-standard
Even though few MP3 players can play it, LAME also offers which option?	freeformat
What is the highest bit rate the LAME encoder allows?	640 kbit/s
The ISO standard dictates that decoders only need to be able to decode streams that have how high of a bit rate?	320
What does the term CBR mean?	Constant Bit Rate
Which early MPEG layer used CBR?	Layer III
The early software was restricted to which kind of bitrate?	uniform
What did more sophisticated MP3 encoders use to target an average bit rate?	bit reservoir
What did encoders base the encoding rate for each frame on?	the complexity of the sound
What kind of audio can a sophisticated MP3 encoder produce?	variable bitrate audio
Which type of decoder must support bitrate switching on a per-frame basis?	layer III
What do encoders use when the goal is to achieve a fixed level of quality?	VBR
Using VBR instead of a constant bit rate encoding makes which part of encoding less predictable?	final file size
An average bit rate is used when who choses an average value for the encoder to use?	the user
A partially full frame's ability to have part of the next frame's audio data is referred to as what?	bit reservoir
What kind of audio is required to use a bit reservoir?	Layer III
What is a possible result of handling the bit reservoir?	encoding delay
A bit reservoir allows for what kind of changes in effective bit rate?	temporary
A large benefit of a bit reservoir is that you can use it even while encoding what kind of stream?	constant bitrate
What can scale factor band 21 be shortened to?	sfb21
What is the maximum frequency that scale factor band 21 can go up to?	16 kHz
The encoder has to choose between less acurate representation in band 21 or which factor in all bands below band 21?	less efficient storage
What does less efficient storage result in for VBR encoding?	wasted bitrate
What is a section of a file that contains metadeta referred to as?	tag
What else can metadeta contain other than the title, artist or track  number?	album
What do MP3 standards not define?	tag formats for MP3 files
What would be needed to support metadata and obviate the need for tags?	a standard container format
Other than the ID3v1, which similar standard format for tag exists?	ID3v2
What is the most recently introduced standard for tag formatting?	APEv2
What is the second place in a file that tags are normally stored, with the first being at the beginning?	end
What is important to note about where the tags are stored?	separate from the actual MP3 frame data
If the MP3 decoders do not extract information from the tags, what do they do to them?	treat them as ignorable, non-MP3 junk data
What is the name given to the standard for measure and storing the loudness of an MP3 file?	ReplayGain
What is measuring and storing loudness of an MP3 file also known as?	audio normalization
What does the standard ReplayGain allow a player to automatically adjust?	the overall playback volume
What program can be used to modify files based on ReplayGain measurements?	MP3Gain
MP3Gain is important because it allows players without what capability to have adjusted playback?	ReplayGain capability
Where is the basic MP3 decoding and technology patent free?	European Union
What happened to the patents that caused them to be patent-free?	expired
When will the technology be patent - free in the United States?	31 December 2017
Between which years did most of the MP3 patents in the US expire?	2007 and 2015
What has many organizations claiming ownership of patents related to aspects of MP3 led to?	legal threats
Legal threats and confusion made it difficult to ensure what about patents regarding MP3 products?	which patents must be licensed
What was the danger of not correctly patenting products?	patent infringement
At what stage of the technology were these problems prevalent?	early stages
What became publicly available on 6 December 1991?	MPEG-1 standard
When can patents not be filed in most countries?	after prior art has been made public
How long does it take for patents to expire after being filed?	20 years
How long can it take for patents to be approved after initially being filed?	12 months
When did patents required to implement MP3 expire in most countries?	December 2012
How long does it take for patents to expire in the United States?	17 years after the publication date
A patent issue much later than normally expected can be referred to as what?	submarine patents
What year is the latest that MP3 related patents will expire on in the United States?	2017
Who holds the longest running MP3 patent in the United States?	Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft
Who administered the longest running MP3 patent in the United States?	Technicolor
What was Technicolor's previous name?	Thomson Consumer Electronics
What patent does Technicolor claim to control?	Layer 3
What are Technicolor constantly in the process of doing?	actively enforcing these patents
When did the Fraunhofer institute send out a letter?	September 1998
What did the letter claim would be required to distribute and/or sell decoders and/or encoders?	a license
What does selling unlicensed products mean that the seller is doing?	infringe the patent rights of Fraunhofer and Thomson
What can products not use if they want to avoid infringing on patent rights?	the [MPEG Layer-3] standard
Who was sued for patent infringement on MP3 technology?	Thomson
Who initially sued to protect their patent rights?	Sisvel S.p.A.
What did Sisvel grant Thomson to end the lawsuit?	a license to their patents
When did the majority of the patents held by Sisvel expire?	2015
When does the last patent held by Sisvel expire?	9. April 2017
What did German officials seize from SanDisk on September 2006?	MP3 players
At which show did SanDisk have their assets seized?	IFA
Which company was the Italian patents firm representing?	Sisvel
What happened after the injunction was successful?	The injunction was later reversed
The continuous back and forth regarding the decisions on patents was referred to as what?	bringing the Patent Wild West to Germany
Who sued Apple, Samsung Electronics and Sandisk in 2007?	Texas MP3 Technologies
Which court did the lawsuit take place in?	eastern Texas federal court
What action did the three companies being sued take?	all settled the claims against them
What year did the lawsuits end?	2009
What was the claim that the lawsuit was based on?	infringement of a portable MP3 player patent
Which company allegedly inherited MP3 patents from AT&T-Bell LAbs?	Alcatel-Lucent
What kind of patents were allegedly inherited?	MP3 coding and compression
How many patents did Alcatel claim Microsoft infringed on?	seven
What subsequently happened after Alcatel was awarded damages?	The court subsequently tossed the award
How much money was awarded to Alcatel by a San Diego jury?	US $1.52 billion
AAC, mp3PRO and MP2 are all members of the same technological family as which other lossy format?	MP3
What model type do all of the lossy formats roughly depend on?	psychoacoustic
Which company owns many of the patents that cover the other formats?	Fraunhofer Gesellschaft
Opus and Vorbis are two explans of what kind of compression format?	open
Being open formats means that Opus and Vorbis can be used without what?	any known patent restrictions
What are some benefits to some of the newer audio compression formats when compared to MP3?	free of some limitations inherent to the MP3 format
How can one obtain an open compression format such as Opus or Vorbis?	available free of charge
What is a significant alternative to MP3?	lossless formats
What can lossless formats provide?	unaltered audio content
What is the downside of using a lossless format?	increased file size
What is another example of a lossless format other than Apple Lossless?	FLAC
What does FLAC stand for?	Free Lossless Audio Codec
What city did House music originate from?	Chicago
What decade did House music first develop?	1980s
What year was House music first popularized?	1984
What genre does House music fall into?	electronic dance music
What song by MARRS was an early House hit in 1987?	"Pump Up The Volume"
House music is characterized by what type of beats?	4/4 beats
What are some subgenres of House music?	euro house, tech house, electro house and jump house
What are rhythms provided by in House music?	drum machines
What are some differences between House and Disco music?	it was more electronic and minimalistic
What type of music is House based on?	dance-based music
When was the second wave of progressive house?	1999–2001
What are some popular subgenres of House?	G-house, Deep House, Tech House and Bass House
where is house music extremely popular?	both clubs and in the mainstream pop scene
What variation of house music was produced by artists such as Madonna and Kylie Minogue?	a more mainstream pop-based variation
What instruments did disco songs incorporate from house music?	synthesizers and drum machines
who produced Donna Summer's hit single "I Feel Love"?	Giorgio Moroder
what sort of music did Hi-NRG group Lime produce?	1980s disco-pop
What year did Cerrone's "Supernature" get released?	1977
What year was solid state survivor released?	1979
What influenced House music?	Soul and disco
What type of producer was Frankie Knuckles?	Early house producers
what did Frankie Knuckles use to create his compositions?	samplers, synthesizers, sequencers, and drum machines
What was the name of Charanjit Singh's 1982 album?	Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat
What did Singh's album contain?	Indian ragas performed in a disco style
What year was synthesizing: ten ragas to a disco beat released?	1982
What sort of arrangement did Charanjit Singh use on his 1982 album?	minimal arrangement
Who is Rachel Cain?	co-founder of an influential Trax Records
Who were Frankie Knuckles and ron hardy?	two influential pioneers of house music
what was the nickname of frankie knuckles?	"the Godfather of House,"
marshall jefferson got involved in house music after hearing whose music?	Ron Hardy's
what was ron hardy's music released in?	Muzic Box
who were the chicago radio jocks that played dance music in the early 1980s?	The Hot Mix 5
what style of music did man parrish play?	B-Boy hip hop music
what style of music did afrika bambaataa play?	electro funk
what style of music did kraftwerk play?	electronic pop music
how did producers sometimes make edits of house music?	reel-to-reel tape
who produced the song "on and on" in 1984?	Jesse Saunders
where was jesse saunders from?	Chicago
who co-wrote the hit song "on and on" in 1984?	Vince Lawrence
what type of bass synthesizer was a staple of the early house sound?	Roland TB-303
when was player one's "space invaders" released?	1979
when was jesse saunders' "on and on" a hit?	1984
what type of audience was early disco and dance catered to?	African-American and gay audiences
what year was house music first used as a genre?	1985
what were two big subgenres of house music?	deep house and acid house
what area radio was house music generally played on?	Chicago-area radio
what producer was the first to produce deep house?	Mr Fingers
where was producer mr. fingers' from?	Chicago
when was mr. fingers' "mystery of love" released?	1985
when was mr. fingers' "can you feel it?" released?	1986
When was Phuture's "Acid Tracks" released?	1987
Who founded the group Phuture?	Nathan "DJ Pierre" Jones, Earl "Spanky" Smith Jr., and Herbert "Herb J" Jackson
what instrument was Phuture the first to use in house music?	TB-303
how long was phuture's "acid tracks"?	12-minute
what type of drum machine did "acid tracks" use?	Roland TR-707
what radio station aired the Hot Mix 5 show?	WBMX-FM
what record labels helped popularize house music?	Trax Records and DJ International Records
what song by marshall jefferson became a big house hit?	"Move Your Body"
what european country were big house music hits being released in, in 1987?	UK
where was house music from chicago-based labels considered a must-play?	clubs
what club did the term 'house music' originate from?	The Warehouse
what city was the club The Warehouse located in?	Chicago
what years was the club The warehouse open?	1977 to 1983
what types of people did the club The Warehouse attract?	primarily black and gay
who was the resident DJ at The Warehouse in Chicago?	Frankie Knuckles
what is the name of Chip E's 1985 house hit?	"It's House"
when was Chip E's hit "It's House" released?	1985
the term 'house music' came from the labeling of records at what store?	Importes Etc
who ran the D.J. International record label?	Rocky Jones
House is a regional catch-all term for what kind of music?	dance music,
what was 'house music' once synonymous with?	older disco music
What was the stage name of Larry Heard?	Mr. Fingers
Why did the term house become popular?	early DJs creating music in their own homes
what are the Roland TR-808, TR-909, and TB 303 examples of?	synthesizers and drum machines
synthesizers were used to create what house subgenre?	acid house
what was the real name of Mr. Fingers?	Larry Heard
What is Juan Atkins an originator of?	Detroit techno music
What did Atkins claim the term house reflected?	the exclusive association of particular tracks with particular clubs and DJs
Why were DJs inspired to create their own house records?	differentiate the clubs and DJs
Who did House relay political messages to?	outcasts of society
Who did Frankie Knuckles once say the Warehouse club was for?	church for people who have fallen from grace
Who was a famous house producer?	Marshall Jefferson
where was the warehouse club located?	Chicago
what community was deep house popular with?	the black community
what was one of the earliest Detroit techno hits?	"Big Fun" by Inner City
who started the Detroit techno development?	The Electrifying Mojo
what was the nickname of juan atkins, derrick may, and devin saunderson?	the "godfathers" of Detroit Techno
who were the early b-boy hip-hop artists that inspired detroit techno?	Man Parrish, Soul Sonic Force
who were the european electronica artists that inspired detroit techno?	Kraftwerk, Art of Noise
Mayday and Thomas Barnett released what hit in 1987?	"Nude Photo"
what was the name of Mayday's record label?	Transmat Records
What was the real name of the artist Mayday?	Derrick May
what year was the hit song "wiggin" released?	1988
what label did Derrick May have successful releases on after his own?	Kool Kat Records
who founded KMS Records?	Kevin Saunderson
what was the name of Blake Baxter's 1986 hit recording?	"When we Used to Play / Work your Body"
what was the name of Blake Baxter's 1987 hit recording?	"Bounce Your Body to the Box"
what group released "Big Fun" and "Good Life" in 1988?	Inner City
what was the 1989 hit theme released by KMS?	"Rock to the Beat"
what is credited as the first house hit in the UK?	Farley "Jackmaster" Funk's "Love Can't Turn Around"
what did "Love Can't Turn Around" peak at in the UK charts?	#10
what year did Farley Funk have his first UK hit?	1986
What was the first house single to hit #1 in the UK?	Steve "Silk" Hurley's "Jack Your Body"
What year did "Jack Your Body" hit #1 in the UK?	1987
Who had a hit single with "jack the groove"?	Raze
what group's productions for Mel and Kim added elements of house to the europop sound?	Stock Aitken Waterman
what was the name of mel and kim's number-one hit single in the UK?	Respectable
what tour boosted house in the UK in the late 80s?	Knuckles, Jefferson, Fingers Inc. (Heard) and Adonis as the DJ International Tour
when did the DJ International Tour take place?	March 1987
what was the name of MARRS' number-one single in October 1987?	"Pump Up The Volume"
what was frequently an important element of UK house music?	humor
Sample montages were a key difference between british house music and what?	the original Chicago house sound
who released the hit single "promised land"?	Joe Smooth
who covered and charted the single "promised land"?	Style Council
who was the resident of the Ministry of Sound?	Justin Berkmann
who did Justin Berkmann bring into the club to play?	Larry Levan
what cities in the UK had major house scenes?	Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield and London
what helped to bolster house music in the uk?	underground Pirate Radio stations and DJs
what were the earliest and most influential record labels in UK house music?	Warp Records and Network Records
what was network records also known as?	Kool Kat records
what type of dance music was later introduced alongside American house music?	Italian dance music
what tiny island was house music also being devloped on?	Ibiza
what was a popular club in ibiza that started playing dance and house music?	Amnesia
who was the DJ at Amnesia in the mid 80s?	DJ Alfredo
who were some of the DJs that brought the ibiza sound to uk clubs in late 1987?	Trevor Fung, Paul Oakenfold and Danny Rampling
what was the name of the big dance club in Manchester UK in the late 80s?	Haçienda
what group did Marshall Jefferson form?	Ten City Byron Burke, Byron Stingily & Herb Lawson(from "intensity")
what sound emerged in Detroit with the recordings of juan atkins and derrick may?	proto-techno music sound
where were mateo & matos based?	New York
where was marshall jefferson based?	Chicago
what sound did US house music move beyond in the late 80s?	drum loops and short samples
atkins was a former member of what music group?	Cybotron
what hit single did atkins release in 1985?	"No UFOs"
what unusual single did derrick may release, featuring a darker strain of house?	"Strings of Life"
what did knights of the turntable release in 1984?	Techno-Scratch
who was the manager of the factory nightclub and co-owner of the hacienda?	Tony Wilson
what was a top club for house music in new york city?	Paradise Garage
who was a pioneer of the genre in america?	Todd Terry
what hit house song did todd terry cover?	Weekend
what new influences led to a new house sound?	hip-hop influences
what was different about the bass-line in the hip-hop influenced house songs?	more rugged
what label launched the careers of burrell?	Nu Groove Records
what sound are the burrell's responsible for?	"New York Underground"
how much can old vinyl releases of the burrells sell for today?	$100
what label were the burrell's briefly with before their success?	Virgin America
what is the oldest dance club in america?	Jewel's Catch One
where did DJs marques wyatt and billy long become successful?	Los Angeles
what label did robert ozn start in 1989?	One Voice Records
one voice records released a remix of what dada nada song in 1989?	Haunted House
dada nada was the moniker for what artist's solo act?	Ozn
what madonna single is credited as helping bring house music to the mainstream?	Vogue
when was madonna's hit single "vogue" released?	1990
what decade did house music hit the mainstream in the us?	1990s
who sang the hit single "vogue"?	Madonna
how well did madonna's single "vogue" do in the us?	topped the US charts
What gospel/R&B-influenced group released "Time Passes On" in 1993?	Aly-us
who released the hit single "time for the perculator" in the us?	Cajmere
what was cajmere's alternate name?	Green Velvet
what was the name of the label operated by dj funk in chicago?	Dance Mania
what was the prototype of ghetto house?	"Time for the Perculator" by Cajmere
where did the "chilling out" concept develop?	Britain
who released the album analogue bubblebath?	Aphex Twin
where was the band deee-lite based?	New York
who released the track "little fluffy clouds"?	Orb
who transformed happy mondays' "wrote for luck" into a dance hit?	Vince Clarke
what act was passed in england in an attempt to ban large rave dance events?	Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
what was the nail in the coffin for illegal raves?	The Spiral Tribe at Castle Morten
when did the bill become a law?	November 1994
what single introduced dub and reggae into the house sound?	"Release the Pressure"
who recorded the hit single "release the pressure"?	Leftfield
where was a new type of club called Cream located?	Liverpool
what was a new subgenre of house in chicago, developed by bad boy bill and others, called?	Chicago hard house
george centeno, darren ramirez, and martin o. cairo developed a hard house sound in what city?	Los Angeles
what was another name for hardcore techno from the netherlands?	gabber
who began opening "superclubs"?	Major record companies
Daft Punk began producing a new sound out of what european city?	Paris
When did Daft Punk begin producing a new sound?	end of the 1990s and into the 2000s
Daft Punk, Stardust, Cassius, St. Germain, and DJ Falcon all came from what scene?	Paris's house scene
When was House Unity Day in Chicago?	August 10, 2005
Who proclaimed House Unity Day in Chicago?	Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley
In 2005, what anniversary was house music celebrating?	"21st anniversary of house music"
what was recognized as the original home of house music in 2005?	Chicago
What event was organized by Chicago's Department of Cultural Affairs to celebrate house music?	Summer Dance Series
Defected Records was at the forefront of what type of house music?	vocal house
Roule and Om was at the forefront of what type of house music?	vocal house
Dennis Ferrer produced what type of house fusion?	electro house and fidget house
in what time period did fusion genres of house emerge?	mid-2000s
Where did the Winter Music Conference take place?	Miami
The Shambhala Music Festival was dedicated to what?	house music
where did house music gain popularity in the middle east?	Dubai & Abu Dhabi
what event led to an increase in popularity for house music in the middle east?	Creamfields
what large event in Miami was industry sponsored?	Shambhala Music Festival
What was different about swedish progressive house music?	snare-less
Sebastian Ingrosso, Axwell, and Steve Angello formed what successful trio?	Swedish House Mafia
What concept is characterized by abrasive leads and darker arpeggios?	Dirty Dutch
Progressive house blended sounds were prominent in the song "Marry the Night" by what popular artist?	Lady Gaga
Big room house has found increasing popularity since what year?	2010
There has been a reunification of contemporary house with what?	its roots
Why do many hip hop and R&B artists turn to house music?	to add a mass appeal to the music they produce
What genre of artists has recently turned to house music to add mass appeal?	hip hop and R&B
The terms uppercase and lowercase originated from the common layout which type of drawers?	shallow
Besides being a single word or two separate words, how can the words uppercase and lowercase be expressed?	hyphen
In relation to the shelf the small letters were located, where were the capital letters?	located above
Which characteristic of capital letters made it easy to remember.	taller
What is the basis of capitalization standards for the sentence-style capitalization?	sentences
What is the popular capitalization structure and standard used by many British publishers and U.S. newspapers?	sentence-style
What is an alternative name for sentence-style capitalization?	sentence case
Which popular global publisher utilizes sentence case for titles and headers?	International Organization for Standardization
Besides headlines, what is sentence-style capitalization often applied to?	publication titles
Which century did the lower-case script for the Greek Alphabet originate?	7th
Which century did the Greek alphabet acquire its quadrilinear form?	8th
Overtime which type of letter forms were mixed increasingly into the Greek language script?	uncial
Which year is the earliest dated Greek lower-case text?	835
In which literature is the earliest dated Greek lower-case text?	Uspenski Gospels
In orthography and typography, what is the distinction between the letters that are in larger upper case and lower upper case	letter case
Minuscule is a term uses to describe which case of letter?	smaller lower
Capital letters refer to which case of letter?	larger upper
Letter case is used to distinction betweem lowercase and uppercase letter in which common representation of certain languages?	written
Capitalization in English is universally standardized for which type of writing?	formal
In English the first letter of a sentence is which type of letter?	capital
What is capitalization commonly use to indicate in poetry independent of any grammatical feature?	beginning of a line of verse
How is the first letter of a first-person pronoun handled mid sentence in English?	capitalised
The interjection "O" has been replaced by which more common and preferred word in English?	oh
Originally alphabets were written entirely in which type of letter?	majuscule
Rounder and simpler forms of letters came from writing quickly with which instrument?	pen
Who developed the Carolingian minuscule script for handwriting?	Alcuin
Carolingian minuscule script quickly spread across which continent?	Europe
What is a common advantage of miniscule over majuscule handwriting?	faster readability
What is often prescribed by the grammar of a language or by conventions of a particular discipline?	Letter case
Which kind of purpose is uppercase reserved for in orthography?	special
Which is the most common variant of case in text?	lowercase
Engineering design drawings typically utiilze which case of letter in labeling?	upper-case
Why are uppercase letters preferred often times when space is restricted?	easier to distinguish than lowercase
Who do majuscules have which distinguish themselves from minuscules?	generally have the same height
In Time New Roman the letter "b" would be consider which type of letter based on whether it is above or below average height?	ascenders
Descending letters tend to have a part which falls where relative to the average height of a letter?	lower than the average
Besides the number 6, which number makes of the ascender set in some traditional or classical fonts?	8
What do most Western languages use in their written form to add clarity?	letter cases
What are writing systems which make no distinction between majuscales and minuscules often referred to as?	unicameral script
Which alphabet is a special case because it transitioned from bicameral to unicameral?	Georgian
What are scripts that utilized two seperate cases called?	bicameral
Papyri from Herculaneum dating before 79 AD have been to to be written in which hand writing?	old Roman cursive
Whicy papyrologist theorized lowercase letter actually developed from the fifth century uncials?	Knut Kleve
Which continents languages with few exceptions generally did not utilize case distinction until about the year 1300?	Europe
What was the initial difference between majuscule and minuscule letters?	stylistic
Which type of document was general unicameral because the writer used one type of writing but not another?	handwritten
What is capitalization of significant words applied to in the United States besides titles?	headings
Capitalization of significant words refers to which family of typographic conventions?	title case
Which book of literature standards suggests capitalizing the first word and all nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, and adverbs?	R. M. Ritter's Oxford Manual of Style
The use of bold fonts and capilization in titles falls under which unusual grammatical distinction?	not universally standardized
Attempts to unify Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic would create which sort of problems?	make casing operations an unholy mess
What among many common letters is shared between Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic?	shapes
What would be problematic for a multilingual character set or font to provide?	single codepoint
What distinguishes Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic from one another?	sets of symbols
Although there are challenges a unified European alphabet is feasible even in the absence of which common language rule?	letter case
What was the name of the nomad tribes that hunted bison?	Jornado
Along which river did they hunt bison?	Rio Grande
How did the Chichimeca survive?	hunting, gathering, and farming
The Chichimeca are the ancestors of what people?	Tepehuan
The Jornado painted onto what surface?	rock
What was the name of the town in which Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla declared independence?	Dolores
What was the name of the Proclamation?	Grito de Dolores
What was Hidalgo's occupation?	priest
What was the name of the royalist who captured Hidalgo?	Ignacio Elizondo
Which country had Hidalgo attempted to reach to gain support?	United States
Who did Santa Anna order the reinstatement as comandante general?	Mendarozqueta
What was the name of the federalist army officer who eventually came into power during the new election?	José Urrea
Who had actually won the original vote?	Gutierrez
Who was his deputy?	P. J. Escalante
Who refused to yield until troops were summoned?	Escalante
What was the name of the treaty that ended the war?	The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
In which year was the treaty signed?	1848
Control over which current U.S. state was given to the U.S. under this treaty?	Texas
How long did the U.S. continue to maintain control over the state capital after the treaty?	three months
Which American general misunderstood the Mexican message sent to Sacramento Pass?	General Price
Which countries owned Mexican debt?	Spain, England, and France
Who was the Foreign Affairs Minister?	Manuel Doblado
Who was the President of Mexico at the time?	President Juárez
Who convinced the English to accept the terms of the pact?	General Juan Prim of Spain
Which country refused to accept?	France
Who was deeply dissatisfied with Bazaine's decision to abandon Chihuahua?	Maximilian
How many men did Billaut have when he recaptured the city?	500
At its zenith, the imperialist forces controlled all but how many states in Mexico?	four
Which four states opposed the French?	Guerrero, Chihuahua, Sonora, and Baja California
In which year did Billaut capture Chihuahua?	1865
In which year did Benito Juarez die?	1872
The two candidates were heroes of what battle?	Battle of Puebla
Which plan defended the "No Re-election" principle?	The Plan of Tuxtepec
Which party rebelled against the administration?	Lerdista party
Which city was occupied by the Lerdista forces?	El Paso del Norte
Which year did Orozco revolt?	1912
Who notified Huerta the revolt had been put down?	Villa
Who saved Villa's life?	Raúl Madero
With whom did Orozco side?	Huerta
Which state has more forests than Chihuahua?	Durango
The state of Chihuahua is primarily identified with what type of landscape?	Desert
The Copper Canyon is deeper than what popular American canyon?	Grand Canyon
Along which two valleys do most inhabitants of Chihuahua live?	Rio Grande Valley and the Conchos River Valley
The Sierra Madre Occidentals are an extension of which American mountain range?	Rocky Mountains
Which city did Villa raid?	Columbus, New Mexico
Which American president pursued Villa?	President Wilson
How long did the American troops pursue Villa?	nearly a year
In which city was Villa killed?	Parral
In which year was Villa assassinated?	1923
Along which mountain range does the Cave of Windows lie?	Sierra Madre
Cuarenta Casas is thought to be a branch of which settlement?	Paquime
Where did the Paquime seek refuge?	Sierra Madre Occidental
Which current native tribes are thought to be descendants of the Casas Grandes?	Yaqui, Mayo, Opata, and Tarahumara
Which precious metal did Biezma discover?	silver
How many years was Parral an important economic and cultural center?	300 years
In which year did Sante Fe inhabitants return home from seeking refuge?	1692
Which new state capital was founded in 1709?	Chihuahua City
In which city had the inhabitants of Sante Fe been seeking refuge?	El Paso Del Norte
In which areas were the earliest human inhabitants discovered?	Samalayuca and Rancho Colorado
What range of years are the oldest ruins from?	12,000 BC to 7000 BC
Which vegetable were they found to have been farming?	corn
Around what year were the ceramic artifacts found to have been from?	2000 BC
How many people left the state for the U.S. between 2000-2005?	49,722
In which city is there a large number of undocumented immigrants?	Ciudad Juárez
Is the population density the highest or lowest of any Mexican state?	lowest
Which are the largest two cities in the state?	Ciudad Juárez and Chihuahua
Which nicknames were used to form the conservative and liberal elements?	Chirrines and Cuchas
Which was the third party?	The military
In which year was the body installed?	1826
Which party had gained control?	liberals
Who was the Durango governor?	Santiago Baca Ortiz
Which cities was Ibarra looking for?	Cibola and Quivira
Through which present-day state did he travel?	Chihuahua
Ibarra is thought to have been the first European to see the ruins of which city?	Paquime
Which was the first Spanish city founded in the region?	Santa Barbara
What caused a temporary exodus from Nueva Vizcaya?	epidemic
What percentage of the population over 15 could read and write Spanish?	95.6%
What percentage of children ages 8-14 could read and write Spanish?	97.3%
What percentage of children age 6-14 attend an institution of education?	93.5%
What percentage of the population have obtained a college degree?	12.8%
The state's economy ranks in what place in the country Mexico	12th-largest
What was the GDP of the state as of 2011?	396 billion pesos
Which sector was the largest portion of the economy?	service sector
Which sector was the second largest?	the manufacturing and industrial sector
The state received how much in remittances from the U.S. in 2011?	884 million dollars
Who was the first person elected under the new constitution?	Simón Elías Gonzalez
Where was Gonzalez located when he was elected?	Sonora
In which year did Gonzalez become commander of Chihuahua?	1829
For whom was the revolution named?	Bustamante
Stringed laws were issued against what group?	secret societies
In which region of the state did culture develop?	northern
To what does Casas Grandes translate in English?	Big Houses
Which prehistoric culture did Casas Grandes stem from?	Mogollon
What city was the center of the Casas Grandes civilization?	Paquime
To what does Cuarenta Casas translate in English?	Forty Houses
Until what year did the state remain calm?	1841
In which year did the state begin to reinforce defense?	1843
What was the price of the small force along the border?	160,603 pesos per year
The state decreed that how many men serve along the border in 1846?	6,000
Who took measures to the state level for self-dependence due to diminishing financial support from the federal government?	Ángel Trías
Which city became the launching place for expeditions into New Mexico?	Santa Bárbara
In which year was El Paso del Norte found?	1598
The path was important for the expansion of which road?	El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Which U.S. state benefited from this road?	New Mexico
Who was hailed as the Father of the Nation?	Hidalgo
Who actually achieved independence for the nation?	Agustin de Iturbide
Which day eventually became the official day of Mexican Independence?	September 16, 1810
Who painted Hidalgo's image on half a dozen murals?	Diego Rivera
In which city do Hidalgo's remains lie?	Mexico City.
In which year did Doniphan march with men from Missouri?	1847
How many men did he have?	924
What was the pass into the capital known as?	Sacramento Pass
Which was the most important battle fought in Chihuahua?	The Battle of Sacramento
How many Mexicans were killed in the battle of Sacramento?	Almost 300
Who supported the reaction against the government?	Durango
Who supported the restoration of President Pedraza?	José Urrea
Which state did Urrea prepare to invade?	Chihuahua
Who threatened to retaliate?	J.J.Calvo
Who was deposed under threat from conservative forces?	Governor Terrazas
Who was established as the new governor?	Jesús José Casavantes
Who decided to march on Chihuahua in response?	José María Patoni
Which president was forced to flee?	President Benito Juárez
Until which year did his extended term last?	1867
In which year was the new constitution ratified?	1855
The state was able to survive through which war?	Reform War
The conservative movement occurred during which year?	1858
1000 men occupied which cities?	Chihuahua and Parral
Who established himself as governor?	Cajen
Brincourt made preparations to invade which state?	Chihuahua
In which states had Brincourt run military affairs previously?	Coahuila and Durango
Who remained in the capital until August 5, 1865?	President Juárez
Who surprised the imperial forces in control of Hidalgo?	General Villagran
The Republican government declared who in charge of the fight against the imperialists?	General Villagran
Where did Aguirre defeat the French forces?	Parral
Who had been leading the French forces?	Colonel Cottret
During which year was Chihuahua declared free of enemy control?	1866
Who passed laws regarding rights of adjudication of property?	President Juárez
Who was executed by firing squad on June 19, 1867?	Maximilian
Who declared war on Mexico in 1846?	The United States
How many men did Chihuahua send to defend New Mexico?	12,000
Which was the first battle fought by Chihuahua?	battle of El Bracito
Who won the battle?	The United States
Which general maintained camp in El Paso Del Norte after the battle?	General Doniphan
The elections of which year caused new hostilities?	1875
Who led a movement against the government in June of 1875?	Ángel Trías
Which orchestrator of the Revolution of the North was captured?	Donato Guerra
Guerra was assassinated in a suburb of which city?	Chihuahua City
With whom was he said to have conspired?	Ángel Trías
Under which governor was the education system unified?	Miguel Ahumada
Which system of measurement was standardized?	metric system
What was inaugurated in Chihuahua City on September 16, 1897?	Civilian Hospital
The first large scale dam project was initiated on which river?	Chuviscar River
The internal stability was known as what?	paz porfiriana
During what years did the economic growth occur?	1876 to 1910
Who committed to a strict "No Re-election" policy when running for office?	Díaz
Which class was frustrated with Diaz due to corruption?	working class
Orozco responded to whose letter to action?	Madero
Which governor teamed up with Orozco?	Governor Abraham González
Orozco and Villa fought for and won which city?	Ciudad Juárez
Madero received support from which country?	United States
Orozco's army was called by what name?	Orozquistas
War with what country seemed imminent?	United States
Pancho Villa seeked a conversation with which American President?	President Wilson
Villa stepped out of whose foreign policy?	Carranza’s
To which Secretary did Carothers write?	Secretary William Jennings Bryan
Which state is the largest in the country by land?	Chihuahua
What percentage of the country does it make up?	12.6%
Which state borders Chihuahua to the direct west?	Sonora
Which U.S. state borders to the northeast?	Texas
Climate in the state depends mainly on what?	elevation of the terrain
Which mountain range dominates the western part of the state?	The Sierra Madre Occidental
Vegetation is much greener in which side of the state, east or west?	west
Which side of the state has more precipitation?	west
Which part of the state has the most desert; north, south, east, or west?	southern
The Chihuahuan Desert is home to many of which type of animal?	mammals
Which type of reptile is most common in the desert?	rattlesnake
Mephitis macroura is which type of mammal?	skunk
Villa became an enemy of whom?	Carranza
Who took control in 1914?	Carranza
Carranza met with his opposition at a meeting called what?	Convention of Aguascalientes
The convention deposed Carranza in favor of whom?	Eulalio Gutiérrez
At which battle was Obregon badly defeated?	Battle of Celaya
Which months make up the pronounced rainy season in the steppe?	July, August, and September
The steppe reaches temperatures above what in the winter?	100 °F
The steppe is important agriculturally because of what feature?	canals
The mountain climate is found in which part of the state?	western
The state has great diversity thanks to the large number of what?	microclimates
What type of life varies greatly with the elevation in the mountains?	flora
The state is home to one of the largest variation species of which genus?	Pinus
Several species of which type dot the steppe and transition zone?	Juniperus
Which city in the state exceeds one million?	Ciudad Juárez
Juarez is ranked where among cities in the country?	eighth
El Paso and Ciudad Juarez combine for a population of how many people?	2.4 million
What is the literacy rate in Chihuahua City?	98%
What percentage of people in Chihuahua live in cities?	76.5%
French forces tried to capture the liberal government based where?	Saltillo
Which two generals lost against the French on September 21, 1864?	José María Patoni and Jesús González
The goverment led by whom was forced to evacuate Saltillo?	President Juárez
Which was the last city through which Juarez evacuated?	Chihuahua, Chihuahua
Which governor led the supportive reception of President Juarez?	Ángel Trías
Benito Juarez was reelected in which year?	1867
Which state gave Juarez a particularly notably strong support?	Chihuahua
Who was confirmed to be the president of the state of Chihuahua?	Luis Terrazas
Which general turned himself over to Donato Guerra?	General Canto
Which year's election was perceived to be fraudulent?	1871
The Diaz administration allowed the elite to concentrate wealth by favoring what?	monopolies
Two-fifths of the state's territory was divided between how many families?	17
This state grew at a rapid pace during the Porfiriato.	Chihuahua
What were installed throughout the state in 1883?	telephone lines
Asian immigrants became integral to the state economy by opening what businesses?	restaurants, small grocery stores, and hotels.
The Porfiriato ended in which year?	1910
The beginning of what ended the Porfiriato?	Mexican Revolution
Who stated that Mexico was ready for a Democracy and that he would step down?	Díaz
Who was incarcerated while running against Diaz?	Madero
Who took up arms in support of Madero?	Toribio Ortega
The uneasy alliance between whom eventually won rebels the victory?	Carranza, Obregón, Villa, and Zapata
The fight against Huerta formally ended on which date?	August 15, 1914
In which city did Obregon sign a number of treaties?	Teoloyucan
Who made a triumphant entry into Mexico City on August 20, 1914?	Carranza
Which is the main mountain range in the state?	Sierra Madre Occidental
What altitude does the mountain range reach at maximum?	10,826 ft (3,300 m)
Which state has more forests than any other?	Chihuahua
Precipitation and temperature in the mountainous region depend on what?	elevation
What type of plants can be found in some canyons?	tropical
Which city is known for its sand dunes?	Samalayuca
The transition zone between east and west is called what?	the Steppe
Both types of climate zones in the eastern part of the state are what?	Desert
What type of land dominates in the eastern part of the state?	Desert
The state hosts populations of birds of both endemic species and what?	migratory species
Cynanthus latirostris is what type of bird?	hummingbird
Aquila chrysaetos is what type of bird?	golden eagle
Which endemic species has symbolic significance to Mexicans?	Trogon mexicanus
Who invited Canadians to resettle in Mexico during the Mexican Revolution?	Álvaro Obregón
Today, Mexico accounts for what percentage of Mennonites in Latin America?	42%
Mennonites speak a form of which language predominantly?	German
Which food do Mennonites excel in producing?	cheese
Mennonites account for about how much of the state's farm economy?	half
Agriculture varies across the state because of the variation in what?	climate
Which fruit does the state rank first in production?	apples
The state produces lots of dairy which large processors of what dairy product?	milk
The state ranks second in the production of what type of wood?	oak
The state ranked second with over 150,000 metric tons of what metal?	zinc
What was the first province of northern New Spain to be explored?	Nueva Vizcaya
Around 1528, a group of Spaniards entered the territory that now makes up what state?	Chihuahua
The conquest of the territory lasted nearly how long?	one century
The Spanish crown wanted to turn the region into what type of industry?	mining center
Which tribe resisted fiercely this conquest?	Conchos tribe
Hidalgo was turned over by whom?	Bishop of Durango, Francisco Gabriel de Olivares
In which year was Hidalgo turned over?	1811
How was Hidalgo executed after having been found guilty?	firing squad
Hidalgo refused the use of what during his execution?	blindfold
In which state was Hidalgo's headless body buried?	Chihuahua
During which year was the federal government unstable?	1828
Who dissolved the government eventually?	Governor Santiago de Baca Ortiz
With which type of government did Ortiz replace the old one?	Yorkino
Which new governor was arrested by Ochoa and Bustamente?	F. Elorriaga
Who now headed the civil and military authorities?	J. A. Pescador and Simón Ochoa
Military command was given to whom based on his firmness?	Colonel J.J. Calvo
The state was in a war with what group?	Apaches
Who declared the state's civil and military forces should be combined during the campaign?	Simón Elías González
In which year did Gonzalez receive renomination?	1837
What group continuously attacked Mexican settlements?	indigenous tribes
How many military colonies were established by the state?	18
The military colonies replaced what as population centers?	presidios
How many men per 1000 residents were mandated to defend?	six men
Which political forces maintained strong control over the state until shortly after French intervention?	liberal
The intervention had serious consequences for which state?	Chihuahua
Who made an effort to organize a strong defense against the French?	President Juárez
Who assigned the First Battalion of Chihuahua for integration into the army?	Governor Luis Terrazas
To where was the battalion first deployed?	Puebla
Juarez again based his government in which state?	Chihuahua
The base served as the center for the resistance against whose invasion?	the French invasion
On March 25, 1866, a battle ensued where in Chihuahua City?	Plaza de Armas
Who decided to fire a heavy artillery barrage with 8 kg cannonballs?	General Terrazas
Which structure in the church became a historical monument?	The bell
The officials in Mexico reduced the price of what food from six cents to two cents per pound?	corn
Who led the revolt for the northern portion of the state?	G. Casavantes
Casavantes was successful in getting which Governor to exile?	Governor Trías
Durango and Coahuila had a military confrontation over what natural resource?	water
Who was able to secure and stabilize the state eventually and gain the support of the people?	Díaz
The state's economy was largely defined by these two industries.	ranching and mining
Diaz promoted economic growth by encouraging investment from foreign companies at the expense of what group?	working class
What was the name of the large estates owned by wealthy families?	haciendas
This group was often exploited and had no legal protection or recourse.	proletariat
Who issued the Plan de Guadalupe?	Venustiano Carranza
The Plan de Guadalupe refused to recognize who as the president?	Huerta
Who returned to Mexico to fight Huerta?	Carranza
Which city was the rebellion's capital for most of the struggle?	Ciudad Juárez
Carranza threatened war with what country in order to maintain credibility nationally?	United States
The desert zone accounts for how much of the state's surface area?	about a third
The Chihuahuan Desert also extends into which neighboring Mexican state?	Coahuila
The desert zone's topography is mostly what shape?	flat
Lower elevations and higher temperature are found in which region of the state; north, south, east, or west?	north
Which well-known river runs in the northern part of the state?	Rio Grande
Canis latrans is what animal?	coyote
Ursus Americanus is what animal that is found in relatively small numbers?	American black bear
The main cause of degradation has been what?	grazing
What type of snake is most popular in the region with many different species?	rattlesnake
The last census in Mexico that asked for race was carried out in which year?	1921
According to the census of 1921, what percentage of citizens were Mestizo?	50.09%
The second largest group of people were whom?	whites
What agreement sparked industrial development during the 1990s?	NAFTA
Large factories called what were built to export manufactured goods to the US and Canada?	maquiladoras
How many in the state are employed by maquiladoras?	294,026
What type of business employs the largest portion of the population?	Small business
Most maquiladoras today produce what?	electronics, automobile, and aerospace components
What type of sensation is pitch?	auditory
What is pitch closely related to?	frequency
Each persons perception of sound is called?	Pitch
Octaves in linear pitch are what size?	12
Semitones in linear pitch are what size?	1
A440 in linear pitch are what size?	69
An equal-tempered semitone is subdivided into how many cents?	100
The pitch halfway between C (60) and C♯ (61) is labeled what?	60.5
What is the most common method of organization?	twelve-note chromatic scale
The pitch ratio between any two successive notes is?	the twelfth root of two
All these different methods have what in common?	the octave
Pitch is the auditory attribute to what?	sound
Pitch is a close proxy for what?	frequency
High pitch is what type of oscillation?	rapid
Low pitch is what type of oscillation?	slower
This produces many modes of vibration that occur simultaneously?	sound generated
A listener can hear how many frequencies at once?	numerous
Harmonics are an important class of what?	overtones
Integer multiples are collectively called?	the partials
The pitch of complex tones can be?	ambiguous
A complex tone is composed of how many waves?	two
 The percept at 200 Hz is commonly referred to as?	the missing fundamental
the percept at 200 Hz is commonly referred to as the missing fundamental, which is often?	divisor of the frequencies present
The just-noticeable difference, at which a change is perceived depends on what?	the tone's frequency content
The jnd is typically tested by?	playing two tones in quick succession
What is the range of perceptible pitch steps to human hearing?	1,400
Which drum has a higher perceived pitch even though they both have indefinite pitch?	snare drum
Repetition pitch is caused by what phenomenon?	the addition of a true repetition of the original sound
It is possible and often easy to roughly discern the relative pitches of two sounds of what?	indefinite pitch
The notion of pitch is insensitive to what?	spelling
The description "G4 double sharp" refers to the same pitch as what?	A4
Human perception of musical intervals is approximately what?	logarithmic
Music theorist represent pitches using what kind of scale?	numerical
The precise way this temporal structure helps code for pitch at higher levels is based on what?	autocorrelation of action potentials in the auditory nerve
Is a temporal delay necessary to produce an autocorrelation model of pitch perception?	unnecessary
Pitch perception  has inherent octave what?	ambiguities
When did King Richard I begin his reign?	1189
Which animal is the main motif of England's national football team?	lions
What type of headgear originally appeared on the lions' heads on England's national football team motif?	a crown
In which year was the FA given an official coat of arms by the College of Arms?	1949
Since 2003, England has topped their logo with a star to recognize their World Cup win in which year?	1966
What color were England's first away kits?	blue
What color are the socks traditionally worn in England's away kits?	red
Three times in 1996, England wore what color socks in their away kits instead of the traditional red socks?	grey
In 2011, England introduced a new away kit in what color?	navy blue
When a new edition of England's away kit has been introduced, the kit is sometimes worn during what type of matches?	home matches
In what year was England most recently eliminated from FIFA World Cup contention?	2014
In 2014, England was eliminated from the World Cup after being defeated by Italy and which other team?	Uruguay
In which three years did England fail to qualify for the World Cup?	1974, 1978 and 1994
After the first round of the 2014 FIFA World Cup, how many teams remained in contention?	sixteen
What was the final score when, in 2010, England lost to Germany in the Round of 16 of the FIFA World Cup?	4–1
In what year did England suffer their first defeat at home to a foreign team?	1949
What was the final score of England's worst ever defeat?	7–1
In what year did England reach the quarter-finals of the FIFA World Cup for the first time?	1954
To whom is the quote "it was like playing men from outer space" attributed?	Syd Owen
After reaching the FIFA World Cup quarter-finals for the first time, to whom did England lose with a final score of 4-2?	Uruguay
In what year did Capello resign as England's football manager?	2012
Capello resigned as England's football manager after a dispute over removing which player from team captaincy?	John Terry
Who became the new manager of England's football team in May of 2012?	Roy Hodgson
In which round of UEFA Euro 2012 was England eliminated?	the quarter-finals
A defeat by which team ultimately eliminated England from UEFA Euro 2012?	Italy
Which governing body controls the England national football team?	The Football Association
Which other team, besides England, is one of the  two oldest national teams in football?	Scotland
In what year did England and Scotland play the world's first international football match?	1872
What is the name of England's home field in London?	Wembley Stadium
Who is the current team manager of England's football team?	Roy Hodgson
In which year did England join FIFA?	1906
England played against countries besides the Home Nations for the first time in what year?	1908
England left FIFA in 1928 and ultimately rejoined in what year?	1946
What was the first year after England left and rejoined FIFA in which they played in a World Cup?	1950
In what year did Wembley Stadium open?	1923
In which place did England finish in the UEFA European Football Championship in 1968?	third place
In how many UEFA European Championship Finals has England competed?	eight
Where does England rank in terms of the number of UEFA European Football Championship appearances?	tied for ninth-best
In what four years was England eliminated from the UEFA European Championship in the first round?	1980, 1988, 1992 and 2000
In which five years did England fail to qualify for the UEFA European Championship?	1964, 1972, 1976, 1984, and 2008
A defeat by which team eliminated England from the 1970 FIFA World Cup?	West Germany
What was the final score of England's last match of the 1970 FIFA World Cup?	3–2
In which year did England fail to qualify for the FIFA World Cup resulting in Ramsey's dismissal?	1974
Where did the 1970 FIFA World Cup take place?	Mexico
Where did the 1982 FIFA World Cup take place?	Spain
Who was the first non-English person to manage England's football team?	Sven-Göran Eriksson
How many competitive matches were lost under the tenure of manager Sven-Göran Eriksson?	five
What was the highest world ranking achieved by England under management by Sven-Göran Eriksson?	No.4
In what year was the contract of Sven-Göran Eriksson terminated?	2006
In what year did Sven-Göran Eriksson become the manager of England's football team?	2001
Commentated broadcasts of all England matches air on what network?	BBC Radio 5 Live
What was the first season in which England's qualifiers and friendlies were broadcast on ITV?	2008–09
What network is ITV's affiliate in northern and central Scotland?	STV
In what year was an England football match aired only via the internet for the first time?	2009
Approximately how many total viewers watched the England World Cup qualifier on the internet on 10 October 2009?	500,000
In how many FIFA world cups has England appeared?	14
Besides France, which other team is tied with England for number of appearances in the FIFA World Cup?	Spain
In which year did England win the FIFA World Cup for the first and only time?	1966
In what place did England finish in the 1990 FIFA World Cup?	fourth
Which country hosted the 1990 FIFA World Cup?	Italy
Where were Augustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen from?	New York
How many acres of land did Augustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen purchase in 1836?	6,642
What was the reason the Allen brothers purchased land in 1836?	founding a city
Who did the Allen brothers name the city they founded after?	Sam Houston
In what year was Sam Houston elected President of Texas?	1836
Who bought land along Buffalo Bayou to build a city?	Allen brothers
How much land did the Allen brothers buy?	6,642 acres
After which famous general was the city named?	Sam Houston
In 1860 what percentage of the city's population was slaves?	forty-nine percent
How much did the slave population of Houston increase from 1850 to 1860?	tripled
What event cause shipping activities to be suspended?	World War II
Petrochemical refineries and manufacturing plants were built due to the demand for what items during the war?	petroleum and synthetic rubber products
When was Ellington Field built?	during World War I
When was the Brown Shipbuilding Company founded?	1942
What was the policy created by President Roosevelt due to the boom in defense jobs?	non-discrimination for defense contractors
What kind of refineries were built along the Houston ship channel?	Petrochemical
To fill what type of demand were refineries built?	petroleum and synthetic rubber
What world event caused this increased need for petrochemicals?	World War II
Why did thousands of new workers flock to Houston?	defense jobs
Which president created a policy of non-discrimination for defense contractors?	President Roosevelt
In what year did the space shuttle Challenger explode after launch?	1986
Why did Houston's economy have problems in the late 1980's?	the nationwide recession
In the 1990's, what is something Houston did to try to diversify it's economy?	reduced its dependence on the petroleum industry
The petroleum industry has become a larger part of Houston's economy again for what reason?	the increase of oil prices in the 2000s
What caused population growth to decline  in the 1980s?	oil prices fell
When did Houston begin to regain its dependence on the oil industry?	2000s
What did Houston focus on after the 1990s recession to improve its economy?	aerospace and health care
When did Houston suffer an economic decline?	late 1980s
Which shuttle disintegrated in 1986 to cause a decline in the space industry?	Space Shuttle Challenger
What materials are underpinning the land surface of Houston?	unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands
Houston's geology was formed from river deposits from the erosion of what mountains?	Rocky Mountains
The sand and clay deposited onto decaying marine matter transformed into what?	oil and natural gas
What is halite?	a rock salt
What type of farming is Houston's surface soil good for?	rice farming
Besides sands, what are the foundations of Houston's land?	clays
How deep are the clay and sands foundations of Houston?	several miles
What geological event caused the foundations of the land beneath Houston?	erosion of the Rocky Mountains
What agricultural crop was farmed in the rich soils on the outlying areas of Houston?	rice
What did the decaying organics under the clay and sand deposits later form?	oil and natural gas
Downtown Houston consisted of what type of building in the 1960's?	mid-rise office structures
When were skyscrapers first built in Houston?	throughout the 1970s
What is the tallest building in Texas?	JPMorgan Chase Tower
How tall is the JP Morgan Chase Tower?	1,002-foot
What is the second tallest building in Houston?	Wells Fargo Plaza
In the 1970 s what developer built high rises in downtown Houston?	Gerald D. Hines
What was the highest building in Houston completed in 1982?	JPMorgan Chase Tower
What was the original name of the JP Morgan Chase Tower?	Texas Commerce Tower
What is the Chase Tower rated as in height in Texas?	tallest structure in Texas
By 2007 how many square feet of office space did Houston have?	43 million square feet
Houston ranked 3rd in which category by Forbes magazine in 2006?	Best Places for Business and Careers
How many offices have been established in Houston by foreign governments?	92
How many foreign governments maintain trade and commercial offices in Houston?	Forty
How many foreign banks operate in Houston?	Twenty-five
How many nations do the 25 foreign banks operating in Houston represent?	13
When did the Houston area rank first in Texas for business?	2006
How did Houston rank in the U.S. for business?	third in the U.S
How many consular offices does Houston have?	92
How many foreign countries have trade offices in Houston?	Forty
How many nations do the twenty-five foreign banks represent?	13
What is the largest annual event held in Houston?	Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo
How long does the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo last?	20 days
When is the annual Houston Pride Parade held?	the end of June
What is some other annual events held in Houston?	Houston Greek Festival, Art Car Parade, the Houston Auto Show, the Houston International Festival, and the Bayou City Art Festival
What art festival held in Houston is one of the top 5 in the US?	the Bayou City Art Festival
What event is the longest running in Houston?	Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo
When is the Houston Livestock show and Rodeo held?	March
When is the Houston Pride Parade held?	end of June
What form of car parade is held in Houston?	Art Car Parade
Where does the Bayou City Art Festival rank in U.S. art festivals?	one of the top five
What does Houston have the most of compared to other large US cities?	parks and green space
How many acres of land does Houston's green spaces cover?	19,600
Who manages Houston's green spaces?	the city
What is one of the largest skate parks in Texas?	The Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark
Who ranked Houston the 23rd most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the US?	Walk Score
How many acres of parks does Houston have?	56,405 acres
After whom is the Houston skate park named?	Joe Jamail
Who owns and runs the skate park in Houston?	city of Houston
For whom was the Uptown District water park in Houston named?	Gerald D. Hines
How does Houston rank as a walkable city?	23rd
Who is the current mayor of Houston?	Sylvester Turner
What form of government does Houston have?	strong mayoral form of municipal government
Who are Houston's elected officials?	the mayor, city controller and 16 members of the Houston City Council
What does Houston's mayor also serve as?	the city's chief administrator, executive officer, and official representative
Besides the general management of the city, Houston's mayor is also responsible for what?	seeing that all laws and ordinances are enforced
What is the form of city  government in Houston?	strong mayoral
What type of municipal elections are held in Texas?	nonpartisan
Besides the mayor and controller, how many members are there on the city council?	16
Who is the mayor of Houston since the last election?	Sylvester Turner
To what political party is Mayor Turner aligned?	Democrat
What was the first public television station in the US?	KUHT (HoustonPBS)
How is Houston Public Radio funded?	listener-funded
Houston Public Radio us comprised of how many stations?	two NPR member stations
What stations comprise Houston Public Radio?	KUHF (KUHF News) and KUHA (Classical 91.7)
Who owns the KUHT, KUHF, and KUHA stations?	The University of Houston
Which of Houston's television stations was the first public television station in the U.S.?	KUHT
What kind of radio station is KUHF?	news/talk radio
What type of radio station is KUHA?	classical music
Where is the Melcher Center located?	University of Houston
From what building do the two public radio stations broadcast?	Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting
Where is Houston located?	in Southeast Texas near the Gulf of Mexico
Where is Houston ranked among the most populous cities in the US?	fourth
What was the population of Houston in 2014?	2.239 million people
What is the fifth most populated metropolitan area in the US?	Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land
What is Houston the principle city of?	Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land
What is the most populous city in Texas?	Houston
How does Houston rank as to population in the U.S.?	fourth
According to the 2014 census, how many people live in Houston?	2.239 million
Houston is located in which Texas county?	Harris County
What is the land are of the City of Houston?	599.6 square miles
What commodity was Houston known for in 1860?	cotton
What type of roads converged in Houston?	rail lines
Which Civil War general used Houston as a headquarters?	General John Bankhead Magruder
For what battle was Houston used as an organization point ?	Battle of Galveston
What was Houston known for by 1890?	railroad center of Texas
What event caused 2.5 million people to evacuate through Houston?	Hurricane Rita
The evacuation of the Gulf coast before Hurricane Rita was what type of evacuation?	largest urban evacuation
How many people evacuated to Houston after Hurricane Katrina?	150,000
Fearing traffic problems, how many people refused to leave Galveston before Hurricane Ike?	forty percent
When did Hurricane Ike hit the Houston area?	September 2008
What is the largest city in the U.S. without formal zoning?	Houston
Besides parking requirements, what land use regulations does Houston have?	mandatory lot size
What is Houston's land use policies credited with producing?	affordable housing
What serious situation of 2008 was Houston spared?	real estate crisis
How many building permits were issued in 2008 in Houston?	42,697
Of what is Houston a center?	oilfield equipment
What has the Houston ship channel served to promote into success?	petrochemical complex
Where does the Port of Houston rank in international commerce?	first
Where does Houston rate in the size ranking of world ports?	tenth
What lines begin or end in Houston?	pipelines
What area of Houston hosts performing arts?	Houston Theater District
Of what is Houston second in performing arts?	theater seats
Besides Jones Hall, what other organization is housed in the Theater District?	Hobby Center for the Performing Arts
To what type of arts is Houston home?	major performing arts
To what group is Jones Hall home?	Houston Symphony Orchestra
How much area of downtown Houston does the Theater District cover?	17-block area
What place produces live concerts, plays and comedy?	Bayou Music Center
Where is Space Center Houston?	Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center
What tourist offerings does the Space Center have?	interactive exhibits
What is the Galleria the largest of in Texas?	shopping mall
Which stadium is located in east downtown in Houston?	BBVA Compass Stadium
Where in Houston is the Toyota Center located?	downtown
What was the first indoor stadium in the world?	NRG Astrodome
What is the home of the Texans named?	NRG Stadium
What is the name of the stadium that hosts the Houston Astros?	Minute Maid Park
What is Houston's one Catholic university?	The University of St. Thomas
What famous research university is located in Houston?	Rice University
What is the student enrollment of Rice University?	6,000
When was Houston Baptist University founded?	1960
What area in Houston is the home of the Houston Baptist University?	Sharpstown
Where in Houston is the world's largest grouping of healthcare institutions?	Texas Medical Center
How many non profit organizations are members of the Medical Center?	49
How many people are employed in the Texas Medical Center?	73,600
How many hospitals belong to the Medical Center group of organizations?	13
What is the name of the first air emergency service?	Life Flight
Until 2010, which airline made Houston its headquarters?	Continental Airlines
Where is United Airlines' largest air hub?	Bush Intercontinental
With which airline did Continental Airlines merge?	United Airlines
How many daily flights did United Airlines offer from Houston?	700
In what year was Bush Intercontinental named a model by U.S. Customs?	2007
What city has more Fortune 500 headquarters than Houston?	New York City
What part of Houston ranks first in the U.S. in international tonnage?	Port of Houston
What is Houston's nickname?	Space City
What is varied about Houston's population?	ethnic and religious backgrounds
What city is the most diverse in Texas?	Houston
What kind of winter weather does Houston have?	mild winters
What is the usual mean temperature in Houston?	53.1 °F
What type of weather is a rarity in Houston?	Snowfall
When was the coldest reported temperature in Houston?	January 18, 1940
How much rain does Houston usually get per year?	49.8 in
How much money does the University of Houston attract to Houston a year?	$1.1 billion
How many local jobs are produced by the University of Houston?	24,000
How many student graduate from the University of Houston per year?	12,500
Where do most university graduates stay after acquiring a degree?	in Houston
Even after five years, how many graduates remain in Houston?	80.5%
When was Houston founded?	1836
Where is Allen's Landing?	Buffalo Bayou
When was the City of Houston incorporated?	June 5, 1837
For whom was Houston named?	Sam Houston
For what battle was Sam Houston known as commander?	Battle of San Jacinto
In what part of the United States is Houston located?	South
What part of the Houston population is growing?	international community
How many of the people who live in Houston were foreign born?	1.1 million
What percentage of Houston's foreign born population is from south of the U.S.-Mexican border?	two-thirds
How many foreign born Houstonites are from Asia?	one in five
What event caused an increase in effort to promote the Houston port?	hurricane
Where was oil found that promoted the development of the oil industry in Houston?	Spindletop
Near what Texas city is the Spindletop oil field located?	Beaumont
In what year did Houston's population reach 78,000?	1910
Who approved the improvement project for the Houston ship channel?	President Theodore Roosevelt
What is the square mile area of Houston?	656.3 square miles
How much of Houston's total area is water?	22.3 square miles
In what topography is Houston located?	gulf coastal plain
How is the vegetation of the area classified?	temperate grassland and forest
What kind of weather event is a recurring problem for Houston?	flooding
How many days per year are Houston temperatures over 90 degrees?	106.5
How many days a year do Houston temperatures average above 100 degrees?	4.6
What weather factor produces a higher heat index?	humidity
What weather factor provides little in heat relief in Houston?	Winds
What was the highest temperature recorded in Houston?	109 °F
What is the political climate of Houston?	divided
Who in Houston tends to vote Republican?	wealthier areas
How do the working and minority areas vote in Houston?	Democratic
What percent of Hispanics vote Democrat?	62 percent
What percent of non-Hispanic whites vote Republican?	68 percent
How much of Houston's population is white?	51%
What percentage of Houston's population is African-American?	25%
What group makes up 6 % of Houston's population?	Asians
According to the 2000 census, what is the population of Houston?	1,953,631
What was the percentage of whites in 1970?	62.4%
What was Houston's gross domestic product in 2012?	$489 billion
Where in the rankings does Houston's gross domestic product place it compared to other U.S. domestic areas?	fourth-largest
How many other countries have a gross domestic product exceeding Houston's?	26
How much did oil and gas exploration and production make up Houston's gross product?	26.3%
Under what category does oil and gas exploration fall?	mining
What Houston medical school ranks in the top ten U.S. medical schools?	Baylor College of Medicine
How does MD Anderson Cancer Center rank in US hospitals dealing with cancer care?	one of the top two
What type of treatments does the Menninger Clinic offer?	psychiatric
What is the third largest acute care center in the U.S.?	Triumph Healthcare
Where is the Triumph Healthcare hospital headquartered?	Houston
Where did Houston rank for job creation in 2013?	#1
How many jobs did Houston add for every one lost?	two
How many foreign companies relocated to Houston?	more than 100
On what Forbes list did Houston appear in 2013?	Best Places for Business and Careers
What was Houston the first city to do regain after the recession caused job loss?	jobs lost
How many community colleges serve Houston?	Three
How are the Houston Community College and Lone Star College systems ranked among educational facilities?	within the 10 largest
What college system serves most of Houston?	Houston Community College System
Which community college system serves the northwestern and northeastern areas?	Lone Star College System
What part of Houston does San Jacinto College serve?	southeastern
When did Houston start using light rail lines?	January 1, 2004
How long was the first light rail line in Houston?	about 8 miles
Where did the Red Line rail track terminate?	NRG Park
How many new rail lines are planned for the future in Houston light rail?	five
How many passengers used Amtrak to embark at Houston?	20,327
What is the second airport that serves Houston?	William P. Hobby Airport
What was the earlier name of Hobby Airport?	Houston International Airport
When was Houston International Airport renamed to Hobby Airport?	1967
Which airline now offers international flights from Hobby Airport?	Southwest Airlines
For what is Hobby Airport ranked in the top five performing airports?	customer service
How many estimated active faults does Houston have?	300
What is the total length of the Houston faults?	310 miles
What geological feature has been removed underground to cause sinking in areas of southeast Houston?	water
Which of the geologic faults run through the center of Houston?	Long Point–Eureka Heights
What is a slow smooth rate of movement of faults called?	fault creep
What system of incorporation was used in 1837 by Houston?	ward system
What is the present day system being used by Houston for representation?	Houston City Council districts
What highway is used to designate locations in Houston?	Interstate 610 Loop
Beside older pre-World War II residences, what is found inside the Loop?	central business district
What highway circles the outer areas of Houston?	Beltway 8
What area is located at Post Oak Boulevard and Westheimer Road?	Uptown District
When did the Uptown district expand?	1970s and early 1980s
What is the tallest building in Uptown Houston?	Williams Tower
How many square feet of office space did Houston have in Uptown in 2002?	23 million
Until 1999 what was the Williams Tower known as?	Transco Tower
Besides oil and gas, what is Houston known for?	biomedical research and aeronautics
What other industry is a large part of Houston's economy?	Houston Ship Channel
What designation does the Globalization and World Cities Study Group give Houston?	global city
In what did Houston pass New York City in 2013?	market for exports
How much in dollars did the Houston area export in 2012?	$110.3 billion
How did Kiplinger's Personal Finance Best Cities rate Houston?	top ranking
When did Houston receive a ranking in the top of Kiplinger's Best cities list?	2008
Where did Forbes magazine place Houston for technological innovation?	fourth
Where did Houston place for Fortune 500 companies?	second
When was Houston ranked the best city for shopping?	2010
For which sports team category does Houston not have a team ?	National Hockey League
Since what year have the Houston Rockets been a Houston team?	1971
When were the Houston Astros formed?	1962
Until 1965 what were the Houston Astros called?	Colt .45s
When were the Houston Astros in the World Series?	2005
How many members did the original Houston city council have?	14
How many at-large positions were there originally?	five
What areas do at-large council members represent?	entire city
What population figure needs to be passed to add at large council members?	2.1 million
How many at-large council members were added in the 2011 elections?	two
How many students does the University of Houston have?	40,000
Where in Houston is the University of Houston campus located?	southeast
How many separate universities does Houston have?	Four
What university is located in Houston'd third ward?	Texas Southern University
What kind of college is Texas Southern University?	largest historically black
What is Houston's major newspaper?	Houston Chronicle
Who owns the Houston Chronicle?	Hearst Corporation
When did Chronicle rival newspaper, the Houston Post, cease operations?	1995
Whose family owned the Houston Post?	Bill Hobby
What is the other newspaper that serves Houston?	Houston Press
What is the type of freeway system that serves Houston?	hub-and-spoke
What encircles the downtown area of Houston?	Interstate 610
What is the diameter of the downtown area?	8-mile
What part of the freeway system is Beltway 8?	middle loop
What is the diameter of the center of Beltway 8?	23 miles
How does Houston's George Bush Intercontinental Airport rank for number of passengers?	tenth-busiest
How many destinations does George Bush Intercontinental Airport serve?	182
When did the U.S. Department of Transportation name IAH as fastest growing of U.S. airports?	2006
Where is the Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center located?	George Bush Intercontinental Airport
What is Houston's primary airport?	George Bush Intercontinental Airport
Where was copper mostly mined at in the Roman era?	Cyprus
What term does the name copper originate from?	сuprum
What componds are common in copper?	copper(II) salts
What is one color common in copper salts?	blue
What is the name of the color pigment on building structures that are made using copper.	green verdigris
When was copper first known to have been used?	9000 BC
In what area is the first recorded use of copper?	Middle East
When was copper thought to have been discovered in China?	2800 BC
Copper smelting resulted in the development of what other metal smelting?	iron smelting
When did Natural bronze start to be used by the general public?	5500 BC
What material were the gates of the Temple of Jerusalem made from?	Corinthian bronze
How is Corinthian bronze made?	depletion gilding
Where do archeologists believe that alchemy was first practiced?	Alexandria
What metal was used to make surgical equipment in ancient India?	copper
What is the name of the battery that was developed using copper in 248 BC?	Baghdad Battery
What metal is used most often in electrical wiring?	copper
What is the most important market for copper today?	Electrical wiring
How much of mined copper is used for cables and electrical wiring?	Roughly half
What metal are most overhead electrical wires made out of?	aluminium
What is one property of copper that makes it so useful in electrical wiring?	high electrical conductivity
What word means that bacteria won't grow on a substrate?	biostatic
What has pure copper been replaced with in the building of ships?	Muntz metal
Because of copper's biostatic properties where is a common use for copper?	ships
In the aquaculture industry what is copper alloys commonly used to make?	netting materials
Name a property that makes copper a good material to use in marine environments?	corrosion-resistant
What group of the periodic table is copper in?	group 11
Name a property that copper, silver and gold have in common.	one s-orbital electron
What makes copper bondings weaker than other metals?	filled d-electron shell
How is copper normally supplied?	fine-grained polycrystalline form
What is a weaker form of copper than fine-grained polycrystalline?	monocrystalline forms
What is the concentration of copper in the earths crust.	50 parts per million
How large was the biggest find of copper?	420 tonnes
What year was the largest find of copper discovered?	1857
How big is the largest copper crystal that has been found?	4.4×3.2×3.2 cm
Where was the largest mass of copper found?	Michigan, US
What was copper called in Greece?	chalkos
In what area was copper first mined?	Cyprus
What is the Greek goddess that symbolizes copper?	Aphrodite
What is the Roman goddess that symbolizes copper?	Venus
What property does copper have that links it to Aphrodite and Venus?	lustrous beauty
What are compounds that have a carbon-copper bond called?	organocopper compounds
What does organocopper compounds reactions toward oxygen form?	copper(I) oxide
What is produced when copper compounds are treated with organolithium reagents?	Gilman reagent
Coupling products can be made by substituting Gilman reagent with what?	alkyl halides
Which form of copper is shock sensitive?	Copper(I) acetylide
Who used copper to produce art?	Renaissance sculptors
What is the photographic technology that uses copper called?	daguerreotype
What famous NY city landmark is made from copper?	Statue of Liberty
What famous explorers ships was one of the first to have it's hulls made of copper?	Christopher Columbus
When did The Norddeutsche Affinerie electroplating plant first begin production?	1830
What property of copper increases the efficiency of electrical motors?	conductivity
What percentage of electrical consumption does motor systems use globally?	43%-46%
What percentage of electrical consumption does motor systems use in industry?	69%
What does the acronym NEMA stand for?	National Electrical Manufacturers Association
By using copper motor rotor technology it is allowing industry to exceed what standards?	efficiency standards
Name a compond that can mobilize sold copper?	Chromobacterium violaceum
What fungi can grow in copper metalliferous soils?	ericoid mycorrhizal fungi
What fungus protects pine trees from copper toxicity?	Suillus luteus
What fungus grows from gold mining solution?	Aspergillus niger
What fungus helps to soften heavy metal sulfides?	fungus Aspergillus
What is an intrinsic property of copper-alloy touch surfaces?	antimicrobial
355 copper alloys have been proven to kill what percentage of bacteria?	99.9%
What does the acronym EPA stand for?	Environmental Protection Agency
How many copper alloys has the EPA approved as antimicrobial materials?	355
What disease do hospitals hope to prevent by installing copper doornobs?	Legionnaires' disease
What are copper compounds in liquid form used for?	wood preservative
What does copper wires along with zinc on roofs help to prevent?	moss
What function does copper serve when used in textile fibers?	antimicrobial protective fabrics
How is copper used with nickel?	as a base
What is used to treat structures for dry rot?	Copper compounds
How long has copper been in use?	at least 10,000 years
What percentage of copper has been extracted since 1900?	95%
How much of mined cooper has been extracted in the last 24 years?	more than half
How much copper is estimated to exsist on earth?	1014 tons
What is a major source of cooper in modern times?	Recycling
What did Romans use as money in the 6th through 3rd centuriesBC?	copper lumps
What became more important than the copper value for Roman coins?	the shape and look
Who had his own coins produced out of brass?	Julius Caesar
During the 6th through 3rd centuries BC how much copper was mined in Rome?	15,000 t
Cctavianus Augustus Caesar had his coins made out of what alloys?	Cu-Pb-Sn alloys
What percentage of copper is used in electrical wires?	60%
What percentage of copper is used in roofing and plumbing?	20%
What percentage of copper is used in industrial machinery?	15%
What property does combining copper with brass or bronze create?	hardness
What is a metal that copper is combined with to create a greater hardness?	brass
What is the explanation for copper's capacity for electrical conductivity?	The softness
What metal has a higher thermal conductivity than copper?	silver
What is the maximum premissible current density in open air of copper?	3.1×106 A/m2
What occurs when copper is placed touching another metal?	corrosion
What happens to copper if an electrical current gets too high?	it begins to heat excessively
In what form is copper extracted?	copper sulfides
From what types of mines is copper extracted?	open pit mines
What percentage of copper do the deposits have that are extracted?	0.4 to 1.0% copper
What country was the top producer of copper in 2005?	Chile
What is the name of the process being considered in Arizona that allows copper to be recovered?	in-situ leach process
What percent of copper is recyclable?	100%
What percentage of copper that has been mined is still being used today?	80%
What other metal besides copper is 100% recyclable?	aluminium
Name a metal that is recycled more often than copper?	aluminium
What is the amount of copper in use, per capita, globally?	35–55 kg
What pigment color is natural to copper?	green
What property does the final patina on cooper have?	highly resistant to atmospheric corrosion
What mixture of compounds is the final patina?	carbonate and sulfate
What conditions effect the mixture of carbonate and sulfate in copper?	environmental
What can be done to copper to give it a certain look?	finished
What are copper salts sometimes used for?	suicide attempts
When ingested in large amounts what does copper salts produce in humans?	copper toxicity
What is the minimum amount of copper rabbits should have in their diet?	3 ppm
What is a major benefit to rabbits having a higher concentration of copper in their diet?	growth rates
What amount of copper salt is toxic in animals?	30 mg/kg
When did Britain first use brass?	3rd–2nd century BC
Who were the first copper miners in North America?	Native Americans
Where was native copper extracted with primitive tools between 800 and 1600?	Isle Royale
What country had a strong copper production in 1000 AD	Peru
When did commercial production of copper begin?	early 20th century
How many isotopes are there of copper?	29
What are the two stable isotopes of cooper?	63Cu and 65Cu
Which isotope makes up about 69% of natural copper?	63Cu
What is the half life of the copper isotope 68mCu?	3.8 minutes
What is the half life of the copper isotope 67Cu?	61.83 hours
What is the alloy of copper and nickel called?	cupronickel
what is the alloy of copper and nickel used for?	low-denomination coins
What is the metal composition of a US nickel?	75% copper and 25% nickel
What extraordinary property does the alloy made up of 90% copper and 10% nickel possess?	resistance to corrosion
What color is created when the alloys of copper and aluminium are combined?	golden
What is the name of the componds that has more than one alcohol functional group?	Polyols
What are copper salts used to test?	reducing sugars
How is the presence of sugar shown by using Benedict's reagent and Fehling's solution?	color change
What color does the copper salts turn to using Benedict's reagent and Fehling's solution if sugar is present?	reddish
What does Schweizer's reagent dissolve?	cellulose
What started about 4000 years after copper smelting was discovered?	Alloying copper with tin to make bronze
What are the first datings of Bronze artifacts from the Vinca culture?	4500 BC
When did the Bronze Age began in Southeastern Europe?	3700–3300 BC
What was the transition between the Neolithic period and the bronze age called?	Chalcolithic
What is an alloy of copper and zinc?	Brass
What is the level of copper in the human body?	1.4 to 2.1 mg per kg of body mass
How is copper absorbed in humans?	in the gut
What is copper bound with when it is sent to the liver?	albumin
What protein carries the majority of copper in blood?	Ceruloplasmin
How can the body get rid of excess copper?	via bile
What is the average concentration of copper in ores?	0.6%
What are most commercial ores?	sulfides
What happens to the silicate slag  during the flash smelting process?	floats on top
What does heating copper ore materials with silica remove?	iron
What do the sulfides convert to after the copper matte is roasted?	oxides
How many metals have a natural color that isn't gray?	four
What color is pure copper?	orange-red
What does copper aquire when exposed to air?	reddish tarnish
The energy difference between filled 3d and half-empty 4s atomic shells corresponds to what color of light?	orange light
What color is the metal caesium?	yellow
What has copper been used for since ancient times?	architectural material
In recent times what is one interior use copper been expanded to include?	antimicrobial indoor products
What is an important benefit to using copper as an architectural material?	low thermal movement
How long has copper been used in building construction?	hundreds or thousands of years
What is the benefit to using copper for things such as counter tops and hand rails?	antimicrobial
Self-image, self-esteem, and individuality relate to what?	A psychological identity
What aspect or type of identity does Weinreich single out?	ethnic identity
What psychological concept does Weinreich state as between the past and future?	identity
A person's identity is defined as the totality of what?	one's self-construal
The central task for psychologists, sociologists, and anthropologists is to describe what topics?	individual and group identity
Who developed the ISA?	Weinreich
ISA stands for what?	Identity Structure Analysis
Identity diffusion, foreclosure, and crisis are categories of what?	Weinreich's identity variant
Those with high levels of identity diffusion are classified as what?	diffused
Those with low levels of identity diffusion are classified as what?	foreclosed or defensive
An adolescent going through a family break up turning into an adult in a stable marriage is given as an example of change in what?	the identity variant
What level of identity diffusion is interpreted as the norm?	an optimal level
What group has shifted the focus of research in identity?	Anthropologists
What does a researcher have to identify to carry out empirical research?	an appropriate analytical tool
What researcher advocated for focus on the boundaries of ethnic groups rather than the cultural aspects of ethnic groups?	Barth
If identity is a virtual site, what do boundaries supply to the virtual site?	the framework
Boundaries are frequently used by researchers to help define what?	identity
What are gender identity, ethnic identity, and occupational identity aspects of?	one's total identity
How one construes oneself now and in the future differs considerably because of what 2 things?	age and accumulated experiences
The young child, the adolescent, the young adult and the older adult are phases of what?	the life cycle
The salient experiential markers one uses to define one's past self differ based on the age that one was at what?	the height of one's powers
What is distinct from the self?	identity
What can the literature of self-psychology offer insight into?	how identity is maintained
What have theorists shown interest in relating to the self-concept?	self-esteem
The I and the Me are two areas of interest in what?	self-psychology
Self-psychology is compelled to investigate how personal self relates to what?	the social environment
What two factors are focused on when explaining an individual's actions within a group?	mental events and states
What are individual cognition and collective behavior are levels of?	identity
What term have Anthropologists employed to refer to the Eriksonian idea of selfhood?	identity
Modern concerns with ethnicity and social movements in the 1970's led what group to be more interested in identity?	anthropologists
Until recently, what approach was used to refer to qualities of sameness in relation to a person's connection to others?	the Eriksonian approach
What are the two types of group boundaries?	inclusive or exclusive
A marker that imposes restriction on the behavior of others is what kind of boundary?	exclusive
A marker that people are ready and willing to associate with is what kind of boundary?	inclusive
What boundary is given as an example that can be inclusive or exclusive?	language
What identity status paradigm emerged due to the work of James Marcia?	Neo-Eriksonian
The Neo-Eriksonian identity status paradigm focuses on what twin concepts?	exploration and commitment
In the Neo-Eriksonian identity status paradigm, exploration and commitments determine what in large part?	any individual's sense of identity
What do many people gain from their identity groups?	a sense of positive self-esteem
People favoring those in their group over outsiders, is an example of what?	discrimination
Belonging and discrimination are both important to researchers working in what tradition?	the social identity tradition
Distinction between in and out groups has been shown to affect people's evaluations of others in work related to what?	social identity theory
What approach takes the sense of self and belonging as a fixed thing?	a primordialist approach
The view that identity is based on a political choice of characteristics is rooted in what theory?	social constructionist theory
Primordialist and social constructionist views need to be understood in what contexts?	political and historical contexts
Various research traditions are using what lens to examine phenomena?	the lens of identity
What stigma do correctional officers have to deal with?	glorified maids
The implications of identity and identity construction are discussed in what settings?	occupational settings
What are people in stigmatized jobs forced to create?	an identity they can live with
What are the two examples give for justifications and values for occupational choices?	workplace satisfaction and overall quality of life
What is it called when someone aspires to the characteristics of significant others?	benign
What is it called when someone wants to dissociate from the characteristics of significant others?	malign
Dissociating from the characteristics of significant others is a process of what?	defensive contra-identification
The formation of identity occurs through identifications with whom?	significant others
What may a person display in terms of both exploration and commitments?	relative weakness or relative strength
What is the permutation when a person lacks exploration and commitment?	identity diffusion
What is the permutation when a person has not chosen goals in the past but is willing to in the future?	identity foreclosure
What is the permutation when a person is ready to make commitments but unable to commit?	identity moratorium
What is the permutation when a person commits to identity choices?	identity achievement
Many scholars confuse identity as a category of practice and what other category?	category of analysis
What do many scholars demonstrate a tendency towards?	their own preconceptions of identity
The idea that identity is made of components that are identified by individuals is what idea?	the idea of identification
Some scholars try to introduce new concepts to capture the fluid qualities of what?	human social self-expression
What is it impossible to do with identity?	define it empirically
What is identified as determining how a person views him or herself to a significant degree?	Gender identity
What are racial, religious, ethnic, and occupational aspects aspects of?	identity
Identity refers to the capacity for self-reflection and awareness in what scientific study?	cognitive psychology
Who was one of the earliest psychologists to take an explicit interest in identity?	Erik Erikson
What distinction is sometimes referred to as the self?	ego identity
The personal idiosyncrasies that separate individuals are called what?	the personal identity
What are the 3 names for the collection of a person's social roles?	the social identity or the cultural identity
In what tradition is Erikson's work to track identity formation throughout a lifetime?	the psychodynamic tradition
Whose definition of identity closely follows Erikson's?	Laing's
One person's perception of another's perception is an example of what concept?	metaperspective of self
The person, aspects of self, and personal characteristics displayed to others are components of what?	self/identity
Who formulated the classifications of strategic manipulator, pastiche personality and the relational self?	Kenneth Gergen
In what classification is a person who regards all experiences are role play and becomes alienated from his or her social self?	The strategic manipulator
In what classification is a person who gives up the chance for a true self and adopts social perceptions of him or herself?	The pastiche personality
In what classification is a person who gives up their exclusive sense of self and defines him or herself only in terms of social engagement?	the relational self
The strategic manipulator, pastiche personality, and relational self are linked to the rise of what culture?	postmodern culture
What concept helps map and define people's experiences of self in society?	the concept of boundaries
What is a volatile, flexible, and abstract thing?	identity
Language, dress, behavior, and choice of space are affected by recognition by what group?	other social beings
What do markers help create?	boundaries
Markers can be used to exert what on other people?	influence
What is the third fastest growing economy in India?	Himachal Pradesh
What is Himachal Pradesh ranked in the highest per capita of Indian States?	fourth
What enables Himachal to sell hydroelectricity to other states?	Abundance of perennial rivers
What three things is the economy of the state dependent on?	hydroelectric power, tourism, and agriculture
What other Indian states does it sell hydroelectricity to?	Delhi, Punjab, and Rajasthan
When did the Chief Commissioners Province of HP come into being?	15 April 1948
When was the State of Himchal Pradesh Act passed?	18 December 1970
When did Himachal emerge as the 18th state of the Indian Union?	25 January 1971
When did Himachal Pradesh become a union territory?	1 November 1956
Why did the  Chief Commissioners Province of HP come into being?	as a result of integration of 28 petty princely states
When did Congress secure an absolute majority?	In the assembly elections held in November 2012
How many seats did Congress win?	36 of the 68 seats
Who was sworn in as HImachal Pradesh's Chief Minister for a record sixth term?	Virbhadra Singh
Who administered the oath of office and secrecy?	Governor Urmila Singh
Where was the oath of office and secrecy taken?	historic Ridge Maidan in Shimla
Himachal is extremely rich in?	hydro electric resources
Who is the first state in India to have every family have a bank account?	Himachal
How much hydroelectric power can be generated?	20,300MW
What has rapidly spread due to economic increase?	Luxury hotels, food and franchisees of recognised brands e.g. Mc Donalds, KFC and Pizza hut
What is current GDP estimated at?	₹ 254 billion
What is the state well known for?	handicrafts
The majority of all households in Himachal own a what?	pit-loom
What is considered pure and used as a ritual cloth?	Wool
What is Kullu famous for?	shawls with striking patterns and vibrant colours
What are Kangra and Dharamshala famous for?	Kangra miniature paintings
What tribes inhibited the area that now constitutes Himachal Pradesh?	Koilis, Halis, Dagis, Dhaugris, Dasa, Khasas, Kinnars, and Kirats
What time periods did the Indus Valley civilization flourish?	between 2250 and 1750 BCE
Who conquered Kangara?	Mahmud Ghaznavi
When did Mahmud Ghanznavi conquer Kangara?	10th century
Who marched through the lower states and captured and forts and fought many battles?	Timur and Sikander Lodi
What does Himachal have a rich heritage of?	handicrafts
Has the demand increased or decreased for handcrafts?	increased
What handcrafts do they include?	woolen and pashmina shawls
What declined under competition?	aesthetic and tasteful handicrafts
Has the demand increased inside or outside the country?	within and outside the country
Who heads the Himachal Pradesh?	Deputy Commissioner or District Magistrate
Who maintains law and order?	Superintendent of Police
Who assists the Superintendent of Police?	the officers of the Himachal Police Service and other Himachal Police officials.
When did the era of planning start in Himachal Pradesh?	1948
How much was allocated?	₹ 52.7 million
What kind of plan was it?	five-year plan
Where does Himachal Pradesh rank in per capita?	fourth
What was more than 50% used on?	road construction
Where did the state place on population chart?	21st
Who was 22nd of chart?	Tripura
Who was top ranked in population strength?	Kangra district
Who was last in population strength?	Lahaul Spiti
What other religions form a small percentage?	Buddhism and Sikhism
Who are mainly Buddhists?	Lahaulis of Lahaul and Spiti
What is the Muslim population in Himachal Pradesh?	slightly 2.18%
Where do Sikhs mostly live?	towns and cities
HOw much of the population do Sikh's make up?	1.16%
When did the Gurkhas come into power?	1768
Where did the Gurkhas come into power?	Nepal
Who lead the Gorkas to siege Kangra?	Amar Singh Thapa
In 1806 who did Gorkas defeat with the help of provincial chiefs?	Sansar Chand Katoch, the ruler of Kangra,
Who rendered help to the British government during the revolt?	rulers of Chamba, Bilaspur, Bhagal and Dhami
What occurs in the climatic conditions of Himachal?	great variation
What is the climate like?	varies from hot and subhumid tropical
What three seasons does Himachal experience?	summer, winter, and rainy season
How long does summer last?	mid-April till the end of June
How long does winter last?	late November till mid March.
What does the Himachal legislature consist of?	elected members and special office bearers such as the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker who are elected by the members
Who presides over meetings?	the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker in the Speaker's absence
Who is the Judiciary system made up of?	Himachal Pradesh High Court and a system of lower courts.
Who is the head of state appointed by the President of India?	The Governor
How long are the terms of office?	5 years, unless the Assembly is dissolved prior to the completion of the term
What is Railway Himachal famous for?	its narrow gauge tracks railways
What are the 2 narrow gauge railways in the Railway Himachal?	UNESCO World Heritage Kalka-Shimla Railway and another one is Pathankot–Jogindernagar
What are the other railways being proposed in the state?	Baddi-Bilaspur, Dharamsala-Palampur and Bilaspur-Manali-Leh.
What is being conducted to extend the railway?	survey
What is the total length of the railways?	259 kilometres (161 mi)
Who is famous for natural beauty?	Himachal Pradesh
What years was the Anglo-Gorkha War?	1814–1816
What does HIma mean in Sanskirt?	snow
What is the literal meaning of Himachal Pradesh?	In the lap of Himalayas
Who was one of the great sanskirt scholars of Himachal Pradesh?	Acharya Diwakar Datt Sharma
Who has an active community of journalists and publishers?	Himachal Pradesh
What are the newspapers famous for?	published in more than one language, and their reach extends to almost all the Hindi-speaking states
What is available in Shimla and district headquarters?	All major English daily newspapers
What are the newspapers that are in Hindi and read widely?	Aapka Faisla, Amar Ujala, Panjab Kesari, Divya Himachal
What has grown significantly?	Radio and TV
Who was elected as chief minister of the state of India?	Virbhadra Singh
How many seats did the BJP win?	41 of the 68 seats
Who is BJP's Chief MInister of Himachal Pradesh?	Prem Kumar Dhumal
When did the BJP secure a landslide victory?	December 2007
When was he sworn in?	30 December 2007
What type of agriculture is in the state?	seed potato, ginger, vegetables, vegetable seeds, mushrooms, chicory seeds, hops, olives and fig
Who is the largest vegetable producing district in the state?	Solan
Where is seed potato mostly grown?	Shimla, Kullu and Lahaul areas
What is the district of Sirmaur famous for?	growing flowers, and is the largest producer of flowers in the state
What is the state deficient in?	food grains
Who was largely untouched by external customs?	Himachal
What has made the state change very rapidly?	technological advancements
What are the common languages spoken?	Hindi, Pahari, Dogri, Mandeali Kangri, Mandyali, Gojri and Kinnauri
Who makes up the tribal populations?	Kinnars, Pangawals, Sulehria, and Lahaulis
Himachal is?	multireligional, multicultural as well as multilingual state like other Indian states
When was the state run Nehru Government Engineering College started?	2006 at Sundernagar
What is the most renowned argricultural institues?	CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishwavidyalya Palampur
What are a few pioneer universities in the state?	The Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Himachal Pradesh University Shimla, Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology (IHBT, CSIR Lab)
What is Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar University earned?	unique distinction in India for imparting teaching, research and extension education in horticulture, forestry and allied disciplines
What is Doordarshan?	state-owned television broadcaster
What is provided by BSNL and others throughout the state?	Dial-up access
What is available in few cities?	Private FM stations
Who are the cellular phone operators available?	BSNL, Reliance Infocomm, Tata Indicom, Tata Docomo, Aircel, Vodafone, Idea Cellular and Airtel
What is All India Radio?	public radio station
Where do 90% of the population live in Himachal Pradesh?	villages and towns
No single house is without?	a toilet
What are the villages well connected to?	roads, public health centers, and now with Lokmitra kendra using high-speed broadband
What is Himachal Pradesh rank according to the 2005 Transparency international survey?	second-least corrupt state in the country after Kerala
What are the most visited places in the country?	The hill stations
What is nonverbal communication?	conveying meaning in the form of non-word messages
What is one example of nonverbal communication?	body language
What is an example of a voluntary intent of a message related to nonverbal communication?	shaking a hand
What is an example of an involuntary intent of a message related to nonverbal communication?	sweating
What percentage of human communication occurs through nonverbal facial expressions?	55%
Why do fungi communicate?	to coordinate and organize their growth and development
How do fungi communicate with insects?	through biochemicals of biotic origin
How many primary signalling molecules are known to organize different behavioral patterns?	five
What enables an organism to differentiate between self and other?	interpretation processes
What is an example of "noise" that is filtered out through the interpretation processes?	similar molecules without biotic content
What acts are included in communication between parties?	confer knowledge and experiences, give advice and commands, and ask questions
The forms of the acts included in communication depends on what?	abilities of the group communicating
What is one dimension that communication is typically described along?	channel (through which medium)
What is one target of communication?	another person or being
Who said that we should examine the impact a message has on the recipient of the message?	Wilbur Schram
What is human communication defined as?	a system of symbols
When does language learning primarily occur most intensively?	during human childhood
How many human languages are there?	thousands
What do human languages use to communicate with others?	patterns of sound or gesture for symbols
What is an example of a language that is not restricted to properties of human language?	programming languages
What is some factors in family communication that could affect communication between family members?	family rules, family roles or family dialectics
What are some time periods that family communication study looks at?	marriage, parenthood or divorce
What does trusted communication in a family lead to?	a well constructed family
How is animal communication defined?	any behavior of one animal that affects the current or future behavior of another animal
What is the study of animal communication called?	zoo semiotics
What is the study of human communication called?	anthroposemiotics
What are some fields of knowledge concerning the animal world that have been revolutionizes in the 21st century?	animal emotions, animal culture and learning
What field of communication has been investigated more thoroughly?	vibrational communication
Who introduced the first major model for communication in 1949?	Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver
What did the first model for communication consist of?	sender, channel, and receiver
What was the sender in the initial model?	the part of a telephone a person spoke into
What was the channel in the initial model?	the telephone itself
What was the receiver in the initial model?	the part of the phone where one could hear the other person
A simple model is also referred to as what?	transmission model
What kind of message is sent in a simple model?	a message in natural language
In what form is the information or content sent in a simple model?	spoken language
How is information sent through a simple model?	from an emisor/ sender/ encoder
What are the strengths of the simple model?	simplicity, generality, and quantifiability
How are the sender and receiver connected in a slightly more complex form of communication model?	reciprocally
What is the model of communication in which the sender and receiver are connected reciprocally called?	constitutive model or constructionist view
What is communication viewed as?	a conduit
What is something that may alter the intended meaning of a message?	different regional traditions
What is something that may cause the reception and decoding of the content of a message to be faulty?	communication noise
What is a form of communication observed within plants?	between plant cells
What part of a plant communicates with rhizome bacteria, fungi, and insects within the soil?	roots
What is the meaning of the word neuron in Greek?	vegetable fiber
How do plants communicate to warn nearby plants of danger?	via volatiles
How are the plant roots able to communicate with rhizome bacteria, fungi, and insects within the soil?	the decentralized "nervous system" of plants
What describes communication as creative and dynamic rather than discrete?	Theories of coregulation
What ancient civilization did Harold Innis use as an example of his theory?	Egypt
Who theorized that the types of media people use to communicate will offer different possibilities for the shape of society?	Harold Innis
What did Harold Innis call papyrus?	Space Binding
What did Space Binding make possible for the ancient Egyptian civilizations?	transmission of written orders across space, empires
Why do communications professionals typically specialize in only one or two areas of communication?	it is difficult to develop such a broad range of skills
Good people skills is a qualification that is important to what profession?	communications
What kind of companies may engage in only a few types of communications?	Companies with limited resources
What is one of the most important qualifications for a communications professional to have?	excellent writing ability
What color are white grapes?	green
What gene makes grapes purple?	anthocyanins
What shape do grapes usually resemble?	prolate spheroid
What type of food are grapes?	fruit
How many grapes are generally in a cluster?	15 to 300
How long ago were grapes first cultivated?	6,000–8,000 years ago
What microorganisms are naturally found on a grapes skin?	Yeast
Where is the oldest know winery located?	Armenia
What city is Syrah red wine believed to have been named after?	Shiraz
How do we know that wine was made in ancient Egypt?	hieroglyphics
What do people in France eat more of that in most western countries?	animal fat
What kind of the wine is regularly consumed by the French?	red wine
What is the phenomenon that shows that the French have less heart disease, even though they eat more animal fat?	the French paradox
What is a potential health benefit from drinking alcohol?	vasodilation
What juice is made when grapes are crushed and blended?	Grape juice
What kind of grapes are made into vinegar?	fermented
What is the most common grape used to make juice in North America?	Concord grapes
What are Sultana grapes known as in California?	Thompson Seedless
What types of grapes are commonly used to make white grape juice?	Niagara grapes
What type of wine is fermented with grape skin?	red wine
What type of wine is fermented after the grapes skin has been removed?	white wine
What substance is absorbed by wine when grapes are fermented with their skins?	resveratrol
What type of wine is believed to have more health benefits?	Red wine
What are grapes that are eaten raw classified as?	table grapes
What are grapes that are used to make wine classified as?	wine grapes
What specie are table grapes and wine grapes?	Vitis vinifera
What Classification of grapes are typically large and seedless?	Table grape
What percentage of a wine grape is sugar when it is harvested?	approximately 24%
When are grapes first mentioned in the Bible?	Genesis 9:20–21
Who was the Greek and Roman god of agriculture?	Dionysus
Whose blood do grapes usually represent in Christian art?	Christ
Which book of the Bible talks about the use of wine during Jewish feasts?	Deuteronomy
Who in the Bible first grew grapes on their farm?	Noah
How many seedless grape sources are there for commercial cultivators?	three
How many varieties of seedless grapes are there?	more than a dozen
What species of grape are grown by Thompson Seedless?	Vitis vinifera
What type of climate are Benjamin Gunnels's Prime seedless grapes specifically cultivated for?	cold
What species of grape are grown by Black Monukka?	Vitis vinifera
What are the most abundant polyphenolics in purple grapes?	Anthocyanins
What is the laboratory index of antioxidant strength in grapes known as?	Total phenolic content
What content of a grapes skin can be affected by soil composition, climate, and cultivation practices?	Phenolic content
Why causes antioxidant strength to be higher in purple grapes?	anthocyanins
What is the main phenolic in white grapes?	flavan-3-ols
What church uses wine to celebrate the Eucharist?	The Catholic Church
When was Jesus Christ known to have used wine in celebration?	the Last Supper
Where in the Code of Canon Law does it say that wine must be natural and not corrupt?	Canon 924
What may a priest use in place of wine for consecration for health reasons?	grape juice
What is the Catholic dogma known as that believes that consecrated bread and wine from the Last Supper literally became the body and blood of Jesus Christ?	transubstantiation
What must an operator deviate from to harm the computer?	secure procedures
What is computer security also known as?	cybersecurity or IT security
What is the protection of information systems?	Computer security
What are the ways an operator can malpractice?	intentional, accidental, or due to them being tricked
What is the practice that includes controlling physical access to hardware?	Computer security
What are attacks designed to make a machine or network unavailable to its intended users?	Denial of service attacks
What does deliberately entering the wrong password enough consecutive times cause?	the victim account to be locked
What are attacks where innocent systems are fooled into sending traffic to the victom called?	reflection and amplification attacks
What does DDoS stand for?	Distributed denial of service
How can a network attack from a single IP address be blocked?	by adding a new firewall rule
What were researchers in 2011 able to use as a successful attack vector?	a malicious compact disc in a car's stereo system
In cars with built-in voice recognition features, what can the onboard microphones be used for?	eavesdropping
Wifi, bluetooth, and cell phone networks are examples of what?	a potential entry point for malware or an attacker
Assuming access has been gained to the car's internal controller area network, what is it possible to do?	disable the brakes and turn the steering wheel
What network is used to contact concierge and emergency assitance services as well as getting navigational and entetainment information?	the cell phone network
How many organisations are estimated to maintain computer systems with effective detection systems?	relatively few
What is the basic evidence gathered by that puts criminals behind bars?	packet capture appliances
The primary obstacle to the eradication of cyber crime is the excessive reliance on what?	firewalls and other automated "detection" systems
What is the source of the quote?	Reuters
Electronic theft of data is causing more loss than what?	physical stealing of assets
Technology that is used to implement secure operating systems is one use of what term?	computer security
What does EAL stand for?	Evaluation Assurance Levels
What is the standard of EAL4?	Methodically Designed, Tested and Reviewed
What is the standard for EAL6?	Semiformally Verified Design and Tested
What is an example of a system that meets EAL6?	Integrity-178B
When was Chine's network security and information technology leadership team established?	February 27, 2014
What is the reason for studying the promotion of national network security ad information technology law?	enhanced national security capabilities.
What country has a network security and information technology leadership team??	China
What is the act of surreptitiously listening to a private conversation?	Eavesdropping
Conversations that people eavesdrop on are typically between who?	hosts on a network
Who has used programs such as Carnivore and NarusInsight to eavesdrop on the systems of internet service providers?	the FBI and NSA
Eavesdropping on a closed system via the faint electro-magnetic trasmissions generated by the hardware has been referred to as what by the NSA?	TEMPEST
What are machines that operate with no contact to the outside world called?	a closed system
What are desktop computers and laptops commonly infected with?	malware
Constructing a botnet to attack another target is an example of the activity of what?	malware
Activity trackers are an example of what?	Quantified Self devices
What could wifi, bluetooth, and cellphone network on devices be used as?	attack vectors
What could be remotely activated after a sucessful breach?	sensors
What does ACL stand for?	access control lists
ACLs and capability based security are two security models capable of what?	enforcing privilege separation
A host computer tricked into indirectly allowing access to restricted files is known as what?	the confused deputy problem
What must designers of systems that are ACL based do?	take responsibility to ensure that they do not introduce flaws
The confused deputy problem and the problem of not guaranteeing only one person has access are resolved by what?	capabilities
In what year did over a hundred intrusions made into the Rome Laboraroty?	1994
How were hackers able to obtain unrestricted access to Rome's networking systems?	Using trojan horses
How were hackers able to penetrate connected networks?	by posing as a trusted Rome center user
What is the Rome Laboratory?	the US Air Force's main command and research facility
Who does the Goddard Space Flight Center belong to?	National Aeronautics and Space Administration
When did The Impact Team successfully breach Ashley Madison?	July of 2015
What is the name of the parent company that created Ashley Madison?	Avid Life Media
When did the Avid Life Media CEO resign?	After the second data dump
What was in the first data dump?	emails from the company's CEO
What website, in addition to Ashley Madison, was Avid Media instructed to take offline?	Established Men
According to goverment officials, what has the failure of the private sector to solve efficiently the cybersecurity problem created?	a crucial need for regulation
Where was the RSA Security Conference held?	San Francisco
Who believes that government intervention would affect innovation?	executives from the private sector
Who said "industry only responds when you threaten regulation"?	R. Clarke
What is a virtual space free of any government intervention?	cyberspace
When did Public Safety Canada unveil Canada's Cyber Security Strategy?	October 3, 2010
What outlines the ongoing implementation of the Cyber Security Strategy?	The Action Plan 2010–2015 for Canada's Cyber Security Strategy
What outlines the responsibilities and provides a plan for coordination during a cyber incident?	The Cyber Incident Management Framework for Canada
What is a potential attack vector for utilities such as the power grid?	The Internet
What demonstrated equipment controlled by computers not connected to the internet can also be vulnerable?	the Stuxnet worm
When did the Computer Emergency Readiness Team investigate 79 hacking incidents at energy companies?	2014
What department does the Computer Emergency Readiness Team belong to?	the Department of Homeland Security
How did the Stuxnet worm infect industrial equipment?	via removable media
Firewalls and exit procedures are considered what?	"preventive" measures
What is defined as a way of filtering network data between a host or network and another network?	A firewall
What does a physical firewall consist of?	a separate machine filtering network traffic
What type of machines normall have a firewall?	permanently connected to the Internet
What compromises mainly preventative measures?	computer security
What has caused serious financial damage?	security breaches
Data made public who is available to estimate the cost of an incident?	the organizations involved
What is the amount of losses estimated from worms and viruses in 2003?	$13 billion
Who produces estimates of worldwide losses attributable to security breaches?	Several computer security consulting firms
What is the underlying methodology of finding worldwide estimates for losses fur to security breaches?	basically anecdotal
Microchips vulnerabilities are introduced when?	during the manufacturing process
What offers an alternative to soft-ware only computer security?	hardware-based or assisted computer security
What can hardware be a source of?	insecurity
What is required in order for hardware to be compromised?	physical access (or sophisticated backdoor access)
What does CCIRC stand for?	Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre
Who is resposible for mitigating and responding to threats to Canada's critical infrastructure?	CCIRC
Where does the CCIRC post regular cyber security bulletins?	on the Public Safety Canada website
What functions as a counterpart document to the National Strategy and Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure?	Canada's Cyber Security Strategy
Who said "Connectedness begets vulnerability?"	Jay Cross
What organization does Jay Cross belong to?	the Internet Time Group
What is the advantage of more critical infrastructure being controlled via computer programs?	increasing efficiency
What is the disadvantage of more critical infrastructure being controlled via computer programs?	exposes new vulnerabilities
When did Public Safety Canada partner with Stop.Think. Connect?	September 27, 2010
When was the Cyber Security Cooperation Program launched by the Government of Canada?	February 4, 2014
Who routinely updates the GetCyberSafe portal for Canadian citizens?	Public Safety Canada
What month is Cyber Security Awareness Month?	October
How much does the Cyber Security Cooperation Program cost?	$1.5 million
Installing keyloggers and making operating system modifications are examples of ways unauthorized users for what?	compromise security
Booting a tool or another operating system from a CD Rom can bypass what?	standard security measures
Disk encryption and Trusted Platform Module are designed to prevent what?	attacks
An unauthorized user with physical access to a computer can likely do what?	directly download data from it
UI redress attack or User Interface redress attack is also known as what?	Clickjacking
What is a malicious technique in which an attacker tricks the user into clicking on a button or link?	Clickjacking
Where are the clicks meant for the top level page routed?	some other irrelevant page
Where would a password typed on a seemingly authetic webpage be directed?	into an invisible frame controlled by the attacker
How istricking the user accomplished in clickjacking?	using multiple transparent or opaque layers
How many computers were connected to the internet in 1988?	60,000
When was the first computer worm released?	November 2, 1988
Who was the first computer worm traced back to?	Robert Tappan Morris, Jr.
What is a malicious code that demands processor time and spreads itself to other computers?	computer worm
Why did Morris Jr make the computer worm?	he wanted to count how many machines were connected to the Internet
Who are Rescator?	a Russian/Ukrainian hacking ring
What was stolen from Target Corporation computers in 2013?	40 million credit cards
How many credit card numbers were stole from Home Depot in 2014?	between 53 and 56 million
What machines were involved in the physical security breaches that played a large role in the incident?	self checkout machines
Who is Jim Walter?	director of threat intelligence operations at security technology company McAfee
What does NCAZ stand for?	Nationales Cyber-Abwehrzentrum
What does NCAZ take care of?	national security aspects
When was NCAZ opened?	June 16, 2011
Whan was NCAZ founded?	February 23, 2011
What is the purpose of NCAZ?	to detect and prevent attacks against the national infrastructure
What is the approach to Judiasm that subscribes to a tradition of mass revelation?	Orthodox
What is the name of the book that has the laws and ethics for Orthodox Judaism?	Torah
what texts were legislated by the Tanarim and Amoraim?	Talmudic
What besides Modern Orthodox Judaism does Orthodox Judaism consist of?	Haredi Judaism
Orthodox Judaism is a self-identification that distinguishes it from what?	pre-modern Judaism
What is the global Jewish news service known as?	JTA
What term do media entities refrain from using?	"ultra-Orthodox
What is New Jersey's largest daily paper?	the Star-Ledger
Who is the spiritual leader of Temple Israel Community Center?	Rabbi Shammai Engelmayer
Where is the Temple Israel Community Center located?	Cliffside Park
What is the name  of the movement that comporises a fairly broad spectrum of distinct but related philosophies?	Modern Orthodoxy
Who does Modern Orthodoxy assign a central role to?	People of Israel
What integrity is orthodox judaism trying to preserve?	halakha
What kind of work does orthodox Judiasm seek to transform the world with?	Divine work
What is modern cutlture in conflict with?	Torah
How do orthodox women dress mosly?	covered
what part of their body do married women cover with a scarf?	hair
What is the Skullcap that orthodox men wear known as?	kipa
What are the fringes Orthodox men wear called?	tzitzit
What type of orthox men often grow beards and always wear black?	Haredi
What is the written law of the Torah known as?	Pentateuch
Who dictated the oral law to Moses?	God
What are the detailed explanations of how to apply and interpret the laws of the written Torah called?	Oral Law
What is the law that is considered the core of religious laws Orthodox Jews know today?	Sinaitic law
What is the origin of Jewish Law?	Divine
Where was Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer from?	Berlin
what was the name of the Rabbi of Altona?	Jacob Ettlinger
What was the name of the manifesto that Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger produced?	Shlomei Emunei Yisrael
How many rabbi's signed on with the manifesto Jacob Ettlinger published?	177
Where was Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch from?	Berlin
When is a newborn boy's hair first cut?	third birthday
What is done with the newborn boy's hair once it is cut?	burned
What are grains and legumes known as?	kitniyot
What is the name of the prohibition against eating grains and legumes during Passover?	Ashkenazi
What text rejects the Ashkenazi prohibition against kitniyot?	Talmud
What type of Judaism advocated segregation from non-Jewish culture?	Haredi Judaism
What should individuals participate as little as possible in?	modern society
Attending secular institution of higher education is viewed as necessary but inferior in what society?	Haredi
What do a significant portion of boys remain in until marriage?	yeshiva
What is a Torah study institute for married men called?	kollel
Where was the written law and the oral law transmitted?	Mount Sinai
Who spoke the words of the Torah to Moses?	God
What were the laws contained in the written Torah known as?	Mitzvot
Where is Moses miraculously transported to?	House of Study of Rabbi Akiva
What law is held to be transmitted with an extremely high degree of accuracy?	Oral law
What maintains a historical understanding of jewish Identity?	Orthodox Judaism
What does orthodoxy reject as a means of establishing Jewish identiy?	patrilineal descent
What is intermarriage typically seen as?	rejection of Judaism
What does Orthodoxy strongly condemn?	intermarriage
What happens to most intermarried people in the orthodox community?	cut off
What do haredi Judaism and modern orthodox Judaism disagree about the application of?	Halakha
what law is halakha to the Orthodox Jew?	God's Law,
Basic respect for human beings is known as what?	"Kavod Habriyot"
The sanctiy of human life is known as what?	"Pikuach Nefesh"
What does halakha guide?	structure of daily life
What is jewish law today based on?	Torah
what does the halakha represent to orthodox judiasm?	will of God
Where were the rules about the Torah revealed to Moses by God?	Mount Sinai
How many rules are jewish law derived from?	13
What law is considered to be no less the word of god?	Oral Law
What overlaps significantly with Hasidic Judiasm?	Haredi Judaism
What overlaps significantly with Haredi Judiasm?	Chasidic Judaism
Who founded what is known as the Baal Shem Tov?	Israel ben Eliezer
What sought to combine rigourous scholarship with more emotional mitzvah observance?	Ba'al Shem Tov
What is the spoken word known as in Hasidic Judiasm?	Yiddish
What is the fertility rate among non-orthodox Jewish families??	1.9 children
What is the fertility rate among orthodox Jewish families?	4.1 children
What is the rate of intermarriage among orthodox Jews?	2%
What is the intermarriage rate among non-orthodox jews?	71%
how many raised on orthodox Jewish homes abandon orthodox Judaism typically?	half
Orthodox Jews subsciribing to modern orthodoxy tend to be what political alignment typically?	right-wing
half of orthodox judiasm tends to lean to what political ideaology?	conservative
What political party is mostly supported by orthodox jews?	Republican
Haredi and Hasidic Jewry have a stronger connection to what country?	Israel
Haredi and Hasidic Jewry have an attachment to what movement?	Zionism
What does the US national council for Young Isreal represent?	Modern Orthodoxy
What is involvement with non-orthodox Jews known as?	"outreach (Kiruv)"
What is a core beliefe that was recognized as important by orthodox Jews?	secular studies
what is it important for both men and women orthodox jews to be able to do?	support oneself
what is the name of the movement of liberalism?	Haskalah
what sometimes prefers a more lenient position on Dietray laws?	Talmud
previous generations typically praciced a more lenient position in regard to what?	dietary laws
What are dietary laws known as?	halachic practices
When can the roots of orthodox judaism be traced to?	19th century
When did the German Jewry seek to reform Jewish belief?	early 19th century
what did orthodox jews seek to modernize?	education
what did the German Jewry reject about the Torah?	absolute divine authorship
What do orthodox Jews express ambivalence towards?	Zionism
What is the administration of the state of Isreal seen as?	Zionist
What does the State of Isreal place emphasis on besides Militarism?	nationalism
What does the State of Isreal place emphasis on in addition to Nationalism?	militarism
what is the Zionist administrartion of the state of Israel seen as according to the judaic way of life?	destructive
Tamudic schools are known as what?	yeshivot
what are the colleges married men study in called?	Talmudical colleges
Haredi and Chassidic communities are threatened by assimilation and intermarriage so they do not do what with non-orthodox populaions?	interact
Haredi Jews do not share what with other jewish sects?	doctrines
What considers itself the only true heir to the Jewish tradition?	Orthodox Judaism
What do Orthodox Jewish movements consider all other non-orthodox moments?	unacceptable
What do Orthodox jewish groups characterize non-orthodox form of Judiasm as?	heretical
Orthodox Jewish groups reject what precedent?	Halakhic
Borough Park, Midwood, Williamsburg and Crown heights have particularly large communities of what?	American Orthodox Jews
Where is a sizeable and rapidly growing Orthodox community currently located besides New York State?	New Jersey
Where is the most rapidly growing community of American orthodox jews located?	Rockland County
Where do many American Orthodox Jews live?	New York State
Who did the modern orthodoxy arise from?	Western European Jewry
What do most Jews consider modern orthodoxy today?	traditional
the neo-orthodox movement holds that who's views are not accurately followed by the mordern orthodoxy?	Hirsch's
What do Orthodox Jews turn to for guidance and practical application of jewish law?	Shulchan Aruch
there is a large degree of what amongst all orthodox jews?	uniformity
What is the differences among regions in practices known as?	minhag
Why are the codes and responsa different in regards to details?	philosophical differences
Who held the opinion that judiasm demands and application of torah thought to the entire realm of human experience?	Hirsch
What was Hirsch's approach called?	Torah im Derech Eretz
What was the Torah im Dereche Eretz aslo known as?	neo-Orthodoxy
The Torah im Derech Eretz insisted that Jews should attempt to engage and influence what?	modern world
Where does the word animal come from?	Latin animalis
What does the Latin word animalis mean?	having breath, having soul or living being
The word animal is usually only used to refer to what?	non-human members of the kingdom Animalia
The biological definition of the word animal refers to all member of what kingdom?	Animalia
What are some of the creatures included in the kingdom of Animalia?	sponges, jellyfish, insects, and humans
What type of cells do all animals have?	eukaryotic
What is the extracellular matrix surrounding eukaryotic cells made of?	collagen and elastic glycoproteins
What is formed when the collagen and elastic glycoproteins surrounding eukaryotic cells are calcified?	shells, bones, and spicules
What are the intercellular junctions unique to animal cells?	tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes
How are cells held in place in plants and fungi?	cell walls
What is the biological interaction where a predator feeds on its prey called?	Predation
The act of predation typically results in what for the prey?	death
What is the consumption of dead organic matter called?	detritivory
Why do parasitic species lay their eggs on their prey?	their offspring to feed on its decaying corpse
The evolutionary arms race between prey and predator has resulted in what?	various antipredator adaptations
Ctenophora and the Cnidaria include what sea creatures?	anemones, corals, and jellyfish
The digestive chambers of the Ctenophora and the Cnidaria serve as what?	both the mouth and the anus
What are the 2 main germ systems in the Ctenophora and the Cnidaria called?	ectoderm and endoderm
What are the Ctenophora and the Cnidaria animals sometimes called?	diploblastic
What differentiates placozoans from the ctenophora and the cnidaria?	they do not have a permanent digestive chamber
What sets animals apart from bacteria  and most protists?	Animals are eukaryotic and multicellular
What are organisms called that digest food in an internal chamber?	heterotrophic
What is another way in which animals are distinguished from plants and algae?	lacking rigid cell walls
The blastula stage is a characteristic exclusive to what organism?	animals
What is the hollow sphere that a zygote initially develops into called?	blastula
In sponges, how do blastula develop into a new sponge?	swim to a new location
What are the 2 germ layers formed by most blastula?	an external ectoderm and an internal endoderm
What may be formed between the external ectoderm and an internal endoderm layers?	mesoderm
What do the external ectoderm and an internal endoderm layers develop into?	tissues and organs
How long ago do some paleontologists believe that animals first appeared?	1 billion years
Fossils found in the Tonian period indicate the presence of what creatures?	triploblastic worms
Triploblastic worms were comparable in size to what other creatures?	earthworms
When was the beginning of the Tonian period?	around 1 billion years ago
What produces tracks similar to the fossilized tracks discovered by paleontologists?	Gromia sphaerica
It is believed that animals evolved from what?	a flagellated eukaryote
What are the closest known living relatives of animals?	choanoflagellates
What is the name of the supergroup that animals have been placed in by molecular studies?	opisthokonts
The opisthokonts also include what other organisms?	choanoflagellates, fungi and a few small parasitic protists
Where does the name opisthokonts come from?	the posterior location of the flagellum in motile cells
What is the group of animals that often have a specialized head with feeding and sensory organs called?	Bilateria
How many openings in the digestive chamber do animals in the Bilateria group have?	two
What are the openings in the digestive chambers for animals in the Bilateria group called?	mouth and an anus
What is the internal body cavity of animals in the Bilateria group called?	coelom or pseudocoelom
What are some examples of non-bilaterian animals?	Porifera, Ctenophora, Cnidaria and Placozoa
What are animals whose body plans display bilateral symmetry called?	bilaterian
Animals in what group are thought to form a monophyletic group?	bilaterian
What groups is named after the trait of growth by moulting or ecdysis?	Ecdysozoa
What are some animals in the Arthropoda group?	insects, spiders, crabs
Organisms in the Arthropoda group have bodies that are divided into what?	repeating segments
What groups are relatives of the arthropods?	Onychophora and Tardigrada
What is another name for roundworms?	Nematoda
Why is it more economical for scientists to study a small number of species?	the great diversity found in animals
Which organisms were among the first life-forms to be genetically sequenced?	fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
Why are  the fruit fly and the nematode the most intensively studied metazoan model organisms?	they are easy to keep and breed
Analysis of what genome has emphasised the importance of sponges, placozoans, and choanoflagellates  in explaining the arrival of 1500 ancestral genes unique to the Eumetazoa?	starlet sea anemone
What are two of the most successful animal phyla?	Mollusca and Annelida
What are some of the animals in Mollusca?	snails, clams, and squids
What are some of the animals in Annelida?	earthworms and leeches
Why are the Mollusca and Annelida considered to be close relatives?	common presence of trochophore larvae
What are the phyla that have a ring of ciliated tentacles around the mouth called?	lophophore
Animal phyla that are recognized for their lack of bilateral symmetry are thought to have come from where?	other animals early in evolution
Which animal represents the oldest animal phyla?	sponges
How do sponges typically feed?	drawing in water through pores
During what time were a series of phylogenomic studies conducted that found support for comb jellies as the basal lineage of animals?	2008-2015
What do deuterostomes and protostomes have in common?	both groups possess a complete digestive tract
In which group does the anus form first, with the mouth developing secondarily?	deuterostomes
What is the process in which cells fill in the interior of the gastrula to form the mesoderm called?	schizocoelous development
What is the process in which the mesoderm is formed through invagination of the endoderm called?	enterocoelic pouching
What do deuterostome embryos undergo during cell division?	radial cleavage
What is another name for flatworm?	Platyhelminthes
What are some parasites included in the Platyhelminthes group?	flukes and tapeworms
What does acoelomates mean?	lacking a body cavity
What are the flatworms closest relative?	Gastrotricha
Where are the rotifera most prominent?	in aqueous environments
How do most animals use the energy of sunlight?	eating plants or plant-eating animals
What do plants use to convert inorganic molecules into carbohydrates, fats, proteins and other biomolecules?	light
What does photosynthesis convert the energy of sunlight into?	chemical energy
When an animal eats plants or another animal that has eaten plants, what happens to the reduced carbon compounds in the food?	become a source of energy and building materials for the animal
What happens with the reduced carbon compounds in the food are broken down releasing stored solar energy?	giving the animal the energy required for motion
What is the process of making beer called?	brewing
What is a building called that is used for making beer?	a brewery
What is company that makes beer typically known as?	a brewing company
What is beer classified as when it is made for non-commerical consumption?	homebrewing
In what year was home brewing first allowed in the UK?	1963
In breweries, what do you call a small vat that is filled with hops?	a hopback
In what phase of brewing does hopped wort become beer?	fermentation
What substance settles and make beer clear after it ferments?	yeast
How long does the fermentation process take in brewing beer?	a week to months
What substance is added to hopped wort once it cools after boiling?	yeast
What is the main source of starch and most beer?	barley malt
At what point does barley have it's hull broken up into pieces?	After malting
What takes the place of barley malt in gluten-free beer?	sorghum
When is sweet wort separated during the brewing process?	during lautering
Aside from barley, what is a another product founded beer that might contain gluten?	wheat
What is a brewery called that makes a small amount of beer?	microbrewery
What would you call a microbrewery that also has a restaurant or a pub?	brewpub
In general, how much beer can a microbrewery make and still be classified as a microbrewery?	around 15,000 barrels
What city is home to the oldest known brewery in the world that is still active?	Freising
What year was The Benedictine Weihenstephan Brewery first licensed as a brewery?	1040
What is the main source of the alcohol in beer?	sugars
What is the process during brewing in which sugar is metabolized into alcohol?	fermentation
At what concentration can yeast no longer survive in alcohol?	above 12%
What could decrease alcohol content during the brewing process?	Low temperatures
Why would more fermentable sugars be added to be beer during the brewing process?	to increase alcohol content
What would you call a frame that holds the cask of beer horizontally when it arrives at the pub?	stillage
What temperature are cask ales stored at before being tapped?	52–55 °F
What would you call a beer that has not been filtered or pasteurized?	Cask-conditioned ales
How long does it take for sediment to settle and clear after a cask ale has been tapped?	from several hours to several days
What tool is used to pull beer from a cask to serve?	a hand pump
What type of alcohol is found in beer?	ethyl alcohol
How is alcohol measured in the human body?	blood alcohol concentration
What type of alcohol is found in wine and distilled spirits?	ethyl alcohol
What is it called when someone dies from inhaling vomit?	pulmonary aspiration
What could be caused by a 0.80% Blood alcohol content in a human?	fatal alcohol poisoning
What types of containers is beer generally sold in?	bottles and cans
In addition to bottles and cans, How is beer often sold in bars?	draught
In general, what is usually the alcohol content in most beer?	around 4% to 6%
What festivals are a social tradition in many beer drinking countries?	beer festivals,
What is a pub game that is popular in many beer drinking nations?	bar billiards
What is the main ingredient in beer?	water
What type of water is good for making stout beer, like Guinness?	hard water
What type of water is best for making pale lager?	soft water
What is the process called when gypsum is added to water?	Burtonisation
What type of beer benefits most from water that contains gypsum?	pale ale
In what year did William IV adopt a purity law pertaining to beer?	1516
What was the title of William IV in 1516?	Duke of Bavaria
What was the name of the purity law that regulated beer in 1516, and is still in use today?	Reinheitsgebot
Aside from water and hops, what is the only other ingredient allowed in beer?	barley-malt
Who was the Duke of Bavaria in 1516?	William IV
What is the main cause for the bitterness in beer?	Hops
What is the main goals for the sweetness of beer?	malt
How is the bitterness in most beers generally measured?	the International Bitterness Units scale
The acidity of what ingredient acts as a preservative in beer?	hops
What do you call the length of time that foam is on top of beer because of carbonation?	head retention
What is the first step of brewing when malted barley is mixed with hot water?	mashing
How is hot water referred to by brewers?	liquor
How long does the mashing step in the brewing process last?	1 to 2 hours
In brewing, what do starches become during the mashing process?	sugars
What is it called when used grain is separated in the brewing process?	wort separation
What causes fermentation during the brewing process when making a beer?	yeast
Which ingredient gives beer its flavor?	hops
What vegetable is sometimes used as a grain source for beer in Brazil?	potato
What is a popular grain source for brewing beer in Mexico?	agave
In a recipe, what would you call the list of each source of starch in beer?	the grain bill
In what year were hops first known to be used in beer?	822 AD
What name was Adalhard the Elder also known as in 822 AD?	Adalard of Corbie
In which century were hops first widely cultivated for making beer?	the thirteenth century
In which century did hops become the most popular flavoring for beer?	the sixteenth century
What would you call a mixture of ingredients used for brewing before the 16th century?	gruit
In what year was the name Porter first used for a dark beer?	1721
In what year was the name stout first used to describe a dark beer?	1677
What do you call a dark beer that is brewed with roasted malts or barley?	Stout and porter
What type of yeast is used to make stout and porter beers?	slow fermenting yeast
In what country was Porter beer popular in 1721?	London
What percentage of beer was sold in cans in Sweden in 2001?	63.9%
What company first created the full aperture can for beer?	Crown Holdings
In what year did Crown holdings create a can with a removable lid for beer?	2010
What is it called when light damages beer that is not in a can?	"skunked" beer
What were cans originally believed to maintain in beer?	quality
How much alcohol is in Schorschbock 57?	57,5%
How much alcohol was in The End of History beer?	55%
What company made The End of History beer in 2010?	BrewDog
What is a strong ale called when it is frozen partially, and then the ice is removed again and again?	fractional freezing
How much alcohol was contained in the beer Sink The Bismarck?	41%
What kind of containers are used for bottle conditioned beers?	Glass bottles
What do bottle conditioned beers contain that most fears do not?	yeast
What ingredient is filtered out of most beers when it is packaged in bottles and cans?	yeast
What are the recommendations for pouring bottle conditioned beers?	slowly
What type of bottle conditioned beer is customarily poured with the yeast in it?	wheat beers
In addition to a lack of muscle tone, what is believed to be the main cause of the beer belly?	overeating
What condition was attributed to binge drinking in a 2004 study?	beer belly
What is believed to be the glycemic index in beer?	110
What is the glycemic index in maltose?	110
What type of starch is used to make the beer Oshikundu?	sorghum or millet
In what country is the beer Oshikundu produced?	Namibia
In what country is the beer Tella produced?	Ethiopia
What is the name of the millet based porridge like beer made in Kyrgystan?	Bozo
What is a beer-like beverage in China that is made with rice?	Choujiu
When does evidence show the earliest known barley beer was produced?	circa 3500–3100 BC
In what country was the earliest chemical evidence of barley beer found?	Iran
What country are the Zargos Mountains located in?	Iran
What year were the elbow tablet first discovered?	1974
What ingredient is used for amylotytic fermentation in sake?	mould
What is a kettle called that is used to boil sweet wort after sparging?	copper
How long is sweet wort boiled for after sparging?	about one hour
What does boiling sweet wort destroy?	enzymes
What affect do hops have in brewing when they brew for a long time?	bitterness
What is generally used as starch in most beer?	malted grain
How does grain become malted?	by soaking it in water
What kind of container is partially germinated grain dried in?	a kiln
What happens to grain when it is soaked in water?	germination
What does a grains starch become after an is malted?	fermentable sugars
How many liters of beer are bought and sold every year?	More than 133 billion
How much revenue did beer bring in in 2006?	$294.5 billion
What year was the brewing Company SABMiller founded?	2002
What company acquired the Anheuser-Busch brewing Company in 2008?	InBev
What was the largest brewing company in the world in 2015?	AB InBev
What does abv stand for?	alcohol by volume
What process can cause beer to have a 55% abv?	freeze-distilling
What is the typical alcohol content of a pale logger?	5%
What type of low alcohol beer is sometimes served in school?	table beer
What percentage of alcohol by volume does beer achieve when it is re-pitched with champagne yeast?	around 20%
What is the term used for the study of beer?	zythology
What is a professional called at a restaurant who advises customers about beer and food pairs?	beer sommelier
What is a popular drinking game where beer is often considered?	beer pong
What is the most popular alcoholic drink in most societies?	beer
What is most popular alcoholic drink in the world?	Beer
What is believed to be the oldest alcoholic drinking the world?	Beer
What is the term used to describe the making beer?	brewing
What brewing process naturally carbonates beer?	fermentation
What prayer did people use in Mesopotamia to remember a beer recipe?	The Hymn to Ninkasi
What year were hops first believed to be added to beer?	822
On what continent were hops first added to beer?	Europe
What was a Carolingian Abbot credited for adding to beer in 822?	hops
Who was believed to have added hops to beer in 1067?	Abbess Hildegard
Where did Abbess Hildegard live?	Bingen
What is the origin of the word ale?	Old English ealu
What is the origin of the word beer?	Old English bēor
What word means to drink in Latin?	bibere
What 12th century poet once wrote "Ale it is called among men, but among the gods, beer."?	Alvíssmál
How much alcohol is contained in the beer Vetter 33?	10.5%
What was the strongest beer in 1994 according to the Guinness Book of World Records?	Vetter 33
What brewing company produced the beer Millennium?	Samuel Adams
What year did the brewing company BrewDog start producing a beer called Ghost Deer?	2011
What do brewing companies sometimes use to give more alcohol content to their beer?	champagne yeasts
What beer is better for the environment than bottled beer?	Draught beer's
How many pounds of CO2 emissions are attributed to just one sixpack of microbrew?	6.6
What type of container can be used to transport draft beer, and is better for the environment that a bottle?	a refillable jug
How much habitat is damaged from just one sixpack of microbrew?	2.5 square meters
How many square feet is 2.5 square meters?	26
What technology support the drinking of chilled beer?	artificial refrigeration
At what cool temperature is a beers flavor reduced?	below 15.5 °C
When is a beer at its most flavorful?	unchilled
What country is the organisation Cask Marque located?	UK
In what decade did drinking chilled pale lager become popular?	the 1870s
What is beers primary active ingredient?	alcohol
What disease can be caused by heavy alcohol consumption?	alcoholic liver disease
How many years are removed from an alcoholic's life expectancy?	around ten
What is the third leading cause of premature dying in the US?	Alcohol
How many deaths are believed to have been caused by alcohol?	3.3 million
What hormone can be triggered by the flavor of beer alone in males?	dopamine
What year did the Neuropsychopharmacology journal publist a study about the effect on the brain of beers flavor?	2013
What taste could significantly impact a man's desire to drink?	beer
How many men were studied for tests on the flavor of beer in the Neuropsychopharmacology journal in 2013?	49
What word was dropped as a racial classification in this year's census?	Mulatto
What were people that had black and white ancestor classified as in this census?	Negro
How were people with both black and American Indian ancestry recorded in this census?	Neg
What is it called when a mixed race person in recorded as negro in this census, even if only a fraction of their ancestry is black?	one-drop rule
Which parent was the deciding factor for how interracial persons were recorded in this census?	their father
In what year were census respondents first able to select more than one race?	2000
How many American reported being of more than one race in the Census 2000?	nearly seven million
How many race categories were respondents able to select in the Census 2000?	one or more
What year was the last census before the Census 2000?	1990
What organization recommended that race and ethnicity categories be combined into one question for the 2000 US census?	the American Anthropological Association
In what year are or racial categories first revised for the 2000 U.S. Census?	1997
Prior to 1997, where were racial categories declared for the U.S. Census?	OMB directive no. 15
How did racial categories appear in the US 2000 census?	race/ethnicity
Who defines the concept of race in the United States Census?	OMB
What do the race categories in the US Census include in addition to race?	national-origin
In addition to social and cultural characteristics, what else is taken into account for race classification in the US census?	ancestry
How many ethnic categories are there in the US census?	two
In addition to Hispanic and Latino, what other ethnic category is included in the United States Census?	Not Hispanic or Latino
What association criticized the separation of race and ethnicity in the UScensus?	the American Anthropological Association
Members of what commission criticized the separation of race and ethnic city on the US Census?	U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
In ethnic classification for the U.S. Census, What option do respondents have other than not Hispanic or Latino?	Hispanic or Latino
What country did President Frankiln Roosevelt have a good neighbor policy for in hopes of a better relationship?	Mexico
In what year did a federal judge say that three immigrants from Mexico were not eligible to be citizens because of their race?	1935
What US President wanted to treat Hispanic people as white by the federal government?	Roosevelt
People of what descent were classified as white by the federal government at the suggestion of President Roosevelt?	Mexican
In 1935, what race was a person required to be to become a United States citizen?	white
Who decided on the standards for the classification of race and ethnicity and federal data?	OMB
In what year did OMB revise the standards for race and ethnicity classifications?	1997
What did OMB hope to provide with their revision on race and ethnicity in 1997?	consistent data
How many races were people asked to mark on the US Census after OMB revised their standards in 1997?	one or more
How many races were people asked to report in the US census prior to 1997?	one
In what year were free persons first listed individually in the US census?	1850
How were free persons listed in the US census prior to 1850?	by head of household
In the 1850 US census, what was put into the color column for black persons?	B
If M was marked in the color column for a person in the 1850 census, How were they classified?	mulatto
How were slaves listed in the 1850 US census?	by owner
What race selection did the census bureau consider getting rid of before the 2000 census?	Some other race
In what year did the ancestery question stop appearing in the US census?	2010
There were campaigns to try to get minorities to use what race category into 2010 census?	Some other race
In addition to the Census, where else is the "some other race" selection an option?	the American Community Survey
What act has rules and regulations for bilingual election?	the Voting Rights Act
What act has rules and regulations for meeting the credit needs of minority populations?	the Community Reinvestment Act
What act has laws about equal employment opportunities for ethnic groups?	the Civil Rights Act
In what year was the term race first used in the U.S. Census?	1890
How often was a new questionnaire sheet used in the 1890 census?	for each family
How were residents listed in the census in 1890?	individually
Why were different East Asian races divided in 1890 Census?	increased immigration
How many ethnicities or federal agencies required to use in data collection?	a minimum of two
How would a person of Cuban origin be listed by the US Census Bureau?	Hispanic or Latino
Aside from Hispanic or Latino, what other ethnicity are federal agencies required to use?	Not Hispanic or Latino
In which ethnic category would a person of Mexican origin be listed by the US Census Bureau?	Hispanic or Latino
In what ethnic category would a person from Puerto Rico to be listed in the United States Census?	Hispanic or Latino
What is the US dollar based upon?	a decimal system of values
How much monetary value does a dime hold?	one-tenth of a dollar
How much was a union going to be worth as proposed in the 1800s?	one hundred dollars
What was the maximum value a gold coin used to be able to have?	$20
In what legislation was the term "eagle" used?	Coinage Act of 1792
Which symbol is used to represent the dollar?	$
What abbreviation was the dollar sign based off of?	ps
What was the common name for the Spanish dollar?	peso
Which century signalled the end of the Spanish dollar?	19th
In which region of the world were the Spanish pesos minted?	Spanish America
What color was predominantly used?	green
Which organization filed an accessibility lawsuit?	American Council of the Blind
Other than the $100 bill, which other note is not going to be redesigned?	$1
Who are currency readers meant to assist?	visually impaired
The redesign of notes is being planned by which organization?	Bureau of Engraving and Printing
Who has the power "to coin money"?	United States Congress
Which section indicates the methods in which the dollar should be issued?	5112
Coins are considered legal tender for which kind of transaction?	payment of debts
What is an example of a copper alloy dollar?	Sacagawea dollar
What is the pure silver dollar referred to as?	American Silver Eagle
Who began minting the coins known as Joachimstalers?	Count Hieronymus Schlick of Bohemia
What is the modern name for St. Joachim's Valley?	Jáchymov
What were the Joachimstalers composed of?	silver
How did the word "taler" translate into Italian?	tallero
Other than "taler", what is the other name of the German coin?	Guldengroschen
What condition does a person have to meet to  be allowed by law on a coin?	deceased
Having portraits of leaders on coins was compared to who's policies?	European monarchs
When did modern day currency start getting the faces that they have?	20th century
Other than Greek and Roman mythology, who else was featured on the "heads" side of past coins?	composite Native Americans
What was the last coin to be converted to the modern day style of having historic Americans on the face?	Dollar
Which year was it when paper money was first issued without the backing of precious metals?	1777
What was the first war that caused paper money to be issued?	Civil War
Which other war also caused a disconnect between paper money and precious metals?	War of 1812
The quick loss in value of paper money resulted in which phrase being hear?	"not worth a continental"
The loss in value resulted in a clause being written in which article in the US Constitution?	article 1
In which year was the new $1 US Presidential coin introduced?	2007
What does the reverse side of the new coins feature?	Statue of Liberty
What is the official version of "In God We Trust" printed on the coins?	E Pluribus Unum
Which inscription was eliminated due to the Statue of Liberty being added to the coin?	"Liberty"
Which President will have two coins with his portrait on it?	Grover Cleveland
Who can create "new high-powered money"?	Federal Reserve
Who does the Federal Reserve have to place an order with for printed money?	U.S. Treasury Department
Which organization stamps coins?	Bureau of the Mint
Which Bureau prints new dollars?	Engraving and Printing
Who can freely withdraw from  their reserve accounts at the Federal Reserve?	Commercial banks
During which times does the value of the dollar typically decline?	wartime
When was the Federal Reserve established?	1913
What was the Federal Reserve designed to furnish?	an "elastic" currency
What had previously kept prices stable?	gold standard
How much did the US prices deflate in the 1930s?	30%
What would zero inflation mean for the US dollar over time?	constant value
What would result in a slow declining of the value of the dollar over time?	low, stable inflation
Who is in favor of a zero inflation policy?	some economists
A zero inflation policy would limit who's influence and ability to react?	central bank
With a zero inflation rate, what would the central bank be unable to do other than control interest rates?	stimulate the economy
What is "dollars" a reference to?	the Spanish milled dollar
How much value did a Spanish milled dollar have in relation to Spanish units of currency?	8 Spanish units
How many grains of standard silver were meant to be in a single dollar?	four hundred and sixteen
How much value was one dollar meant to be equivalent to?	a Spanish milled dollar
How many grains of pure silver were meant to be in a single dollar?	three hundred and seventy-one
What is a "grand" sometimes shortened to?	"G"
What is another term other than "large" that means a stack of mutiple thousands?	"stack"
What is a "C-note" a reference to?	the Roman numeral for 100
Which note is occasionally called a "yardstick"?	$50
What is another term for "bigface" notes?	Monopoly money
What defined the US dollar?	Coinage Act of 1792
What was the dollar based on?	the Spanish milled dollar
How many grams of gold roughly were in an eagle?	17
Who made the decision to base the American Unit on the weight on the Spanish dollar?	Alexander Hamilton
What was the average weight of a new Spanish dollar in terms of grains?	377
What is specifically produced for collectors?	Proof Sets
What is the percentage of silver in coins in the Silver Proofs?	90%
When did the Mint being producing proof sets?	1983
Other than the Silver Proof set, what other type of Proof set exists?	Presidential Dollar Proof Set
When was the production of Presidential dollar coins suspended?	December 13, 2011
What dictates that a receipt for expenditures of all public money must be published?	The Constitution
Which section specifically states that receipts for public money must be published?	Section 331
Which currency are the sums of money in the "Statements" displayed in?	U.S. dollars
What is the unit of account of the United States?	U.S. dollar
What is the highest currently printed denomination of bill?	$100
In which year were notes valued above $100 no longer printed?	1946
When were bills above the $100 denomination withdrawn from circulation?	1969
What use of higher value bills prompted Nixon to halt the use of said bills?	organized crime
What was issued to halt the use of higher currency denomations?	an executive order
What is the British equivalent of a "buck"?	quid
In which century can the term "buck" be traced back to?	18th
What kind of trade may have been the origin of the "buck"?	colonial leather trade
What was the nickname given to the Demand Note dollars that were used to finance the Civil War?	Greenback
What color other than green was used on the backside of the original note?	black
What was the value of the U.S. dollar no longer anchored to?	gold
Who's duty did it become to maintain the value of the U.S. currency?	Federal Reserve
What move did the Federal Reserve take that resulted in stagflation and the decline of the U.S. dollar?	increase the money supply
What claimed that inflation and economic growth were linked?	the Phillips curve
How much value did the U.S. dollar lose between 1965 and 1981?	two thirds
What was the look of the dollar based on?	Spanish dollar
In which century did the Spanish dollar start being used in Spanish America?	16th
When was the United States Mint founded?	1792
Outside of Mexico, where else was the Spanish dollar minted?	Peru
When were the Spanish dollar and Mexican peso no longer accepted as legal tender?	1857
What was the name of the act introduced in the year 1900?	Gold Standard Act
How much gold in grams was one dollar equivalent to?	1.505
How much was 1 troy ounce of gold worth?	$20.67
Which year brought the end to silver being in dimes and quarters?	1964
Which President confiscated gold coins?	Franklin Roosevelt
Other than Florida, which other state got send error coins?	Tennessee
Where did error coins originate?	Philadelphia mint
How much were error coins initially worth for collectors?	profit
What were some amateur collectors duped into buying?	"upside down lettering error" coins
What do vending machines commonly only accept?	$1 bills
What power was Congress given by the Constitution?	borrow money on the credit of the United States
What did Congress authorize the Federal Reserve Banks to do?	issue Federal Reserve Notes
What are the notes issued by the Federal Reserve?	obligations of the United States
Where, other than any Federal Reserve bank, can notes be redeemed?	Washington, District of Columbia
Since the 1970s, what is the only type of note that has remained in circulation?	Federal Reserve Note
What is the short term goal of open market operations?	achieve a specific short-term interest rate target
What does the Federal Reserve target?	federal funds rate
What is the federal funds rate?	the rate at which member banks lend to one another overnight
What is the cajoling of certain market players to achieve specified outcomes also known as?	Moral suasion
What does "open mouth operations" mean?	talking monetary policy with the market
When was the Bretton Woods system established?	after World War II
What was the fixed value of gold?	$35 per ounce
What was the value of the U.S. dollar linked to?	the value of gold
What did banks and investors do that devalued the dollar?	convert dollars to gold
In which year was gold convertability terminated?	1971
What kind of money is the U.S. dollar?	fiat money
Although for some countries the dollar is not their official currency, how do they use the currency?	de facto currency
Other than the British Virgin Islands, what other area in the Caribbean uses the dollar as it's sole currency?	Turks and Caicos islands
For countries that use the dollar as their paper currency, what other currency do they make?	mints its own coins
What is an example of a U.S. coin that can be used as payment in some countries?	Susan B. Anthony dollar
What are dollar notes made from now adays?	cotton fiber paper
What is most common paper made of?	wood fiber
Since 1914, who issues the dollar banknotes?	Federal Reserve
How long do the current notes measure?	6.14 inches
What size currency are the new smaller notes similar to?	Philippine
When was the Mint Act passed?	1792
How many grains of silver did the Mint Act define the dollar as?	371.25
Who suggested that the ratio of silver to gold should be fixed?	Alexander Hamilton
What market value were gold coins traded in relation to?	Congressional standard of the silver dollar
In what year did the shift in gold standard occur?	1834
What are gold and silver coins valuable for now adays?	their precious metal value
What are non primarily gold and silver coins valuable for?	their numismatic value
What was the only coin with any silver content in circulation from 1965 to 1970?	Kennedy half dollar
What was the Kennedy half dollar replaced with?	cupronickel
How much was the experimental Stella coin valued at?	$4.00
When were silver dollars first minted?	1794
Who was featured on the copper - nickel dollar?	President Dwight D. Eisenhower
Which coin was introduced in 1979?	Susan B. Anthony dollar
What did the new $1 coin minted in 2000 feature?	Sacagawea
In which century were gold dollars minted?	19th
What do coins, Federal Reserve Notes and deposits held by despository institutions make up?	The monetary base
What was the monetary base value in 1994?	400 billion dollars
How much did the monetar base value increase to in 2013?	over 3000 billion
What would the Federal Reserve buy to try and increase money supply?	securities
How many times a year does the Federal Open Market Committee meet?	Eight
What does the decline in value of the dollar correspond to?	price inflation
The rise in level of prices in an economy is referred to as what?	price inflation
What does CPI stand for?	consumer price index
Who publishes the Consumer Price Index?	Bureau of Labor Statistics
What does the CPI estimate?	average price of consumer goods and services in the United States
When was the Royal College of Chemistry established?	1845
Which politicians donated funds to establish the Royal College of Chemistry?	Benjamin Disraeli, William Gladstone and Robert Peel
Who was the first professor of the Royal College of Chemistry?	August Wilhelm von Hofmann
Why was the Royal College of Chemistry founded?	in the United Kingdom the teaching of chemistry in particular had fallen behind that in Germany
Who supported the Royal College of Chemistry?	Prince Albert
When was the Royal College of Chemistry established?	1845
What was not well taught that led to the founding of the Royal College of Chemistry?	practical aspects of the experimental sciences
Which country was ahead of the United Kingdom in the teaching of chemistry?	Germany
Which Prince supported the establishment of the college?	Prince Albert
Who was the first professor of the college?	August Wilhelm von Hofmann
When was the City and Guilds College founded?	1876
What was the aim of the City and Guilds College when it was founded?	improve the training of craftsmen, technicians, technologists, and engineers
What were the main objectives of establishing the City and Guilds College?	to create a Central Institution in London and to conduct a system of qualifying examinations in technical subjects
How much did the 1851 Exhibition Commissioners pay for the land that became the City and Guilds College?	GBP 342,500
What was the former name of the City and Guilds College?	CGLI Central Technical College
Which college was founded in 1876?	City and Guilds College
How many livery companies were in the meeting that founded the college?	16
What does CGLI stand for?	Advancement of Technical Education
Other than conducting a system of qualifying examinations, what was the other main objective of the meeting of CGLI?	to create a Central Institution in London
How large was the land (in acres) that the institution was founded on?	eighty-seven
When did Imperial announce their science park program at the Wye Campus?	December 2005
When did Imperial abandon their science park program?	September 2006
When was the Wye College campus closed?	September 2009
Where was Imperial planning on launching their science park program?	the Wye campus
Where was Imperial's science park programme located?	Wye campus
When was the science park programme abandoned?	September 2006
How much money could the science park programme have raised for the college?	£110m
Who did not know about the potential revenue that the programme could have raised initially?	the public
What was closed on September 2009?	Wye College campus
What was the market value of the endowment the college received on July 31, 2015?	£512.4 million
What is a "Unitised Scheme"?	a unit trust vehicle for College, Faculties and Departments to invest endowments and unfettered income to produce returns for the long term
How much did the market value of the college's endowment increase between 2014 and 2015?	£78 million
How many percent did the college's endowment market value increase from 2014 to 2015?	18%
How many distinct portfolios is the College's endownment divided into?	three
What is the term that represents a unit trust vehicle that allows endowments to be invested to produce returns for the lon term?	Unitised Scheme
The 120 operational and developmental properties within the college that are not core to the academic mission belong to which portfolio?	Non-Core Property
The College's restricted equity holdings would be considered a part of which portion of the portfolio?	Strategic Asset Investments
How much did the market value of the endowment increase by during the year 2014/2015?	£78 million
How many staff members did Imperial submit assessments of for the REF assessment?	1,257
In the 2014 rankings produced by Times Higher Education, what position was Imperial ranked for GPA?	2nd
How many units of assessment did Imperial submit?	14
How highly was Imperial ranked in "research power" in 2014?	8th
How many staff members did Imperial claim to have in 2014?	1,257
What does REF stand for?	Research Excellence Framework
What was the percentage of Imperials research that was seemed to be 3*?	44%
What did the REF give Imperial as an overall GPA?	3.36
What was Imperial's overall GPA rank according to the Times Higher Education?	2nd
When was Professor Stefan Grimm found dead?	September 2014
When did Imperial College make its first public announcement of Stefan Grimm's death?	4 December 2014
How many times was Professor Stefan Grimm's email viewed in the first four days after it was posted online?	more than 100,000
What did Professor Grimm's last email accuse Imperial College of before his death?	bullying
What did Imperial College announce it would do after Professor Grimm's death?	internal inquiry
Which Professor was found dead in September 2014?	Professor Stefan Grimm
To which department did the professor who passed in September 2014 belong?	Department of Medicine
What was the dead professor threatened with before his death?	dismissal
How much did the Grimm claim his employers said he should raise in grant money per year?	£200,000
How many views did Grimm's last email get in the first four days after it was posted?	more than 100,000
Which day was the Imperial College Boat Club formed on?	12 December 1919
How many alumni from Imperial were a part of the Gold medal winning GB8+?	3
What was the name of the coach of the Gold medal winning GB8+?	Martin McElroy
Which event has the Boat Club been highly successful at?	Henley Royal Regatta
Which event did the Boat Club claim victory in for 2013?	The Prince Albert Challenge Cup event
What school was established in 1851?	The Royal School of Mines
Who established the Royal School of Mines?	Sir Henry de la Beche
A collection of miners, maps and mining equipment all belonged to what entity?	the Museum of Economic Geology
Which famous prince was a patron at the Royal School of Mines?	Prince Albert
Which region did Prince Albert aim to make famous as an educational region?	South Kensington
Who granted Imperial degree-awarding powers?	Privy Council
In which year was the London Centre for Nanotechnology established?	2003
The Londre Centre for Nanotechnology was a joint effort between UCL and which college?	Imperial College London
What is the old name of the Imperial College Business School?	Tanaka Business School
The Faculties of Life Sciences and Physical Sciences merged in 2005 to become which faculty?	Faculty of Natural Sciences
In which area in London is Imperial's main campus located?	South Kensington
What is the area inside of South Kensington where Imperial is located known as?	Albertopolis
In which decade did the expansion of the South Kensington campus being?	1950s
Who designed the Imperial Institue that was a victim of Imperial's expansion in the 1950s & 1960s?	Thomas Collcutt
Which landmark still remains from the Imperial Institue after Imperial's expansion?	Queen's Tower
Which centre provides electives outside of science for students?	Centre For Co-Curricular Studies
Outside of doing it on their own time, what other motivation could students have to take non mandatory electives?	credit
Which unit is a part of the Co-Curricular Studies that offers master's degrees?	Science Communication Unit
Scientists seeking a master's degree might be interested in which other degree besides Science Communication from the Science Communication Unit?	Science Media Production
What statistic did the average Imperial graduate rank the highest in for 2014?	average starting salary
Which type of graduate from Imperial earned the second highest average starting salary after graduation?	Computing graduates
Who ranked different graduates according to their average starting salary after graduation in the UK?	Sunday Times
Which prestigious newspaper ranked Imperial College as one of the top 10 most welcomed universities by job markets?	New York Times
In which year did Imperial University claim the award for being voted the highest in the UK for Job Prospects?	2014
What does the abbreviation STOIC stand for?	Student Television of Imperial College
What is STOIC's modern name?	Imperial College TV
When was Imperial College Union's TV station founded?	1969
Where was a cable link located that connected the Southside Halls of residence?	Exhibition Road
When was the station renamed to it's modern name?	start of the 2014/15 academic year
Which famous automobile designer is considered a non - academic alumni?	Nicholas Tombazis
Which famous author is considered an alumni for Imperial?	H. G. Wells
Which airline's CEO can be called a non - academic alumni of Imperial?	Singapore Airlines
Which incredibly prestigious position did Huw Thomas hold?	Head Physician to the Queen
Which hedge fund manager with a networth of over a billion is considered an alumni?	Alan Howard
Which society organized The Great Exhibition?	Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce
How much of a surplus did The Great Ehibition raise?	£186,000
Who insisted that the surplus from The Great Exhibition be used as a home for culture and education for all?	Albert
What was Prince Albert's commitment?	to find practical solutions to today's social challenges
What did the Royal colleges and Imperial Institute form when they merged?	Imperial College London
Who proposed a merger of many colleges in 1907?	Board of Education
What was the reasoning behind the proposal to merge many colleges?	greater capacity for higher technical education was needed
When the merger was passed, what constituent college was created?	The Imperial College of Science and Technology
Who did the constituent college belong to?	University of London
Which document, granted by Edward VII, was officially signed on the 8th of July 1907?	Imperial's Royal Charter
What was Imperial's net income for the financial year that ended on 31 July 2013?	£822.0 million
What was Imperial's total expenditure for the financial year that ended on the 31 July 2013?	£754.9 million
How much income was generated from research grants and contracts for 2013?	£329.5 million
Who granted Imperial close to 170 million pounds in grants?	Funding Council
What was Imperial's capital expenditure for the 2012/2013 financial year?	£124 million
In which year did Imperial merge with St Mary's Hospital Medical School?	1988
Which school resulted from Imperial's merger with St Mary's?	The Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine
Who did Imperial partner with to launch the Imperial College Press?	World Scientific
What year was the Imperial College School of Medicine formally established?	1997
What is the name of the building that was opened by Queen Elizabeth II?	Sir Alexander Fleming Building
What percentage of Imperial's staff was classified as world leading in 2008?	26%
What percentage of Imperial's staff was deemed to be internationally excellent in 2008?	47%
Which group assessed Imperial's staff members to determine their standing in relation to the rest of the world?	Research Assessment Exercise
How many subjects were judged to be the best in terms of internationally recognised research quality?	five
What was formed on the 1st October 2007?	Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust
How many hospitals does it manage?	five
What is it considered to be?	an academic health science centre
What is the annual turnover for the trust?	£800 million
How many patients a year does the trust treat?	more than a million
What portion of females reported that they were held back by managers?	one third
In which year were these allegations raised?	2003
After the 2003 incident, what was the next major year in which conerns were raised?	2007
In which faculty were the methods used to fire people being questioned?	Faculty of Medicine
Who is the new President for Imperial College?	Alice Gast
What is the official name of the student's union?	Imperial College Union
How many full time officers run the union?	five
How long is the tenure for an officer to run the union?	one year
How many clubs, projects and societies is the union responsible for managing?	around 300
What kind of programmes do students work on for Project Nepal?	educational development
What kind of University is Imperial College London?	public research university
Who founded the Imperial College London?	Prince Albert
Who opened the Imperial Institute in 1907?	Queen Victoria
Which document allowed the Imperial College London to be formed?	Royal Charter
What was the focus of the Imperial College London?	science and technology
Who discovered the first synthetic dye?	William Henry Perkin
What did the scientist who discovered the dye do after discovering it?	resigned his position
What is the name of the first synthetic dye discovered?	mauveine
The discovery of the synthetic dye is claimed by some histories to have sparked what event?	second chemical revolution
Which award is named after the discoverer of the dye?	Perkin Medal
What site did Imperial acquire in 1947?	Silwood Park
What was the name of Imperial's student newspaper?	Felix
How much money was donated for a new Biochemistry Department?	£350,000
Who donated the large sum of money to help aid the establishement of the Biochemistry Department?	Wolfson Foundation
Imperial formed a relationship with which other entity in 1963?	Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
What is the maximum length of the runway gymnasts sprint down before hurdling onto a spring board?	25 meters
What is blocking using only a shoulder movement called?	punching
What is one thing a successful vault depends on?	the length of the hurdle
What may be added to a vault before landing in advanced gymnastics?	multiple twists and somersaults
What is the maximum length of a runway?	25 meters
Who gets to chose where a gymnast starts to run on the runway?	The gymnast
What position is the gymnast when in the air?	a standing position
What are later added to the landing by advanced gymnasts?	multiple twists and somersaults
What do successful vaults depend on other than speed of the run?	the length of the hurdle, the power the gymnast generates from the legs and shoulder girdle, the kinesthetic awareness in the air, and the speed of rotation
Only women compete in rhythmic gymnastics according to what rules?	FIG
What combines elements of ballet, gymnastics, dance, and apparatus manipulation?	rhythmic gymnastics
What 5 items are used in rhythmic gymnastic routines?	ball, ribbon, hoop, clubs, rope
Rhythmic gymnastics places greater emphaises on aesthetics rather than what?	the acrobatic
What is the maximum number of points possible for a rhythmic gymnastic routine?	30
What rules state that only women can compete in rhythmic gymastics?	FIG
What does rhythmic gymastics combine together?	ballet, gymnastics, dance, and apparatus manipulation
What five seperate apparatuses are used in the five separate routines?	ball, ribbon, hoop, clubs, rope
Which is more focused on, aesthetics or acrobatics?	aesthetic
How many possible points are there for rhythmic routines?	30 points
What does AGG stand for?	Aesthetic Group Gymnastics
Why is AGG different than Rhythmic Gymnastics?	body movement is large and continuous and teams are larger'
Do athletes use apparatuses in the international AGG competitions?	do not use apparatus in international AGG competitions
What physical qualities are needed for rhythmic gymastics?	flexibility, balance, speed, strength, coordination and sense of rhythm
What year was the Federsation of Aesthetic Group Gymnastics established?	2003
What is the rope made out of that the gymnists uses in their routine?	hemp or a synthetic material
How long is the rope?	Its length is in proportion to the size of the gymnast
What are at the ends of the ropes to help the gymnists hold it?	One or two knots at each end are for keeping hold of the rope while doing the routine.
What other requirement is there for the rope?	The rope must be coloured, either all or partially and may either be of a uniform diameter or be progressively thicker in the center
When did FIG decide to nullify the use of ropes in competition?	2011
Where was the FIG founded?	Liege
What year was FIG founded?	1881
When was gymnastics included in the Olympics?	1896
When were the first women's Olympic competitions held?	1928
Where were the first women's Olympic competitions held?	in Amsterdam
How long is the run way in vaulting?	25 metres (82 ft)
How man feet do vaulters land on?	a two footed landing
What determines where a vaulter starts on the runway?	their height and strength
What is a round-off entry vault called?	Yurchenko
What is the most common vault in elite level gymnastics?	yurchenko
How are gymnasts scored?	from deductions taken from their start value
How is the start vaule determined?	e start value of a routine is based on the difficulty of the elements the gymnast attempts and whether or not the gymnast meets composition requirements
What is this score called?	D score
Deductions in execution and artistry are taken from what score?	10.0
What were added to scoring in 2007?	adding bonus plus the execution and then adding those two together to get the final score
When were the technical rules for the Japanses version of men's rhythmic gymnastics formed?	1970s
How many apparatuses are used?	only four types
What are the types of apparatuses used?	the double rings, the stick, the rope, and the clubs
What apparatuses do groups use?	Groups do not use any apparatus
When did Japan hold the first of the Men's Rhythmic Gymnastics World Champtionship?	November 27–29, 2003
What Greek word did gymnastics derive from?	γυμνός (gymnos) meaning "naked"
What does the  verb gymnazo mean?	to train naked", "train in gymnastic exercise", generally "to train, to exercise"
Why was this verb used?	because athletes in ancient times exercised and competed without clothing
When did the word come into use?	1570s
What year was the Olympic Games apparatus and events standardized?	1954
What is the grading structure?	a point system from 1 to 15
Who set the first precedent that continues this day?	Soviet gymnasts
Who recieved the first perfect score?	Nadia Comăneci
What year and where was the first perfect score given?	1976 Summer Olympics held in Montreal, Canada
What does a typical pommel horse exercise consist of?	both single leg and double leg work
Single leg skills are found in the form of what normally?	form of scissors, an element often done on the pommels
What is the main staple of this event?	Double leg work
When does the routine end?	when the gymnast performs a dismount
What are two ways that a gymnist dismounts?	by swinging his body over the horse, or landing after a handstand
What is a critical skill in terms of execution in scores?	landing
Where do most injuries happen?	the lower extremities such as: cartilage lesions, ligament tears, and bone bruises/fractures
How do you avoid injuries?	proper technique must be used by the gymnast
What is a successful landing?	soft, meaning the knee and hip joints are at greater than 63 degrees of flexion
Individual routines start with what phases?	build-up phase during which the gymnast jumps repeatedly to achieve height
What does the gymnast do during the 10 bounces.	a sequence of aerial skills
What is the maximum scroe for routines?	10 points
How can additional points be earned?	depending on the difficulty of the moves and the length of time taken to complete the ten skills
In high level competitions how many preliminary rountines are there?	two preliminary routines
What are the uneven bars?	two horizontal bars set at different heights
What are these bars made out of?	fiberglass covered in wood laminate
Why are the bars not made of wood anymore?	the bars were prone to breaking,
How have the bars changed over the years?	They've been moved increasingly further apart
How do gymnasts normally mount the uneven bars?	using a springboard, or a small mat
What does a higher flight phase result in?	a higher vertical ground reaction force
What is vertical ground reaction force?	s external force which the gymnasts have to overcome with their muscle force and has an impact on the gymnasts linear and angular momentum
What else is an important aspect that affects linear and agular movements?	time the landing takes Gymnasts
What was aerobic gymnastics called orginally?	Sport Aerobics
What does aerobic gymnastiscs involve?	the performance of routines by individuals, pairs, trios or groups up to 6 people, emphasizing strength, flexibility, and aerobic fitness
How many people can be in a routine?	individuals, pairs, trios or groups up to 6 people
What is the size of the mat?	7x7m
How long do the routines last?	Routines generally last 60–90 seconds depending on age of participant and routine category
What kind of routines do general gymnastic groups perform?	synchronized, choreographed routines
What do the troupes consist of?	of both genders and are not separated into age divisions
When was the first World Gymnaestrada held?	1939
What was the first Sport Program recongized by FIG?	Gymnastics for All
How many participants are there?	30 million
What is gymnastics?	Gymnastics is a sport involving the performance of exercises requiring strength, flexibility, balance and control
Who governs all events in gymnastics?	Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique (FIG)
What does each country have?	Each country has its own national governing body (BIW) affiliated to FIG
What are the best known gymnastic events?	Competitive artistic gymnastics
What events does this normally consist of for women?	vault, uneven bars, balance beam, and floor exercise.
What two Germans were known for creating exercises on apparauses?	Johann Friedrich GutsMuths (1759–1839) and Friedrich Ludwig Jahn (1778–1852)
What did the exercises lead to?	to what is considered modern gymnastics
Who introduced educative gymnastics in France?	Don Francisco Amorós y Ondeano
What did Jahn promote the use of?	parallel bars, rings and high bar
When did FIG decide that scores are no longer limited to 10 points?	2006
What are the two different scores?	an execution score and a difficulty score
What score was added?	difficulty score
How much is a fall deduction?	1.00 deduction
What is a gymnast's difficulty score based on?	what elements they perform
What is the floor exercise events performed on now?	a carpeted 12m × 12m square, usually consisting of hard foam over a layer of plywood
What was the floor exercise even on before?	the bare floor or mats such as wrestling mats
Why helps add an extra bounce to the floor?	springs or foam blocks generally called a "spring" floor
What is the maximum for floor events?	up to 90 seconds
What do athletes perform for tumbling?	an explosive series of flips and twists down a sprung tumbling track
When was tumbling orginally contested at the Olympics?	1932
Where are offical tumbling competitions allowed?	only allowed as an event in Trampoline gymnastics meets
What year did FIG reconginze Trampoline and Acrobatic Gymnastics?	1999
What are mens' rhythmic gymnastics related to?	both Men's artistic gymnastics and wushu martial arts
Where did mens' rhythmic gymnastics develop from?	stick gymnastics
What is the aim of stick gymnastics?	improving physical strength and health
What are the main focus?	tumbling, strength, power, and martial arts skills are the main focus
How many mens' rhythmic gymnasts were in Japan in 2002?	1000
Where did the Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg move his residence to?	Hanover
Who elevated the status of the Dukes of Brunswick-Lüneburg?	Holy Roman Emperor
Who confirmed the elevation of the Dukes of Brunswick-Lüneburg in 1708?	Imperial Diet
Which other nation would the electors of Hanover become monarchs of?	Great Britain
Who was the first elector from Hanover to sit on the British throne?	George I Louis
Other than for railroads and road junction, what did Hanover have that made it a major target?	production center
Which campaign specifically was Hanover a target for in World War II?	Oil Campaign
What does VLW stand for?	United light metal works
How many civilians were killed in the Allied bombing raids in World War II?	more than 6,000
How many bombing raids were there during World War II?	88
Which zoo is one of the best in Europe?	Hanover Zoo
What award did the Hanover Zoo receive four years in a row?	Park Scout Award
Which animal does the so-called swimming area have?	seabirds
When did the Canadian-theme area in the Hanover Zoo open?	2010
How many people visited the Hanover Zoo in 2010?	1.6 million
What famous theatre is located in Georgs Palace?	GOP Variety theatre
What is the most important Cabaret-Event?	Kleines Fest im Großen Garten
Where do artists who feature in the Kleines Fest im Großen Garten come from?	around the world
What is another important event other than the Calenberger Cabaret Weeks or the Hanover Cabaret Festival?	Wintervariety
What is a notable achievement about the Kleines Fest im Großen Garten?	most successful Cabaret Festival in Germany
What does the German spelling of Hanover have that English does not?	a double n
Which version of the spelling of Hanover does the local Government use on English websites?	German
Which syllable does the English spoken version of Hanover stress?	first
Which syllable does the German pronunciation of Hanover stress?	second
Which spelling of Hanover is used in historical contexts?	traditional English spelling
What does the NSDAP stand for?	Nazi party
After which year did the Lord Mayor join the NSDAP?	1937
How many Hanoverian Jews were expelled in 1938?	484
Who assassinated the German diplomat Eduard Ernst vom Rath?	Herschel Grynszpan
Which city was the German diplomat in when he got assassinated?	Paris
What kind of garden is The Great Garden?	European baroque garden
What destroyed the palace?	Allied bombing
Who constructed the two pavilions in the palace?	Remy de la Fosse
Other than the Nouveau Jardin, what is the other popular part of The Great Garden?	Great Ground
What is at the centre of the Nouveau Jardin?	Europe's highest garden fountain
Who designed the Gehry Tower?	Frank O. Gehry
What is notable about the city forest Eilenriede?	one of the largest of its kind in Europe
What nationality was the architect of the Gehry Tower?	American
How many parks are there approximately in Hanover?	40
How many rivers run through Hanover?	two
What is Hanover a German capital for?	marksmen
What is the name of the largest Marksmen's Fun Fair in the world?	Schützenfest Hannover
How many rides and inns does the fair have?	more than 260
How many participants are int he Parade of the Marksmen?	12.000
What year can the festival be traced back to?	1529
What is a Schnellweg?	expressway
What structure does the Schnellweg and a number of roads roughly form?	a large ring road
When does the Messeschnellweg change to the B6?	Seelhorster Kreuz
What road does the Messeschnellweg pass the Hanover fairground as?	B6
What road does the Südschnellweg start out as?	B65
What ended in the year 1837?	the personal union of the United Kingdom and Hanover
What was the name of William IV's heir?	Queen Victoria
Who did the throne of Hanover pass to instead of Queen Victoria?	Ernest Augustus
What happened to the kingdom of Hanover in 1866?	annexed by Prussia
In which battle was the Hanover army destroyed?	Battle of Langensalza
What plan was implemented in September 1941?	Action Lauterbacher
Which portion of the population underwent ghettoisation?	Hanoverian Jewish families
What occured on the 15th of December 1941?	Wannsee Conference
How many Jews approximately lived in Hanover in 1938?	4,800
How many concentration camps were constructed in Hanover?	seven
Where was Hanover originally founded?	east bank of the River Leine
What did Hanover possibly originally mean?	"high (river)bank"
When did Hanover become a comparitvely large town?	13th century
Which city was Hanover connected to by the Leine?	Hanseatic League city of Bremen
What is one example of traffic that passed through Hanover?	mule trains
Who imposed the Convention of Artlenburg?	Napoleon
How many French soldiers occupied Hanover?	30,000
Where did many soldiers from Hanover emigrate to?	Great Britain
What did the soldiers who emigrated form?	King's German Legion
Who elevated Hanover to the Kingdom of Hanover in 1815?	The Congress of Vienna
What is the Berggarten?	European botanical garden
What is the name of the area inside the Berggarten that hosts one of the world's biggest collection of orchids?	Orchid House
What historic landmark is near the entrance to the Berggarten?	Library Pavillon
What is the name of the first tropical aquarium in Germany?	Sea Life Centre Hanover
Other than orchids and birds, what else is housed in the Orchid House?	butterflies
What does VWN stand for?	Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles Transporter
What part of town is the plant owned by VWN located in?	northern edge of town
Which company was founded in Hanover in 1871?	Continental AG
Where does TUI AG host their headquarters?	Hanover
Which major global reinsurance company has their headquarters east of the city center?	Hannover Re
How many theaters approximately are located in Hanover?	40
What is the Schauspielhaus in English?	Play House
Who does the Cumberlandsche Galerie belong to?	Lower Saxony State Theatre
Which theatre is Hanover's big theatre for musicals, shows and guest performances?	Theater am Aegi
Which theater has it's own musical company?	Theater für Niedersachsen
Who does the nicname "Die Roten" belong to?	Hannover 96
What is another name for the top football division?	Bundesliga
What is the name of the stadium that the Hanover football team plays in?	HDI-Arena
Where did the reserve team for the main Hanover team used to play?	Eilenriedestadium
Which league does the reserve team Hanover 96 II play in?	fourth league
What is Hanover's population?	518,000
What is Hanover's ranking in terms of size in Germany?	thirteenth largest
What is the largest Oktoberfest in the world?	Oktoberfest of Blumenau
In which year did Hanover host the Expo?	2000
What is "highways" in German?	Autobahnen
Where are the large Martkirche located?	Old Town
What is the old royal sports hall now called?	Ballhof theatre
What is the name of the momument to the victims of war and violence?	Aegidien Church
What world famous landmark is located on the bank of the Leine?	Nanas of Niki de Saint-Phalle
Where does the Mile of Sculptures start?	Trammplatz
What is the Münzkabinett der TUI-AG?	A cabinet of coins
What is the name of the largest police museum in Germany?	Polizeigeschichtliche Sammlung Niedersachsen
Where can you find carpets and objects from the orient?	Oriental Carpet Museum
Other than in Hanover, where else can you find a Blind Man Museum?	Berlin
What is the main topic of the Kunsthalle Faust?	Modern art
What system of the body is related to emotion's physiology?	nervous
What sorts of people are more likely to be emotionally expressive?	Extroverted
What type of people hide their emotions?	introverted
What is emotion frequently responsible for driving?	motivation
Along with physical changes, what sort of changes do emotions sometimes cause?	psychological
What is the name of the theory Plutchik created?	wheel of emotions
How many main emotions exist in Plutchik's theory?	eight
In Plutchik's theory, what emotion is the opposite of anticipation?	surprise
What emotion can be perceived as a combination of disgust and anger?	contempt
What does Plutchik see as the positive equivalent of disgust?	trust
What was the name of the book that Darwin wrote on emotions?	The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals
Along with survival, what did Darwin see as the role of emotions in humans?	communication
Through what process did Darwin believe emotions developed?	natural selection
In what century did Darwin write?	19th
In this theory, what action evokes an emotion?	stimulus
What sort of response does the stimulus cause?	physiological
How is the stimulus interpreted by the mind?	as a particular emotion
In the James-Lange theory, what causes emotions?	bodily states
Who argued that emotions arise from cognitive intentionality?	Richard Lazarus
Along with evaluations and thoughts, what cognitive activity did theorists believe to be required for emotion?	judgments
In Lazarus' view, what could the cognitive activity be if it was not conscious?	unconscious
What book by Prinz defended the perceptual theory?	Gut Reactions
What book on the perceptual theory was written by James Laird?	Feelings
What is Laird's job title?	psychologist
What is Jesse Prinz's profession?	philosopher
What theory argues that conceptual cognition is not required for emotional meaning?	the perceptual theory
What discipline examines the role emotions play in culture?	sociology
What discipline makes use of ethnography?	anthropology
What field of study studies the organizational role of emotions?	communication sciences
Who developed the concept of emotional labor?	Arlie Russell Hochschild
Roughly how many people are part of EmoNet?	700
Along with anger, pride and happiness, what is an example of an emotional label?	fear
Aside from increased perspiration, what is a physiological change related to emotions?	changes in pulse rate
Along with smiling and frowning, what is an example of a facial or body movement caused by emotion?	baring teeth
Who developed a comprehensive theory related to human emotional arousal?	Jonathan Turner
How many emotional categories did Turner recognize as being founded on human neurology?	four
Along with William James, who was an influential 19th century theorist?	Carl Lange
What was William James' nationality?	American
What was the nationality of Carl Lange?	Danish
What was the name of the theory that Lange and James developed independently?	the James–Lange theory
In what year did Lange die?	1900
Along with psychology, neuroscience, endocrinology, medicine, history and sociology, what field has engaged in research on emotion?	computer science
Along with dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin, cortisol and oxytocin, what neurotransmitter or hormone influences emotion?	GABA
Along with the experience, function and origin of emotion, what aspect of emotion does current research attempt to explain?	neurobiology
What are emotional episodes defined in contrast to?	emotional dispositions
What other traits are emotional dispositions similar to?	character traits
What category is defined to contain pleasure, pain, motivation, moods and dispositions?	affective states
What theory sees an emotional episode as consisting of components?	psychological construction
At what point does psychological construction theory believe the components of an emotion are put together?	at the moment of its occurrence
What is an example of an emotion that, under psychological construction theory, is not the same from one case to another?	fear
Who argued that physiological responses were insufficient to explain emotional experiences?	Walter Bradford Cannon
Along with the physiological response, what did Cannon believe was triggered by an emotional event?	a conscious experience of an emotion
Why did Cannon believe that physiological responses were insufficient cause for emotions?	too slow and often imperceptible
Who developed a situated perspective on emotion along with Andrea Scarantino?	Paul E. Griffiths
What factors did the situated perspective believe to be most important?	external
The situated perspective was influenced by what school of thought?	situationism
Along with infant and animal emotion, what did Scarantino and Griffiths believe the situated perspective could help to explain?	phobias
When did Broca publish his pioneering work?	1878
Who published a work in 1937 on the relationship between emotion and the limbic system?	Papez
Along with the cingulate cortex and hippocampi, what structure is a notable part of the limbic system?	hypothalamus
Along with the philosophies of music and art, what field of philosophy studies emotions?	ethics
Along with drama and melodrama, in what filmmaking genre does emotion play an important role?	romance
Of what discipline is ethology a branch?	zoology
Along with laboratory work, what does an ethologist engage in?	field science
Along with evolution, what area of study is ethology tied to?	ecology
Who discussed the idea of a collective effervescence?	Emilé Durkheim
What society was studied to describe the notion of collective effervescence?	Australian aborigine society
Durkheim saw collective effervescence in what Australian aboriginal activity?	totemic rituals
What is another term for collective effervescence?	emotional energy
What theory was developed by Arnold?	the appraisal theory of emotions
When did Richard Lazarus die?	2002
Who wrote 'What Is An Emotion?'?	Robert C. Solomon
Who published What Is An Emotion?: Classic and Contemporary Readings?	Oxford
What is Nico Frijda's nationality?	Dutch
When did the word emotion enter the English language?	1579
From what French word is emotion derived?	émouvoir
What does émouvoir mean in English?	to stir up
Prior to the introduction of the word emotion, what word was used in its place?	passion
Along with anxiety, what is an example of directionless emotion?	depression
What is the thalamus a part of?	the diencephalon
Who argued that an emotional stimulus triggered experiential and physiological responses to emotions at the same time?	Cannon
What creatures did Bard experiment on?	animals
Along with sensory and motor information, what information had to pass through the diencephalon before being processed?	physiological
Who wrote The Passions, Emotions and the Meaning of Life?	Robert C. Solomon
In what year was The Passions, Emotions and the Meaning of Life published?	1993
What does Solomon believe emotions to be?	judgments
Whose theory discussed action tendencies?	Nico Frijda
The idea that judgment can't be identified with emotion is an objection to what school of thought?	cognitivism
Who researched the role of emotional phenotype temperaments on social connectedness?	Kurt Kortschal
From where do zygotes derive their genetic information?	their parental germ cells
What percentage of difference is there between the genetic material of humans and the genetic material of chimpanzees?	1.2%
How many million years ago did the evolution of chimpanzees and humans diverge?	five
About how long ago did modern human beings first come into existence?	200,000 years
Along with mood, temperament, disposition and motivation, what is emotion often tied to?	personality
What do some theories see as an important part of emotion?	cognition
Along with sweating and muscle tension, what might be a physiological response to danger?	rapid heartbeat and breathing
Sweating is a product of the arousal of what system?	nervous
Who described the concept of a continuum of intensity?	Michael C. Graham
What is Michael Graham's profession?	Psychotherapist
What is an example of an extreme form of fear?	terror
What would be an example of mild shame?	embarrassment
What are non-intense feelings that lack a contextual stimulus called?	Moods
Who has argued that emotions are discrete?	Paul Ekman
How many basic emotions did Ekman recognize?	six
Along with anger, disgust, happiness, sadness and fear, what is one of Ekman's basic emotions?	surprise
What school of thought saw emotion as an impediment to virtue?	stoic
What thinker believed that emotions were necessary for virtue?	Aristotle
What did the Aristotelians call emotions?	passions
Who was a notable scholastic thinker?	Thomas Aquinas
Along with Descartes, Machiavelli and Hume, what notable philosopher developed a theory of emotions?	Baruch Spinoza
Who wrote that exciting facts lead to emotions?	William James
What did James believe a stimulus act upon to produce emotion?	the autonomic nervous system
What did James believe emotion was synonymous with?	the perception of bodily changes
Who developed a theory similar to that of James?	Carl Lange
What was the profession of Lange?	psychologist
What historical school claims that sentiments and meta-emotions can be learned?	constructivist
According to the constructivists, what is an example of a learned meta-emotion?	Schadenfreude
Along with Germany, England, Spain and Australia, where has a research center on the history of emotions recently opened?	Sweden
Along with class and race, what is regarded as an essential category of historical analysis?	gender
Whose work did the theory of Stanley Schachter build on?	Gregorio Marañón
What did Gregorio Marañón inject his patients with?	epinephrine
What was the nationality of Gregorio Marañón?	Spanish
Who was a notable student of  Stanley Schachter?	Jerome Singer
In what year was the book Gut Reactions by Jesse Prinz published?	2004
In what decade did sociologists focus on the social relevance of emotion?	1990s
What emotions did Cooley regard as of paramount social importance?	pride and shame
Who studied rage and shame cycles in married couples?	Retzinger
Who developed the social bond theory?	Scheff
Along with Cooley, from whose work did Scheff derive social bond theory?	Goffman
What is the term for the strategies used by people to influence their emotional experiences?	Emotion regulation
What type of strategy involves avoiding a situation where unwanted emotions might be experienced?	behavioral
Rational emotive behavior therapy is an approach used by what psychotherapy schools?	Cognitively oriented schools
What sort of therapy might examine emotions based on components of facial expressions?	Gestalt therapy
What system was examined to develop the neurobiological explanation of human emotion?	limbic
What classification of chemicals do dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline belong to?	neurochemicals
What chemicals may mediate emotions?	pheromones
Reactive responses are present in the brains of what animals?	reptiles
The neurobiological explanation is specific to what types of brains?	mammalian
What discipline studies the role of emotions in neural mechanisms?	Human sciences
What fields studies the role of emotions in the treatment of human mental disorders?	psychiatry
What profession studies the role of emotions in providing holistic health care?	Nursing
What is affective neuroscience a sub-field of?	neuroscience
What field studies the relationship between emotion and learning?	education
Who came up with the interaction ritual theory?	Randall Collins
From what work of Durkheim's was interaction ritual theory derived?	totemic rituals
In addition to Durkheim, whose work influenced the development of interaction ritual theory?	Goffman
What is the term for a feeling of confidence to take action?	Emotional energy
What is the term for the energy generated during group gatherings, such as totemic rituals?	collective effervescence
Of what discipline is affective computing a branch?	computer science
What is the foundational document of affective computing?	Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper
In affective computing, what devices are used to collect data about the physical state of a user?	passive sensors
How does emotional speech processing determine a user's emotional state?	analyzing speech patterns
Along with subjective experience, cognitive processes, expressive behavior and psychophysiological changes, what is another notable emotional component?	instrumental behavior
With what emotional component did William James identify emotion?	subjective experience
What emotional component did behaviorists identify emotion with?	instrumental behavior
What academics identified emotions with physiological changes?	psychophysiologists
Who discussed emotions in the context of expressive body actions and cultural labels?	Peggy Thoits
What model of emotion was developed by Scherer?	components processing model
How many important emotional elements are present in the components processing model?	five
What processes drive the other components processing model processes?	appraisal
What do psychologists use to visually map emotional experiences?	multidimensional scaling
Along with valence, what is the other of the two dimensions used to map emotional experiences?	arousal
What is the term for the feeling of energy or enervation created by an emotional experience?	arousal
What is the term for the degree to which an emotional experience feels positive or negative?	valence
What component of emotion provides its perceived energy?	core affect
What technology has allowed for research into the earlier-evolved parts of the brain?	neuroimaging
Along with LeDoux, who was a notable neurological brain researcher?	António Damásio
Who argued that emotional responses compete with instinct and reason?	Paul D. MacLean
In what decade did Damásio and LeDoux do notable work?	1990s
Along with Cropanzano, who developed a communication-based theory of emotional experience?	Howard M. Weiss
When did Weiss and Cropanzano publish their work?	1996
What context did the theory of Weiss and Cropanzano pay particular attention to?	work
Who did Beal write "Reflections on Affective Events Theory" with?	Howard M. Weiss
Where was "Reflections on Affective Events Theory" published?	Research on Emotion in Organizations
What parts of reptiles respond to sensory cues?	motor centers
What is the principal sense of night-active mammals?	smell
Why were early mammals active at night?	reptiles slept
What developed from the mammalian odor pathways?	limbic brain
How do the olfactory lobes of mammals compare in size to those of reptiles?	larger
What model described the opposite of approach as moving away?	Direction Model
What model described the opposite of approach as unmoving but with resistance and strength?	Movement Model
According to the Action Tendency Model, the opposite of approach is described as unmoving with what?	passive yielding
Along with behavioral inhibition, research on what trait resulted in support for the Action Tendency Model?	shyness
In what economics sub-field are emotions discussed?	microeconomics
What is a notable political science subfield where emotions are analyzed?	the analysis of voter decision-making
Along with criminal law, what facet of law considers evidence related to emotion?	tort law
Along with sociology and behavioral sciences, what discipline informs the field of criminology?	psychology
Along with risk perception, what do economists study emotion in relate to?	purchase decision-making
What emotion do many cultures discourage in women?	anger
Some cultures attempt to regulate what emotion in boys?	fear
The open expression of what emotion is generally frowned upon in most cultures?	disgust
What social institution is associated with the emotion of love?	marriage
What emotion do political campaigns appeal to in regard to terrorism?	fear
How many Copa del Rey trophies has Barcelona won?	27
How many UEFA Champions League titles has Barcelona won?	five
Barcelona ranked first in the IFFHS Club World Ranking in what years?	1997, 2009, 2011, 2012 and 2015
How many Inter-Cities Fairs Cup trophies has Barcelona won?	three
What position is Barcelona ranked on the UEFA club rankings?	second
How many UEFA Championship League titles has Barcelona won?	five
How many UEFA  Cup Winners' Cup wins does Barcelona have?	four
How many FIFA Club World Cup trophies does football club Barcelona have?	three
What club is Barcelona's long time rival?	Real Madrid
How many UEFA Super Cup wins does the Barcelona team have?	five
On what day did the stadium crowd jeer the Royal March in protest against Primo de Rivera's dictatorship?	14 June 1925
In what year did the directors of Barcelona first claim to operate a professional football club?	1926
On what date did the FC Barca hold a second testimonial match for Paulino Alcántara against the Spanish national team?	3 July 1927
Who wrote the poem titled "Oda a Platko"?	Rafael Alberti
When did Gamper commit suicide?	30 July 1930
In 1925 what incident by the crowd caused the closing of the stadium?	jeered the Royal March
How long was the stadium closed?	six months
What year did Barcelona claim to be a professional football club?	1926
When did Barcelona win the Spanish League?	23 June 1929
What past president of the Barcelona club committed suicide in 1930?	Gamper
When did Johan Cruyff join Barcelona?	The 1973–74 season
What did Johan Cruyff say to the European press that won over Barelona fans?	he could not play for a club associated with Francisco Franco
Who did Johan Cruyff name his son after?	Catalan Saint George
When was Johan Cruyff first crowned footballer of the year while playing for Barcelona?	1973
When was Johan Cruyff crowned footballer of the year for the third time?	1974
How much did Barcelona pay to acquire Johan Cruyff?	£920,000
 For what team did Cruyff refuse to play?	Real Madrid
What dictator's rule was Cruyff's reason for avoiding Real Madrid?	Francisco Franco
What award did Cruyff win during his first year with Barcelona?	European Footballer of the Year
When did Cruyff win his third Ballon d'Or?	1974
In what year did Barcelona win a Copa del Rey and La Liga double?	1998
In what year did Barcelona win the Primera División title?	1999
In what year did van Gaal and Núñez resign from Barcelona?	2000
Who was the fourth Barcelona player to be awarded European Footballer of the Year?	Rivaldo
How long did Ronaldo remain with Barcelona?	short time
When did Barcelona win a Copa del Rey and La Liga double?	1998
When was the centenari of Barcelona celebrated?	1999
What title did Barcelona win in 1999?	Primera División
Which Barcelona player was the fourth to win European Footballer of the Year?	Rivaldo
How many players did Barcelona list on the day their transfer ban ended?	77
What event in February did Barcelona qualify for for the sixth time?	Copa del Rey final
How many consecutive wins did Barcelona have in 2010-11?	28
With which team did Barcelona have a 1-1 draw in the 2015-16 Copa del Rey?	Valencia
Besides Arda Turan, what other player became eligible to play in 2016?	Aleix Vidal
What team is dominate in won games in La Liga?	Barcelona
What team has beaten Barcelona three times in 80 seasons?	Espanyol
What team won the all-Catalan Copa del Rey in 1957?	Barcelona
Which team has the largest margin win?	Espanyol
When was Espanyol's margin win of 6-0?	1951
Besides Barcelona and Real Madrid, what other team has remained in the Primera Division?	Athletic Bilbao
What series of wins did Barcelona achieve in 2009?	continental treble
How many competition wins did Barcelona have in 2011?	five
When was Barcelona able to win the continental treble for the second time?	June 2015
How many UEFA Champions League wins does Barcelona have?	five
What is the  number of UEFA Cup Winners' Cup competitions Barcelona has won?	four
How many UEFA Super Cup awards does Barcelona have?	five
What is the number of FIFA Club World  Cup trophies Barcelona has?	three
What competition is the predecessor to the UEFA Cup-Europa League?	Inter-Cities Fairs Cup
Who was murdered on 6 August, 1936?	Josep Sunyol
Besides being club president, what was Sunyol involved in to have caused his murder?	pro-independence political party
What was Sunyol called after his death?	martyr
What was club Barcelona considered to represent when on tour in 1937?	Second Spanish Republic
Where did half of the Barcelona team seek asylum in 1937?	Mexico and France
How many consecutive La Liga titles did Barcelona win from 1991-94?	four
By 1992 who was Barcelona's most successful manager?	Cruyff
For how many years was Cruyff manager for Barcelona?	eight
What feature of play did Cruyff introduce to Barcelona?	passing style
What failure did Cruyff have in his last two seasons as manager with Barcelona?	win any trophies
Under whose direction was there disappointment?	Gaspart
After Gaspart, who was manager of team Barcelona?	Frank Rijkaard
At this time, what type of players were added to Barcelona?	international
What season did Barcelona win La Liga and Supercopa de Espana?	2004–05
Which player won FIFA World Player of the Year?	Ronaldinho
How many times did Barcelona win the Copa del Rey?	25
What team did Barcelona beat to win La Liga for the 2008-09 season?	Real Madrid
What team did Barcelona beat to win 2008-09 Champions League title?	Manchester United
Which Spanish team did Barcelona defeat to win the Supercopa de Espana?	Athletic Bilbao
When Barcelona won 2009 FIFA Club World Cup, what first time feat did they accomplish?	sextuple
When did Tito Vilanova become manager of FC Barcelona?	2012
Who did Vilanova replace as manager?	Pep Guardiola
How many total points did Barcelona collect during the 20012 season?	100
Who was Barcelona's top scorer?	Lionel Messi
When was the Barcelona team become Spanish football champions for the 22nd time?	11 May 2013
To whom did Barcelona appeal to lift the transfer bad?	Court of Arbitration for Sport
During what year was Barcelona not allowed to use  their transfer windows?	2015
When was Zubizareta fired by the board?	5 January 2015
What position did Zubizareta have?	director of football
After firing the director, what did Barcelona form?	Football Area Technical Commission
How many registered fan clubs does Barcelona have worldwide?	1,335
What are the fan clubs called?	penyes
How many Facebook followers does team Barcelona have?	over 90 million
What famous cleric was a supporter of Barcelona?	Pope John Paul II
What is the only team that has a higher attendance rate than Club Barcelona?	Borussia Dortmund
What team is Barcelona's local rival?	Espanyol
What club was granted royal patronage?	Blanc-i-blaus
What type of group founded Espanyol?	Spanish football fans
Of what element of Barcelona's board did Espanyol disapprove?	multinational nature
Of what does team Espanyol view Barcelona as a team ?	foreigners
What royal symbol appears on the club's crest?	Crown of Aragon
Beside a palm, what tree appears on the crest?	laurel
When was a competition held to produce a team crest?	1910
Who was the winner of the crest competition?	Carles Comamala
What flag is on the team crest?	Catalan
What was the number of team Barcelona supporters by 1922?	20,000
What did Barcelona build in 1922?	Camp de Les Corts
How many people could Camp de Les Corts hold?	20,000
After several expansions how many people could the stadium hold?	60,000
When was the last expansion of Les Corts?	1950
When did the Italians bomb Barcelona?	16 March 1938
Why was club Barcelona placed under restrictions during the occupation?	"undisciplined" Catalanism
What kind of signs were removed form club Barcelona?	regional nationalism
What flag was removed from the club's crest?	Catalan
What new named was the Barcelona club forced to adopt?	Club de Fútbol Barcelona
How much was the signing payment for Diego Maradona?	£5 million
When was Diego Maradona signed by Barcelona?	June 1982
Who did Barcelona defeat the season following the signing of Maradona?	Real Madrid
Who was hired as manager in 1984?	Terry Venables
What caused the loss to Steaua Bucuresti in Seville?	penalties
When was Barcelona founded?	1899
Who led the founders of the Barcelona football club?	Joan Gamper
What is the Barcelona motto?	Més que un club
How much is club Barcelona worth?	$3.16 billion
What is the title of the Barcelona club song?	"Cant del Barça"
In what year did Barcelona win its first trophy?	1902
What was the first cup Barcelona won?	Copa Macaya
When did Joan Gamper become the president of the Barcelona club?	1908
How many times between 1908 and 1925 was Gamper president?	five
Why did Gamper want Barcelona to acquire a stadium of its own?	stable income
What team won the first match in the 1943 Copa del Generalissimo?	Barcelona
What was the score of the second match in 1943 played against Real Madrid?	11–1
Who is rumored to have threatened Barcelona players before the match against Real Madrid?	police
What journalist alleged that the Barcelona team was threatened to make certain of Real Madrid's win?	Paco Aguilar
What was proven about the alleged threats to Barcelona before the game?	nothing
What team was dominate in the 1960s in La Liga?	Real Madrid
Due to the emergence of Fuste and Rexach, what competition did Barcelona win in 1963?	Copa del Generalísimo
What competition did Barcelona win in 1966?	Fairs Cup
Who was present when Barcelona beat Real Madrid in 1968?	Franco
With Franco's dictatorship over, to what did Barcelona change their name ?	Futbol Club Barcelona
What political group wanted Nunez to resign the presidency?	Boixos Nois
 To what did Boixos Nois idetify themselves as belonging?	left-wing separatism
What right-wing separatists tried to spread fascism to the Boixos Nois?	skinheads
What did the resulting split in the Boixos Nois group cause many to support?	Núñez's presidency
What did the resulting violence perpetrated by the extremists produce?	large-scale arrests
How did Barcelona finish the 2006-07 season?	without trophies
What event was blamed for the injuries to Barcelona stars?	US tour
What team beat Barcelona in La Liga in the 2006-07 season?	Real Madrid
To whom was Messi's goal in the first leg of the Copa del Rey compared?	Diego Maradona
What team pushed Barcelona out of the Champions League play?	Liverpool
What competition did Barcelona win because of goals by Messi and Fabregas?	UEFA Super Cup
Which team did Barcelona beat to win the UEFA Super Cup?	Porto
 How many total trophies did  Barcelona's Super Cup win produce?	74
What team did Barcelona's total competition wins pass?	Real Madrid
Who is the record holder for most trophy wins as coach of Barcelona?	Josep Guardiola
When FIFA ban Barcelona from buying players?	April 2014
What was the FIFA  charge that Barcelona violated?	footballers aged under 18
What fine did FIFA impose on Barcelona for the rules violation?	CHF 450,000
When did FIFA reject an appeal of the rules violation ruling?	August
What did the pending appeal allow Barcelona to do anyway?	sign players
Who did Barcelona beat to win the 2015 UEFA Super Cup?	Sevilla FC
What team did Barcelona defeat to win the 2015 FIFA World Cup Final?	River Plate
What was the only team to match Barcelona's record of trophy wins by 2015?	Al Ahly SC
How many goals did Barcelona score to break the record for most goals in a year?	180
What teams previous record was 178 goals in a year?	Real Madrid
Where did Barcelona defeat Real Madrid for a trophy win in 2005-06?	Santiago Bernabéu Stadium
What was the winning score for the game with Real Madrid at Bernabeu stadium?	3–0
How many wins did Frank Rijkaard have at Bernabeu Stadium?	second victory
What recognition did Ronaldinho's second goal receive at Bernabeu?	standing ovation
What team did Barcelona defeat to win the Champions League trophy?	Arsenal
What caused the suppression of regional cultures?	dictatorships
Of the languages of the are, what was the only approved language?	Spanish (Castilian)
How did the Catalans show their identity during the dictatorships?	joining Barça
What team was awarded by Franco for having a good relationship?	blaugrana
What motto of the team Barcelona appealed to the Catalans?	'More than a club'
Who was elected as president of the Barcelona club in 2010?	Sandro Rosell
What percentage of the votes for president did Rosell get?	61.35%
What was Rosell's record number of votes he received for president?	57,088
How much did Barcelona pay to sign  David Villa?	€40 million
What team did Barcelona beat in El Clasico in 2010?	Real Madrid
When did Espanyol  offer a counter-petition against autonomy?	1918
Which civil war group did some Espanyol supporters join?	Falangists
What event is more relevant to Espanyol supporters than to Barcelona fans?	derbi
From what language did Espanyol translate their name?	Spanish
How has the rivalry between Espanyol and Barcelona  changed?	less political
What is Lionel Messi's goal total in all competitions?	474
How many players on the Barelona team have scored over 100 goals?	Four
What is Messi's total goal scores in official competitions?	445
How many goals has Messi scored in La Liga competitions?	305
Who is the next highest goal scorer after Mess?	César Rodríguez
What team has won the treble competitions  twice?	Barcelona
What competition did Barcelona win on May 17 of the 2014-15 season?	La Liga
What team did Barcelona defeat to win their 23rd La Liga title?	Atlético Madrid
What have the trio of players , Messi, Suarez, and Neymar been called?	MSN
How many total goals have the trio MSN  scored in the 2014-15 season?	122
What corporate sponsorship did Barcelona agree to in 2006?	UNICEF
How much does Barcelona donate to UNICEF per year?	€1.5 million
What target does the Barcelona donation to UNICEF match?	UN International Aid Target
Who recommended setting up the FC Barcelona Foundation?	Jaime Gil-Aluja
What was the Barcelona foundation meant to attract?	financial sponsorships
What is the game between the rivals Barcelona and Real Madrid called?	El Clásico
What basic difference is there between the teams of Barcelona and Real Madrid?	rival regions
What areas of Spain do the teams of Barcelona and Real Madrid represent?	Catalonia and Castile
What kind of tensions are the two teams viewed as displaying?	political and cultural
Besides the areas of Spain, what other differences are there between Barcelona and Real Madrid?	two cities
Why did the stadium need to be redesigned in 1980?	meet UEFA criteria
What were people allowed to do to bricks for a fee to support the stadium redesign?	inscribe their name
How did supporters of the team view the inscriptions on bricks idea?	popular
What name inscription was a center of controversy?	Santiago Bernabéu
What is the capacity of the Barcelona stadium?	99,354
How was Espanyol viewed as being toward Spanish authority by the people of Barcelona?	compliance
What type of supporters did Barcelona  attract?	Catalonia's new arrivals
From where did Espanyol draw their supporters?	close to the regime
When did Barcelona act as a draw to new arrivals from Catalan?	1960s and 1970s
What kind of spirit does Team Barcelona seem to encourage?	revolutionary
When were the blue and red colors worn for a game by Barcelona?	1900
When the colors were first worn, what team did Barcelona play?	Hispania
What do the red and yellow stripes of the away kit symbolize?	flag of Catalonia
What are Barcelona's most often used change colors?	yellow and orange
From what source do Catalons think the red/blue colors originated?	Joan Gamper
How many goals did Laszlo Kubala score in 256 matches?	196
What titles did Barcelona win in 1948 and 1949?	La Liga
When did Barcelona sign Kubala?	June 1950
In what year did Barcelona begin the construction of a new stadium?	1954
Who blessed the first stone of the new stadium?	Archbishop of Barcelona Gregorio Modrego
Which sports team has the world's largest social media following?	Barcelona
How Ballon d'Or awards have members of the Barcelona team won?	11
How amny FIFA World Player of the Year have members of FC Barcelona won?	7
How amny of Barcelona's players were picked as the three best players of the year in 2010?	three
Where did Messi, Iniesta and Xavi learn their football in Barcelona?	youth academy
How many times did Barcelona win the Pyrenees Cup?	four
From what area were the participants of the Pyrenees Cup competition?	Marca Hispanica
When was the Pyrenees Cup play begun?	1910
Who was Barcelona's first full time coach?	Jack Greenwell
When was the last Pyrenees Cup played?	1914
Who was the first elected president of the Barcelona club?	Josep Lluís Núñez
When was Nunez elected as president of FC Barcelona?	1978
What group elects the club president?	members of Barcelona
How long was Nunez president of Barcelona?	22 years
What was Nunez known to be strict about?	wages and discipline
What team did favorite play Luis Figo leave Barcelona to join?	Real Madrid
What kind of treatment was Figo offered during visits to Barcelona?	hostile
After Figo's departure what happened the next three years?	decline
What rank was club Barcelona in 2003?	15th
After Barcelona's poor showing in the 2003 season , who resigned from the presidency?	Joan Gaspart
Who returned to Barcelona as head coach?	Luis Enrique
How long did Enrique 's deal as coach run?	two-year
How much did Barcelona pay for Luis Saurez?	between €81 to €94 million
Why was Saurez not playing for four months?	ban from all football
Who banned Saurez for four months after he bit another player?	FIFA Disciplinary Committee
What is the nickname for a Barcelona supporter?	culé
How much of the Spanish population are Barcelona supporters?	25%
How much of the population of Spain are supporters of Real Madrid?	32%
What was the club membership in 2003-04?	100,000
What did the club membership grow to by 2009?	170,000
In 1950 what player was successful for Real Madrid?	Alfredo di Stéfano
When did Barcelona meet Real Madrid twice in Europe?	1960s
What was a match between Real Madrid and Barcelona called in 2002?	Match of The Century
How many people watched the Match of the Century?	500 million
Which team won the 2002 match between Real Madrid and Barcelona?	Madrid
What did Forbes say Barcelona was worth in 2010?	€752 million
In what place does the Forbes ranking put Barcelona?	fourth
Besides Real Madrid and Arsenal,what other team is ahead of Barcelona in worth ranking?	Manchester United
What was Barcelona's revenue in 2010?	€366 million
Where  in 2014 did Forbes rank Barcelona as to how valuable a sports team they are?	second
When did Barcelona become the first Spanish team to win the treble competitions?	2009
In 2009 Barcelona became the first team to win six of six competitions in what span of time?	single year
What European football team has won the treble twice?	Barcelona
During which football season did Barcelona win its second treble?	2014–15
What team has played continental football every season since 1955?	Barcelona
When was Everton admitted as a member of the Premier League?	1992
What year did Howard Kendall return to manage Everton?	1990
Who replaced Howard Kendall as Everton's manager?	Mike Walker
What was the score in the first Everton game managed by Joe Royle?	2–0
What year did former Everton player Joe Royle take over managing the club?	1994
When was the Tower constructed?	1787
For what purpose was the Tower first used?	bridewell
On what road is the Tower located on?	Netherfield
What is the Everton club motto?	Nil Satis Nisi Optimum
What does the Everton club motto, "Nil Satis Nisi Optimum," mean in English?	Nothing but the best is good enough
What is the name of the theme song that players walk out to on Everton matchdays?	Johnny Todd
Where did "Johnny Todd"--the theme song for Everton matchdays--originate?	Liverpool
What year did the Everton players walk out to a song other than "Johnny Todd"?	1994
What was the reaction of the crowd to the Everton replacement theme songs in 1994?	disapproval
What song did the Everton club replace its player walkout theme with in August 1994?	Get Ready For This
How many seasons out of the last 114 has Everton been in England's top tier?	111
How many other teams have played all 22 seasons in the Premier League since its inception?	seven
When was the Premier League established?	1992
What match has been played the most since the inception of the Premier League?	Everton against Aston Villa
How many games has Everton played against Aston Villa?	196
When was the Everton club founded?	1878
In what decade did Everton experience a revival?	1960s
When was Everton's most recent trophy awarded?	1995
How many league championships did Everton win in the 1960s?	two
What nickname is used for Everton's club supporters?	Evertonians
In what season did Everton win their fourth League title?	1931–32
In what year did Everton win their second FA Cup?	1933
What was the score in the final game that Everton won its second FA Cup in 1993 against Manchester City?	3–0
In what season did Everton win its fifth League title?	1938–39
When did the Everton club board fire Smith?	2002
Who replaced Smith as manager of the Everton FC in 2002?	David Moyes
In what place did the Everton FC place in the 2004-05 season?	seventh
Where did Everton FC place in the 2009 FA Cup Final?	runners-up
When did Everton FC launch their new crest?	2013
What company did critics suggest pressured Everton FC to change their crest?	Nike
How was the Everton FC's crest redesign received by fans?	poorly
What percentage of fans had a negative reaction to Everton FC's crest redesign in 2013?	91
How many people signed a petition in protest of Everton FC's crest redesign in 2013?	over 22,000
In which park did Everton FC originally play?	Stanley
Where was the new Liverpool FC stadium located in 1879?	Stanley Park
Who donated land to Everton FC in 1882?	J. Cruitt
Who was the chairman of the Everton FC in 1892?	John Houlding
Where did Everton FC relocate their games to in 1892?	Anfield
How many seats did the proposal for the new Everton stadium feature in 2000?	55,000
How much money did Everton FC need to generate for a half-stake in the new stadium project in 2000?	£30 million
In what year did the Liverpool city council reject Everton FC's new stadium proposal?	2003
In what year did Liverpool announce that they would build their own Stanley Park Stadium?	2005
What team did Everton FC consider sharing grounds with around the year 2000?	Liverpool
What place did Everton FC rank in highest average attendance in the Premier League in the 2008-09 season?	eighth
Where does the majority of Everton's matchday support hail from?	North West of England
What is the name of Everton's official supporters club?	FOREVERTON
Where can you find fanzines sold on Everton match days?	Goodison Park
Who is the current manager of the Everton Football Club?	Roberto Martínez
How many caretaker managers have their been in the Everton FC's history?	four
Who was the Everton FC team's longest serving manager?	Harry Catterick
When did Harry Catterick manage the Everton Football Club?	1961–73
Which Everton manager won the most domestic and international trophies during his time?	Howard Kendall
In what year did Everton's second successful era begin?	1961
Who was the manager when Everton's second successful era began in 1961?	Harry Catterick
In what year did Everton win the FA cup in a 3-2 win over Sheffield?	1966
In what year did Everton lose the FA cup final to West Bromwich Albion?	Wembley
Where did a group of fans demand that Everton remain within the city boundaries of?	Liverpool
In what year was it revealed that Everton had entered talks to build a new 55,000 seat stadium in Kirkby?	2006
Who did Everton enter talks with to build a new 55,000 seat stadium in Kirkby?	Knowsley Council and Tesco
What percentage of fans were supportive of Everton's plans to build a new stadium in 2006?	59
How many travelling fans did Everton bring with them to Benefica in 2009?	7,000
How does the Everton FC promote fans to purchase away tickets?	loyalty points
In what year did Everton take 7,000 travelling fans with them to an away game?	2009
Aside from 2009, in what year did Everton FC bring the most fans with them to an away game?	1985
Who holds a majority of the shares in the Everton FC?	the board of directors
What is the Everton FC's overdraft with Barclays Bank secured against?	Basic Award Fund
What is the Premier League's "Basic Award Fund" for?	competing in the Premier League
How much money did Everton FC borrow from Bear Stearns and Prudential in 2002?	£30 million
How long does Everton FC have to pay back £30 million they borrowed from Bear Stearns and Prudential?	25 years
Who is the Everton Football Club's biggest rivals?	Liverpool
What derby does Everton FC contest against Liverpool?	Merseyside
In what year was the Liverpool Football Club established?	1892
Where did Everton FC move to that began their rivalry with Liverpool?	Goodison Park
The Merseyside derby is also known as?	the "friendly derby"
What player holds the Everton Football Club record for most appearances?	Neville Southall
Who currently holds the record for the most league clean sheets during a season?	Tim Howard
Which former captain made 534 appearances with the Everton Football Club?	Brian Labone
Who was the longest serving goalkeeper for the Everton FC?	Ted Sagar
How many years did Ted Sagar play for the Everton Football Club?	23
How many fans were in attendance during Everton's match against Liverpool on September 18, 1948?	78,299
How many fans were injured in Everton's 1948 match against Liverpool that drew the largest crowd they've had?	1
Who was injured during Everton's record attendance match against Liverpool in 1948?	Tom Fleetwood
How many people does Goodison Park stadium hold?	under 40,000
How much did Everton FC pay to transfer Belgian forward Romelu Lukaku?	£28m
What was the name of Everton's professional basketball team?	Tigers
In which league do the Everton Tigers compete?	British Basketball League
When was the Everton Tigers team launched?	2007
Where do the Everton Tigers play their home games?	Greenbank Sports Academy
When did the Everton Tigers win the BBL Cup?	2009
What is the name of the Chilean team that has ties to the Everton FC?	Everton de Viña del Mar
When did the two Everton Football Clubs (English and Chilean) face off against one another?	2010
Who organized the friendly match between the English and Chilean Everton football clubs in 2010?	The Ruleteros Society
What US city also has an Everton football team?	Elk Grove
What year did the Everton FC release their UK pop song "The Boys in Blue"?	1984
What position did the song "Here We Go" by the Everton FC peak at on the UK pop charts in 1985?	14
What was the name of the song that the Everton Football Club released in 1986?	Everybody's Cheering The Blues
Who originally sang the song "All Together Now" that was reworked and released by Everton Football Club in 1995?	The Farm
How many times has the Everton FC entered the UK pop charts?	four
Who temporarily replaced Joe Royle as club captain after he resigned?	Dave Watson
In what year was Howard Kendall appointed manager of the Everton FC for the third time?	1997
Who took over for Howard Kendall after his third attempt at managing the Everton FC was unsuccessful?	Walter Smith
How many successive finishes did Walter Smith manage for the Everton FC?	three
What rank did Everton place in the 1997 Premiership league?	seventeenth
What year did the Everton Football Club "go blue"?	1901
How did Steve Bloomer describe Everton's style of play in 1928?	scientific
What is Everton Football Club's semi-official club nickname?	The People's Club
What was Everton's nickname when they wore black before 1901?	The Black Watch
What was Everton Football Club called after winning the 1995 FA Cup?	The Dogs of War
What is the name of the English language's earliest form?	Old English
In what parts of Scotland was Old English spoken?	southern and eastern
in what historical period was Old English spoken?	the early Middle Ages
What people brought Old English to Britain?	Anglo-Saxon settlers
What language developed from Old English?	Middle English
Along with West Saxon, Northumbrian and Mercian, what was one of the four main dialects of Old English?	Kentish
What is a term that collectively refers to Northumbrian and Mercian?	Anglian
Geographically, what river was Northumbria north of?	Humber
What river was the Mercian region south of?	Humber
Which of the Old English dialects covered the smallest geograhical region?	Kentish
From what language did Old English borrow some words?	Latin
What individuals introduced the Latin alphabet to the speakers of Old English?	Irish Christian missionaries
After the Norman Conquest, Latin words entered English via what language?	Old French
Before the introduction of the Latin alphabet, how was Old English written?	runic system
In what year did the Norman Conquest occur?	1066
What type of gender did Old English nouns possess?	grammatical
What type of gender is present in modern English nouns?	natural
What was a feminine word in Old English?	sunne
What was the grammatical gender of the Old English word for wife?	neuter
What was a masculine word in Old English?	mōna
When the Latin alphabet was introduced to Old English, what letter was the same as v?	u
Along with k and z, what Latin letter was not used in Old English?	q
What is the term for the letter þ?	thorn
What number was the Tironian note visually similar to?	ƿ
What was the term for the letter ƿ?	wynn
What is regarded as the greatest literary work in Old English?	Beowulf
About how many lines was Beowulf?	3,000
Who was Hrothgar a descendant of?	Scyld
Who adopted Hrothgar's ancestor?	a noble family
To what language group does Old English belong?	West Germanic
Along with Old Saxon, what language is closely related to Old English?	Old Frisian
To what modern language is Old English similar?	German
In what century did the Latin alphabet replace the runic system in Old English writing?	9th
Who was known by the nickname "the Grammarian"?	Ælfric of Eynsham
What churchman was influential in the development of the Winchester standard?	Bishop Æthelwold of Winchester
In what century did the Winchester standard arise?	10th
What is another term for the Winchester standard?	Late West Saxon
What event led to English temporarily losing its importance as a literary language?	the Norman Conquest
For about how many years was Old English used?	700
In what century was Old English first used?	5th
In what century did Old English cease to be used?	11th
According to Albert Baugh, what was the period in which Old English was used?	450 to 1150
About what percentage of Old English words are not present in Modern English?	85
From what Old English dialect is the standard for of Modern English descended?	Mercian
From what Old English dialect did Scots derive?	Northumbrian
Along with centralization, what reason is given for the lack of records in non-Wessex dialects after the unification of Alfred?	the Viking invasions
What modern dialect is sometimes regarded as being similar to that of the historical Kingdom of Wessex?	Somerset
What language influenced Old English as a result of the Viking invasions?	Danish
What language was spoken in Northern England after the Viking invasions?	Old Norse
Between the English and Scandinavian language, what elements were most different?	inflectional
What trait does Old English possess that Modern English lacks?	morphological diversity
Along with the nominative, genitive, dative and instrumental, what case did Old English possess?	accusative
The Modern English ending -'s is derived from what ending in Old English?	-es
In Old English, noun endings vary on what basis?	their case
What language had the greatest influence on English?	Old Norse
What was the name of the area in England ruled by the Vikings?	the Danelaw
Who argued that the influence of Old Norse caused English to become a clearer, stronger and more direct language?	Simeon Potter
What parts of English grammar declined as a result of Old Norse influence?	word-endings
Along with the present, what was a verb tense in Old English?	past
What were the three moods that caused verb variation in Old English?	indicative, subjunctive and imperative
Along with the first and second, what person influenced verb variation in Old English?	third
What is an example of a suffix used by Old English weak verbs?	-de
How did Old English strong verbs express the past tense?	altering the root vowel
What language family does Old English belong to?	West Germanic
What is another name for Ingvaeonic?	North Sea Germanic
In what century did Old English first develop?	5th
What Anglo-Saxon kingdom ruled parts of modern-day Scotland?	Northumbria
What language was spoken in Cornwall?	Medieval Cornish
What is an important Old English historical record?	the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
What is an important Old English religious poem?	Cædmon's Hymn
What type of literary work is Beowulf?	an epic poem
Who is the earliest English poet known by name?	Cædmon
Where did Cædmon live?	Whitby
What is another name for Anglo-Frisian?	North Sea Germanic
What language family did Common Brittonic belong to?	Celtic
How was the Latin language brought to Britain?	Roman invasion
In what century did Scandinavian settlement begin in northern England?	9th
Along with the Angles and Saxons, what tribe spoke Anglo-Frisian?	Jutes
What treatise was written by Pope Gregory?	Pastoral Care
What dialect did Alfred's government use?	West Saxon
In what century did Alfred unify Anglo-Saxon England?	9th
When did Alfred the Great's reign begin?	871
What king unified the Anglo-Saxon realms in England?	Alfred the Great
Along with Northumbria, what kingdom was invaded by the Vikings?	Mercia
Along with the part of Mercia not conquered by the Vikings, what other kingdom was combined with Wessex by Alfred?	Kent
What is the modern name for the West Saxon dialect of Alfred's time?	Early West Saxon
From what language was literature notably translated into West Saxon?	Latin
North of what river in Northumbria was the kingdom not overrun by the Vikings?	Tyne
During what century did Cnut rule?	11th
What was Cnut's nationality?	Danish
During what century did Scandinavians begin to settle in England?	9th
What language was a source for English loanwords that are still used today?	Old Norse
Along with eastern England, what part of England contains many place names of Scandinavian origin?	northern
What form of c, when written, contains a dot over the letter?	palatal
What conventional letter from the Latin alphabet typically replaces the wynn from Old English?	w
What letter from the Latin alphabet replaces the Old English insular G?	g
What Latin letter is used in place of the Old English long S?	s
When eth is replaced, what is it replaced by?	thorn
What modern religion sometimes uses Old English?	Neo-Paganism
What hobby champions the use of Old English?	Historical re-enactment
Along with Tolkien, what modern scholar notably made use of Old English?	Alistair Campbell
What Wikipedia project makes use of the Old English language?	the Old English Wikipedia
What is a term for modern texts written in Old English?	Neo-Old English
What type of carrier is the largest?	fleet carrier
What capability does a fleet carrier offer?	offensive
What purpose were excort carriers developed for?	to provide defense for convoys of ships
What were most escort carriers built from?	mercantile hulls
What are the soviet aircraft carriers used by Russia actually called?	heavy aviation cruisers
What type of aircraft carrier was the USS Bogue?	Escort
What type of aircraft was the USS Independence?	light
What advantage did light carriers have over escort carriers?	speed
What was the expected serice life of the UK 1942 Design Light Fleet Carrier?	3 years
Who did the UK 1941 Design Light Fleet Carriers serve during the war?	Royal Navy
When did Russia's United Shipbuilding Corporation expect to begin design work for a new carrier?	2016
What year was the goal for Russia's new carrier to achieve initial operational capability?	2023
What was Izvestiya?	Russian newspaper
Where was the Northern Fleets nuclear-powered aircraft carrier supposed to be stationed?	Murmansk
Where was the Pacific Fleets nuclear-powered aircraft carrier supposed to be stationed?	Vladivostok
What are typically regarded as "runways at sea"?	aircraft carriers
What design feature do aircraft carriers feature to aid in launching and recovering aircraft?	flat-top flight deck
Where are the most notable differences between a carrier and a land runway found?	The flight deck
What is a primary reason that ships have shorter runways than land runways have?	a full-length runway would be costly to construct and maintain
What do aircraft need to do when using shorter runway lengths?	accelerate more quickly to gain lift
When did conventional carriers start recovering aircraft at an angle to port of the axial line of the ship?	early 1950s
What risk is avoided by aircraft by using an angled deck?	hitting aircraft parked forward
How many "waist" catapults can be installed with an angled deck?	one or two
How man bow cats can be installed with an angled deck?	two
What aircraft design feature improves launch and recovery cycle flexibilty?	An angled deck
Where are ski-jump ramps located on aircraft carriers?	the forward end of the flight deck
What did ski-jump ramps allow STOVL aircraft to do that they couldn't do with a flat deck??	take off at far higher weights
Who originally developed the ski-jump ramp?	the Royal Navy
What does a ski-jump ramp convert in order to be successful?	some of the forward rolling movement of the aircraft into vertical velocity
What does the ski-jump ramp prevent a fully loaded and fueled aircraft from doing?	either stalling out or crashing directly into the sea
What type of flight decks are aircraft carriers equipped with?	full-length
What purpose do aircraft carriers serve for aircraft?	carrying, arming, deploying, and recovering
Typically, what is the capital ship of any fleet?	An aircraft carrier
What have the old converted cruiser aircraft carriers evolved into?	nuclear-powered warships
What do aircraft carriers allow naval forces to accomplish?	project air power worldwide without depending on local bases
In what year was the advent of heavier-than-air fixed-wing aircraft?	1903
In what year was the first experimental take-off of an airplane?	1910
In what year were the first experimental landings of an airplane?	1911
What was the first carrier-launched airstrike?	the Tondern Raid in July 1918
What did the Imperial Japanese Navy Wakamiya conduct in September 1914?	the world's first successful ship-launched air raid
Which ship was originally known as being the capital ship of the fleet?	the battleship
When did aircraft carriers begin being know as the capital ship of the fleet?	World War II
What type of carrier is capable of displacing 75,000 tonnes or greater?	Supercarriers
Which ships are used for carrying and landing Marines?	Amphibious assault ships
What do Amphibious assalut ships need a large contingent of for carrying Marines?	helicopters
Who is in the process of procuring two Canbera-class LHD's?	The Royal Australian Navy
How large will the two Canbera-class LDH's be?	the largest in Australian naval history
How many troops can be maintained on a Canbera-class LHD?	1,000 troops and their supporting vehicles
What is one primary role of the Canbera-class LDH?	to embark, transport and deploy an embarked force
How many helicopters is the LHD capable of launching?	multiple helicopters at one time
What is the British Navy constructing to replace their three Invincible-class carriers?	two new larger STOVL aircraft carriers, the Queen Elizabeth class
What will the 2 Queen Elizabeth class ships be named?	HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales
When are the 2 Queen Elizabeth class ships due to become operational?	2020
How many tonnes can the Queen Elizabeth class ships displace?	70,600
How large will the two Queen Elizabeth ships be?	the largest warships ever built for the Royal Navy
Why do the constraints of constructing a flight deck affect the role of a carrier?	they influence the weight, type, and configuration of the aircraft that may be launched
What are assisted launch mechanisms primarily used for?	heavy aircraft
What does CATOBAR allow for?	deployment of heavy jets with full loadouts
Why is STOVL used by other navies?	it is cheaper to operate
Why do almost all carriers using conventional aircraft have arrested-recovery systems?	conventional aircraft cannot decelerate on their own
What is the purpose of an arrested-recovery system?	to recover their aircraft
What do aircraft do when landing in order to stop on a short distance?	extend a tailhook that catches on arrestor wires stretched across the deck
What does a landing area angles off access allow an aircraft to do if if misses the arresting wires?	bolt
What can a "bolt" prevent an aircraft from doing?	crashing into aircraft on the forward deck
What are 3 key personnel involved in the flight deck?	the shooters, the handler, and the air boss
What are shooters responsible for?	launching aircraft
What is the handler responsible for?	the movement of aircraft before launching and after recovery
Where does the captain of the ship spend most of his time?	on the Navigation Bridge
Who is the Flag Bridge area of the ship designated for?	the embarked admiral and his staff
What is the disadvantage of the ski-jump?	the penalty it exacts on aircraft size, payload, and fuel load
What cannot launch using a ski-jump due to their high loaded weight?	heavily laden aircraft
What do heavily laden aircraft sometimes require the assistance from?	a catapult or JATO rocket
Why is a ski-jump not included on mixed flight deck operations where helicopters are present?	would eliminate one or more helicopter landing areas
How is the Russian SU-33 able to launch from the carrier Admiral Kuznetsov?	with a minimal armament and fuel load
Why did China purchase the STOBAR carrier Liaoning in 1998?	on the pretext of use as a floating casino
What is Liaoning classifed as?	a training ship
What is the Liaoning intended to help the navy practice with?	carrier usage
Why is Liaoning not assigned to any of China's operation fleets?	it is a training ship
Why did the Chinese PLA Navy need 4-5 years for Liaoning to reach full capacity?	this is the first aircraft carrier in their possession
Who started construction of a 40,000-tonne Vikrant-class carrier in 2009?	India
What will power the Indian-made ship?	four gas-turbine engines
What will the range of the Indian-made ship be, carrying 160 officers, 1400 sailers, and 30 aircraft?	8,000 nautical miles
Who is constructing the Indian-made ship?	Cochin Shipyard
When was the Indian-made ship launched?	August 2013
What were carriers used for in the early 20th century?	to deploy balloons
As of 3/3/2016, how many active aircraft carriers are there worldwide?	thirty-seven
What is another name for the 10 large nuclear-powered carriers operated by the U.S. Navy?	supercarriers
How many aircraft can supercarriers carry?	up to 90
Who owns the largest carriers in the world?	The United States Navy
What is the definition of an "aircraft carrier"?	There is no single definition
How may aircraft carriers be classified?	according to the type of aircraft they carry and their operational assignments
Who is Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope?	former head of the Royal Navy
Who said, "countries that aspire to strategic international influence have aircraft carriers"?	Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope
What dramatically changed naval combat in World War II?	The aircraft carrier
What drove the advent of carrier-launched aircraft as focal weapons?	the superior range, flexibility and effectiveness
Why were carrier-launched aircraft more effective than naval guns?	They had higher range and precision
What was signalled in 1940 when HMS Illustrious launched an strike on an Italian fleet?	the beginning of the effective and highly mobile aircraft strikes
What event showed the vulnerability of carriers when forced into gun-range enounters?	the sinking of HMS Glorious by German battleships
What develpment produced the first large fleet ships?	flattop vessels
What was the world's first carrier capable of launching and recovering naval aircraft?	HMS Argus
What did the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 limit?	the construction of new heavy surface combat ships
What caused early aircraft carriers to be made up of conversions of ships that were previously cargo ships, cruisers or battlecruisers?	Washington Naval Treaty of 1922
What type of aircraft carriers did these ship conversions give rise to in 1927?	Lexington-class
What does EMALS stand for?	Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System
Who developed EMALS?	General Atomics
What do EMALS enable the launching of?	varied aircraft including unmanned combat air vehicles (UCAV)
Who was impressed by the demonstration of EMALS by General Atomics?	Indian Navy officers
How many in-service aircraft carriers are aimed for with EMALS?	three
What was the August 2013 launching ceremony in Yokohama held for?	Japan's largest military ship since World War II
How many helicopters can simultaneously land on Japan's largest military ship?	five
How long is Japan's largest military ship?	820-foot-long (250 m)
How many troops can Japan's largest military ship carry?	400
How much does Japan's largest military ship weigh?	19,500-ton
What will some of the current US fleet of Nimitz-class carriers be replaced with?	the ten-ship Gerald R. Ford class
Which feature of the new ships will replace the old steam catapults?	Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS)
When is the USS Enterprise scheduled to be decommissioned?	2016
How much does the Gerald R. Ford-class carrier weigh?	100,000 ton
How much does the America-class amphibious assault ship weigh?	45,000 ton
What type of aircraft have no need to decelerate?	VTOL-capable or helicopters
What does the angled deck separate the recovery operation area from?	the launch area
What does V/STOL refer to?	aircraft capable of vertical or short take-off and landing
What capability do helicopters use to move over the flight deck and land vertically?	hover
What don't helicopters need because of having hover capablility?	arresting gear
What feature was pioneered on the HMS Hermes in 1923?	an island
What is concentrated in the small area called an island?	The superstructure of a carrier
Other than Japanese carriers, which side of the flight deck are islands typically built on?	starboard
What was the biggest drawback to the flush deck configuration?	management of the exhaust from the power plant
What was a major issue in the USS Langley?	Fumes coming across the deck
What is the name of the 42,000 tonne nuclear-powered carrier commissioned in 2001?	Charles de Gaulle
What is the Charles de Gaulle the flagship of?	the French Navy
What type of missiles does the Charles de Gaulle carry?	Aster
What is another name for the French Navy?	Marine Nationale
What type of carrier is the Charles de Gaulle?	CATOBAR
How many new carriers per year did the House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee recommend in 7/24/07?	one every four years
What class does the USS America belong to?	America-class amphibious assault ships
How many supercarriers did the U.S. fleet have following the deactivation of the USS Enterprise?	10
What is the USS America capable of destroying squadrons of?	F-35Bs
Which other carrier joins the USS America in active service?	USS Tripoli
Why have aircraft carriers increased in size since World War II?	to accommodate a steady increase in aircraft size
How much more displacement does the modern Nimitz class have compared to the older USS Enterprise?	nearly four times
Why do nations risk significant political impacts if a carrier is lost or even used in conflict?	Today's aircraft carriers are so expensive
Which era does the USS Enterprise belong to?	World War II
What does LSO stand for?	landing signal officer
Who does a conventional aircraft rely upon to moniter the aircraft's approach and transmit the data to the pilot?	a landing signal officer
What did LSO's use to signal corrections to the pilot prior to the angled deck designs introduced in the 1950's?	colored paddles
Which visual landing aids have provided information on proper glide slope since the late 1950's?	Optical Landing System
What are LSO's still being used to do?	transmit voice calls to approaching pilots by radio
What is a more fuel efficient way for STOVL aircraft to take off rather than vertically?	using the ramp and a running start
What kind of aircraft are capable of taking off vertically?	STOVL
What landing aircraft have removed the need for arresting cables?	vertical
What do Russian carriers include for launching lightly loaded conventional fighters?	a ski-jump ramp
What do Russian carriers still use to recover?	traditional carrier arresting cables and a tailhook on their aircraft
What class carrier is the Sao Paulo?	Clemenceau
Who is the Sao Paulo currently in service for?	the Brazilian Navy
Who was the Sao Paulo first commissioned by in 1963?	the French Navy
What did Sao Paulo undergo during the period from 2005-2010?	extensive modernization
What setback happened to Sao Paula in 2012?	another major fire
What type of carrier is Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov?	STOBAR
When was Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov first launched?	in 1985
What was Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov renamed?	Tbilisi
What is unique about Tbilisi?	carrying a heavy cruiser's complement of defensive weapons and large P-700 Granit offensive missiles
What will be removed from Tbilisi in order to enlarge her below decks aviation facilities?	The P-700 systems
Which class of aircraft carriers is being constructed to replace the Invincible-class carriers?	Queen Elizabeth
What will the displacement be for the HMS Queen Elizabeth?	70,600 tonnes
When is HMS Queen Elizabeth projected to commission?	in 2017
When is Prince of Wales projected to commission?	in about 2020
Who is building HMS Queen Elizabeth and Prince of Wales?	Royal Navy
When did two whisleblowers allege that Boutris  attempted to ground Southwest Airlines?	2007
How many planes did the FAA managers allow to fly in 2006 and 2007 that were overdue for safety inspections?	46
How much did the FAA propose to fine Southwest for failing to inspect older planes?	$10.2 million
What former chairman of the committee said it's investigation uncovered a pattern of regulatory abuse?	Jim Oberstar
How many planes were allowed to be operated commercially although not in compliance with FAA safety regulations?	117
When did the aftermath of the Southwest Airlines inspection scandal happen?	July 22, 2008
who approved a mesaure to tigheten regulations concerning airplane maintenance prodecures?	House
What does the word 'customer' properly apply to?	the flying public
how long was the "cooling off" period that the FAA inspectors or supervisers of inspectors must wait before they can work for those they regulate?	two-year
What epidemic did the FAA have to handle in the 1960s?	hijacking
Who now takes responsibility for aviation security?	Department of Homeland Security
When did the FAA become more involved with the environmental aspects of aviation?	1968
What is the altitude which the FAA regulates over?	500 feet
When was legislation passed that gave the agency management of a new airport aide program?	1970
When did the CAA begin to exptend it's ATC responsibilities?	World War II
What helped ATC controllers in their drive ot keep ahead of the postwar boom in commercial air transportation?	radar
When did Congress give the CAA the task of administering the federal-air airport program?	1946
What did the federal-aid airport program aim to help develop?	civil airports
When did the agency acheive a semi-automated air traffic control system?	mid-1970s
When was the Airline Deregulation act?	1978
When did the nationwide strike by air traffic controlers union happen?	1981
when did the FAA shift to a more step-by-step approach to providing air traffic controllers with more advanced equipment?	1994
What helped operate radar in the new air-traffic control system?	computer technology
When was the Air Commerce Act passed?	May 20, 1926
Who was charged with fostering air commerce?	Secretary of Commerce
What new branch was created and operates under the Department of Commerce?	Aeronautics Branch
Who assumed primary responsibility for aviation oversight?	Aeronautics Branch
Who was responsible for operating and maintaining aids to air navigation?	Secretary of Commerce
When did the Grand-Canyon mid-air collision happen?	1956
when was the Federal Aviation Act passed?	1958
What agency would now act like the CAA?	Federal Aviation Agency
Who did the Federal Aviation Act transfer air safety regulation from?	CAB
Who was the FAA's first administrator?	Elwood R. Quesada
When did the FAA decide to expand passengers use of portable elctronic devices during all phases of flight?	October 31, 2013
What mode must mobile phones be put into?	airplane mode
What phases of flight will passengers be able to use electronic devices?	all phases
Where must devices be put during actual takeoff and landing?	seat-back pocket
Are short-range bluetooth accessories able to be used?	can also be used.
When did the US DOT combine major federal responsibilities for air and surface transport?	1967
What did the Federal Aviation Agency change it's name to?	Federal Aviation Administration
Who would the FAA administrator report to?	Secretary of Transportation
Who approves new programs and budget requests?	DOT
Who is the final person to approve the budget that is submitted?	president
What was the Areonautics Branch renamed to?	Bureau of Air Commerce
When was the Aeronautics Branch renamed?	1934
When did the Buerau take over and begin to expant the ATC system?	1936
What were the people who used maps, blackboards, and mental calculation to ensure the safe separation of aircraft traveling between cities called?	air traffic controllers
When did the FAA change it's long-standing approach to air traffic control candidates?	2014
What was now favored instead of training and experince at flight schools?	personality test
Who could be an air traffic controller irrespective of experience now because of the rule change?	anyone
What did applicants now take that many of them found baffling?	biographical questionnaire
What retired NASA Office of inspector general is outspoken about the FAA?	Joseph Gutheinz
How much do penalties against airlines cost per violation?	$25,000
A heavy penalty for violating FAA reulations could said to be do what?	impact their ability to continue operating
What did the agency propose to find Southwest Airlines?	$10.2 million
In what year did Blackpool and Blackburn become independent unitary authorities?	1998
In what year was Simonswood transferred from Knowsley to West Lancashire	1994
Which places were added to the new county of Cheshire?	Warrington and Widnes
Where were the boroughs of Liverpool, Knowsley, St Helens and Sefton included?	Merseyside
Which parish was transferred from Knowsley to the district of West Lancashire?	Simonswood
When did the administrative boundaries for the Duchy of Lancaster change?	1970s
What is the Duchy of Lancaster?	one of two royal duchies in England
What does the Duchy of Lancaster operate as?	a property company
Who are appointed within the Duchy and County Palatine of Lancater?	High Sheriffs
Who exercises the right of the Crown in the County Palatine of Lancaster?	The Duchy of Lancaster
How many state grammar schools are in Lancashire?	four
How many state schools are in Lancashire?	77
How many independant schools are in Lancashire?	24
Who has the largest school population?	South Ribble
Who has the smallest school population?	Fylde
What years did the Lancashire League competition run from?	1895 to 1970
Which county was once the focal point for many professional competitions?	Lancashire
Which year was the Lancashire County Cup abandoned?	1993
What year did Rugby League start?	1895
Where was the first open competition for brass bands held?	Manchester
What year was the first open competition for brass bands held?	1853
Where was David Atherton born?	Blackpool
What did David Atherton co-found?	the London Sinfonietta
Who began their musical career as organist of Salford Cathedral?	Leslie Stuart
What are the biggest cities in Lancashire?	Manchester and Liverpool
By the 1830's, how much of all cotton was processed in Lancashire?	85%
Where was a center for tourist for the people of Lancashire's mill towns?	Blackpool
What week was most popular to visit Lancashire's mill towns?	wakes week
When did Lancashire emerge as a major commercialand industrial region?	during the Industrial Revolution
When was Liverpool and Manchester removed from Lancashire boundaries?	1974
How many miles of land did Lancashire lose to other countries?	709
What is to the north of Lancashire today?	Cumbria
What is to the east of Lancashire today?	West Yorkshire
Who exercises sovereignty rights for Lancashire?	Duke of Lancaster
When was the administrative county of Lancashire created?	1889
What is the area served by the Lord-Lieutenant called now?	ceremonial county
Where is the ancient border between Lancashire and Yorkshire located?	the western part of Todmorden
Why is Lancashire smaller than its historical extent?	reform of local government
What area is covered by the Lord-Lieutenant?	the administrative county and the county boroughs
When did the county become more urbanised?	20th century
Which part in particular became urbanised in the 20th century?	the southern part
When was Warrington added to Lancashire?	1900
When was Southport added?	1905
When was Blackpool added to the county?	1904
What is most of the lowland in the county devoted to?	dairy farming and cheesemaking
What is the higer ground in the county devoted to?	sheep
What is in the highest ground?	uncultivated moorland
Where is the Lancashire Coalfield located?	modern-day Greater Manchester
where is Beacon Fell County Park located?	North of the Ribble
What does the Duchy administer within the County Palatine?	bona vacantia
What serves as the county town of the county palatine?	Lancaster
When did the title of Duke of Lancaster merge into the Crown?	many centuries ago
Who is the Duchy administered by?	the Queen
What does the Lancashire economy rely on?	the M6 motorway
Which direction does the M6 motorway run?	north to south
What road connects Preston to Blackpool?	The M55
Which road crosses the part of the county furthest south?	M58
Where are the major settlements in the ceremonial county located?	Fylde coast
Where is the Fylde coast?	Blackpool Urban Area
Which part of the county is rural and sparsely populated?	north
How many people live in Lancaster and Morecambe?	100,000
What percentage of Lancashire is Asian?	6%
Where was pop star Frankie Vaughan from?	Liverpool
How many bands were active in the Liverpool area in the 1960s?	350
What was the first act to break through in the UK, not from Liverpool or managed by Brian Epstein?	Freddie and the Dreamers
Where were Freddie and the Dreamers based?	Manchester
Where were Herman's Hermints and the Hollies from?	Manchester
Who was "The Ballad of Chevy Chase" composed by?	Richard Sheale
Where was Richard Sheale from?	Lancashire
What did the county share with it's national traditions?	balladry
What is Lancashire's long and productive tradition?	music making
What is the finest border ballad?	The Ballad of Chevy Chase
When was Lancashire established?	1182
When was the area part of Brigantes tribal area?	Roman times
In what year did the northern parts of the country form the Brythonic kingdom of Rheged?	410AD
What is the Brythonic kingdom of Rheged?	a successor entity to the Brigantes tribe
When was the area incorporated into Northumbria?	mid-8th century
How many people lived in Lancashire in 1971?	5,129,416
What is the most populous geographic county in the UK?	Lancashire
When was the administrative county abolished?	1 April 1974
What incorporated the Furness exclave?	Cumbria
What did the southern part of Lancashire turn into?	Merseyside and Greater Manchester
Who was a local pioneer of folk song collection?	James Orchard Halliwell
Who did the most to popularize folk songs of the county?	Harry Boardman
Who were the most influential fold artists from the region in the 20th century?	The Spinners
Who do the many folk clubs today cater to?	Irish and Scottish folk music
What is one of the regular folk festivals called?	Fylde Folk Festival
What is the county flower of Lancaster?	The Red Rose of Lancaster
Where can the red rose of lancaster be found?	on the county's heraldic badge and flag
What is on the traditional Lancashire flag?	a red rose on a white field
What is on the official Lancashire flag?	red rose on a gold field
Whos flag officially is a red rose on a white field?	Montrose in Scotland
In what year was Hugh Wood born?	1932
Where was Sir Peter Maxwell Davies born?	Salford
When was the Royal Manchester College of Music founded?	1893
When was the Royal Northern College of Music formed?	1972
What did the Royal Manchester College of Music merge with?	the Northern College of Music
What era was 250 million to 247 million years ago?	Early Triassic
What geologic climate was found in the Early Triassic?	deserts
What landmass was still unbroken in the Early Triassic?	Pangaea
What percentage of extinction of species had recently happened??	95%
What species had evolved after  the extinction and would become the basic predator in the Triassic?	Temnospondyli
What event produced further adaptations during  the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods?	climatic changes
When was the top of archosaur diversity?	Jurassic
What species spread towards the poles during the Jurassic?	Angiosperms
What species dominated many tree floras by the end of the Cretaceous period?	angiosperms
What types of species are thought to still have been dominate until after the extinction?	cycad and ferns
What event sets the boundary for the Triassic?	Permian–Triassic extinction
How many terrestrial species died during the extinction?	70%
What is the largest extinction of species in Earth's history known as?	Great Dying
What percentage of marine life died during the extinction?	90% to 96%
What is the possible cause of the upper Cretaceous extinction event ?	K–Pg) extinction
What is the span of the Late Cretaceous period?	100 million to 65 million years
What weather trend ocured in the Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic periods?	cooling
What climate was restricted to the equatorial areas?	tropics
What type of weather changes did areas outside of the tropics experience?	extreme seasonal changes
What event ended the age of the dinosaur by causing a 75% extinction?	K-T Extinction
What is uncertain about the Cretaceous?	climate
What atmospheric gas caused temperatures levels to be 10 degrees higher than today?	carbon dioxide
During the Cretaceous what climate was thought to be found in areas near the seas?	deserts
What did large amounts of deposited un-decomposed organic matter later become?	black shale
What was about equal across the planet?	temperatures
What was the span of the Late Triassic?	237 million to 200 million years
Besides moderate precipitation, what weather conditions did the Late Triassic have?	heat spells
When did the first dinosaurs evolve?	Triassic
According to theory, what did climate change in the Late Triassic cause?	Triassic-Jurassic extinction
What was the only archosaur to survive the fourth mass extinction?	crocodiles
What is the span of the Early Cretaceous?	145 million to 100 million years
What event of the Early Cretaceous caused the extinction of several species?	expansion of seaways
What species died out due to the expansion of coastal shallows?	Ichthyosaurs
What species dominated the seas?	Mosasaurs
What dinosaur spread to every continent?	Iguanodon
What caused the sea to rise during the Jurassic?	increase in seafloor
Rising seas and displaced waters caused what  element along the coasts?	flooded coastal areas
Pangaea beginning to break apart created what new sea?	Tethys Sea
What weather condition increased?	Temperatures
As humidity increased what land area decreased?	deserts
What is the span of years for the Early Jurassic?	200 million years to 175 million
Besides Ichthyosaurs and Ammonites, what was the other dominate species in the seas?	Plesiosaurs
What was the highest order of species n land?	Dilophosaurus
What other order evolved during the Jurassic?	true mammals
What feature of the climate produced a more tropical world?	more humid
At what time was tectonic formation mild?	Mesozoic
Where did the basic geological changes of this period occur?	Arctic
What supercontinent split to form two smaller continents?	Pangaea
What was the northern continent split from Pangaea?	Laurasia
What was Pangaea's southern continent called?	Gondwana
What type of animals took longer to reestablish?	specialized animals
How long after the Permian-Triassic extinction did animal recovery take to completion?	30M years
When did recovery of these diverse animals begin?	mid-Triassic
What dominated animal life in the Triassic?	reptiles
How many years after the extinction did animal recovery begin?	4M to 6M
At what point did the Mesozoic era begin?	Permian–Triassic extinction
When did the Mesozoic end?	Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction
What kind of geologic activity occurred during the Mesozoic?	tectonic
Besides climate changes, what other important activity occurred during the Mesozoic?	evolutionary
When mamals appeared they remained small until what period?	Cenozoic
What is the span of years of the Middle Triassic?	247 million to 237 million
What continuing event began in the Middle Triassic?	breakup of Pangaea
From what had the ecosystem had to recover?	the Great Dying
During the breakup of Pangaea, what sea was created?	Tethys Sea
What type of animal began to flourish and become increasingly large?	reptiles
How many years did the Late Jurassic cover?	163 million to 145 million
What did the separation of Pangaea cause to become extinct?	sauropods and Ichthyosaurs
What is the extinction caused by the splitting of Pangaea called?	Jurassic-Cretaceous extinction
What caused the destruction of fern prairies and increasing shallows?	Sea levels rose
What did the rise in sea levels open in the seaways?	Atlantic sea
What was the general rainfall in the Triassic?	dry
What could have made temperatures more extreme?	Low sea levels
Because of distance form the sea and wide variance in temperatures, what was the interior of Pangaea like?	desert
What were there periods of during the Triassic?	increased rainfall
What was the Carnian Pluvial event?	increased rainfall
What was the dominant plant species of the Mesozoic?	gymnosperms
What is an example of a gymnosperm?	conifers
What are the dominate plant species on Earth now?	angiosperms
When did the Ginkgo evolve?	Mesozoic
What famous tree species is believed to have evolved during the Mesozoic?	Sequoia
In what decade was digital telephony transmission made possible?	the 1980s
What is the minimum bit rate for compressed video and audio transmission?	128 kilobits/s
What is an example of an early form of digital video and audio communication?	the Media space
In what form did the first dedicated videoconferencing system appear as?	ISDN networks
What company offered the first commercial videoconferencing system?	PictureTel Corp.
What controls the conferencing while its active on the signaling plane?	The MC
What is one example of what the signaling plane controls in a videoconferencing system?	endpoint signaling
Where does the videoconferencing system manage conferencing creation?	the signaling plane
On what plane does the MC operate?	the media plane
What generates output streams from each endpoint?	The MP
What technology has become more widely available and affordable?	High speed Internet connectivity
What is an example of a personal videoconferencing system tool?	webcam
What has made videoconferencing accessible to many?	The availability of freeware
Videoconferencing freeware is widely available in what programs?	chat programs
Videophone calls are different from videoconferencing in what way?	serve individuals, not groups
What is an example of a videophone call program?	Skype
What term is more used today to refer to calls between two units?	videoconferencing
What are videoconferencing calls now more commonly known as?	a video link
What is another name for videophone calls?	video chat
In what decade did developers extend the capabilities of videoconferencing to more devices?	the 2010s
What allows people in remote locations the ability to video-conference with colleagues far away?	Mobile collaboration systems
What is one example of an application that videoconferencing manufacturers have begun to offer?	still image streaming
What type of applications have videoconferencing manufacturers begun to offer?	mobile
What is an example of a place that videoconferencing can be used today?	hand-held mobile devices
What can videoconferencing offer students?	participating in two-way communication forums
Who can benefit from two-way communication forums?	students
What is a major barrier to videoconferencing between some communities?	language
What is one example of how students can benefit from videoconferencing?	virtual field trips
What is one experience that students using videoconferencing can achieve?	visit museums
What company introduced the first device to help deaf people communicate through telecommunications?	AT&T
What was the name of AT&T's videophone device?	Picturephone
In what year was AT&T's "Picturephone" device introduced?	1964
Where was AT&T's "Picturephone" device unveiled?	1964 New York World's Fair
In what decade were more efficient ways of using sign language via video-telephony developed?	1990s
In what industry has videoconferencing become useful?	film
On what film was videoconferencing widely used?	Frozen
What year was the movie Frozen released?	2013
In what city were the songwriting team of Frozen located?	New York City
How many months did the songwriters work on the movie via videoconferencing?	14
What is a video-conference also known as?	videoteleconference
What does a video-conference use that allows communication in live situations?	a multipoint control unit
What is a multi-point control unit?	call management system
How does video-conferencing allow multiple parties to communicate with each other?	web-based applications
How many locations can one use videoconferencing for?	two or more
What is one area where teleconferencing could not be used?	telemedicine
Who developed the first systems to transmit slow-scan video?	AT&T Corporation
When was the first slow-scan video systems researched?	the 1950s
What was the bit rate of AT&T's Picturephone?	6 Mbit/s
What was the bandwidth of AT&T's Picturephone?	1 MHz
What year did one the first community service usages of videoconferencing take place?	1992
What company helped in the creation of community service videoconferencing?	IBM
What is the videoconferencing product that both IBM and PictureTel worked on?	PCS/1
What does DIANE in Project DIANE stand for?	Diversified Information and Assistance Network
How many years did it take for Project DIANE to grow?	15
What enables videoconferencing to connect three or more remote points?	Multipoint Control Unit (MCU)
What is one type of MCU bridge?	IP
In what way can an MCU be characterized?	the number of simultaneous calls it can handle
What feature enables an MCU to allow for multiple parties to be seen on screen at the same time?	Continuous Presence
Where can an MCU be embedded?	dedicated videoconferencing units
In what one way can videoconferencing help a person?	money savings
What technology can be used along with videoconferencing?	VoIP
What is another use of VoIP?	telecommuting
What is telecommuting?	work from home
What is the percentage of people who use videoconferencing a majority of the time?	54%
In what decade was Internet video-conferencing made possible?	1990s
In what device was videoconferencing finally able to be used in?	desktop
In what year was CU-SeeMe, a desktop-based videoconferencing tool, developed?	1992
In what year did the first public video-conference take place?	1995
What South African city participated in the first public video-conference?	Cape Town
What is the software that performs audio and/or video compression?	a codec (coder/decoder)
How high can compression rates go?	1:500
What is one digital network through which a digital stream can be transmitted?	IP
What does POTS stand for?	Plain Old Telephone System
What do POTS do?	convert the digital pulses to/from analog waves
What is a common use of conferencing technology?	deaf Video Relay Service
What profession utilizes videoconferencing technology to conduct online sessions?	teachers
What is one way that videocalling can be used?	personal videocalls to inmates
What is a common use of conferencing technology?	tele-medical
What is one way that videoconferencing is useful?	real-time telemedicine
What areas benefit especially from videoconferencing?	Rural
In what US state did a rural area use videoconferencing to help reduce the number of transfers of sick infants to hospitals?	Ohio
How far away was the hospital from this rural area?	70 miles
How much money did videoconferencing help this rural area save?	$10,000 per transfer
In what European country has VRS services become well developed?	Sweden
What is one of the reasons why VRS services are not in most European countries?	financing
What European country is a leader in providing VRS services to its citizens?	Germany
What country is a world leader in providing VRS services?	United States
What year was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?	2005
Who produced the first high definition video conferencing system?	LifeSize Communications
Where was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?	Las Vegas, Nevada
What company introduced the first HD video conferencing system to the general market?	Polycom
What was the resolution of the first HD video conferencing system?	1280 by 720
What do systems with no MCU use in order to perform multipoint conferencing?	a standards-based H.323 technique
What is one advantage of using an H.323 technique?	higher quality
What is one disadvantage of using the H.323 technique?	increased network bandwidth
What is the H.323 technique also known as?	decentralized multipoint
Why is the video and audio of the H.323 technique higher quality?	they don't have to be relayed through a central point
Who has the world's largest administrative judicial system?	U.S.
What US Department oversees the World's largest administrative judicial system?	Social Security Administration (SSA)
In what year did the SSA see a 55% increase in videoconferenced hearings?	2009
When did the SSA open its largest videoconferencing-only center?	August 2010
Where is the SSA's fifth videoconferencing only center located?	St. Louis, Missouri
What does duel dating use to show the date?	two consecutive years
What is the Old Style date mean?	Julian calendar
What is N.S. stand for?	New Style
What are New Style dates?	Gregorian
Why use two consecutive year dates?	starting date of the year
Who revised the Julian calendar?	Pope Gregory XIII
When was the Gregorian Calendar introduced?	1582
What calendar was used in the reform to create the Gregorian calendar?	Julian calendar
What holiday was the inducement to revise the Julian calendar?	Easter
When did the First Council of Nicaea rule that Easter be celebrated by all Christians?	on the same day
What ruler decreed the change to the Gregorian calendar?	Philip II of Spain
Besides part of Italy, over what areas did Phillip rule?	Spain and Portugal
What was the first day selected to be the first day using the new calendar?	Friday, 15 October 1582
What was the last day the Julian calendar was used?	Thursday, 4 October 1582
Why did the Spanish colonies lag behind in adopting the calendar?	delay in communication
When did the last country to adopt the Gregorian calendar start using it?	1923
At what date did the first country start using the new calendar?	1582
How which calendar did some countries notate the date?	in both
Who said that English writers usually used both dates on writings?	Woolley
What difference in dating caused the use of double-dating documents?	different beginnings of the year
What was the percentsge of correction from the Julian calendar to the new Gregorian calendar?	0.002%
What was the correction due to?	length of the year
What change in date motivated the change in calendars?	celebration of Easter
To what astrological date was Easter tied?	spring equinox
What was wrong in the Julian calendar?	slightly too long
What kind of calendar is the Gregorian calendar?	solar
How many days are in the Gregorian calendar?	365
How often is a leap day added to the Julian calendar year?	every 4 years
When does the Gregorian calendar omit 3 leap days?	every 400 years
On what day did both the Julian and Gregorian calendars add leap day?	24 February
When was Easter Sunday celebrated after the equinox?	15th day
What did churches do to settle the date if there was a difference?	compromise
By what century had almost all churches begun celebrating Easter according to the Alexandrian Easter?	10th century
On what border of the Byzantine Empire were the last holdouts for celebrating according the  Alexandrian Easter?	eastern border
What date placement drifted increasingly off the true date on the calendar?	vernal equinox
What did Lilius first propose to correct in the calendar?	length of the year
By how much is the Julian calendar too long?	11 minutes
How much difference does the extra 11 minutes make over 400 years time?	three days
On what date was the original vernal equinox set?	21 March
By the time of Lilius where was the equinox falling?	10 or 11 March
On what date did most European countries set the start of the new year?	1 January
When did Scotland begin to use January 1 as the start of the new year?	1600
When did the other British states and colonies set the year start date to January 1?	1752
What act did Britain use to implement the use of the Gregorian calendar?	Calendar (New Style) Act 1750
When did England finally change the tax year to 6 April?	1800
Attempting to use Gregorian dates for earlier events  on the Julian calendar should be used with what action?	caution
When was the Battle of Agincourt?	25 October 1415
When are events usually shown as they appeared on the Julian calendar?	prior to 15 October 1582
What other date is 25 October known for, that keeps the Battle of Agincourt on 25 October,1415?	Saint Crispin's Day
In the Julian calendar when is the start of the new year?	1 January
Why would a knuckle -space count be used to determine months?	language-independent
A knuckle count is a month of how many days?	31
The space between knuckles is what kind of month?	short month
What are held together for a knuckle-space month count?	one's two fists
How many parts did the Gregorian calendar reform have?	two parts
What was the first reform concerning the calendar?	Julian calendar
What was the second reform of the calendar?	lunar cycle
What was calculated using the lunar calendar?	date of Easter
What did Lilius's calendar plan to reduce in every 400 years?	number of leap years
What calendar did Turkey use before 1917 for general purposes?	lunar Islamic
What calendar did Turkey utilize for fiscal purposes?	Julian
Where did Turkey start the fiscal year?	1 March
When did Turkey begin to use the Gregorian calendar for fiscal means?	1 March 1917
When did Turkey start using the Gregorian calendar for all purposes?	1 January 1926
How many days do you subtract to convert days from a calendar?	subtract one day
What does one need to remember about  the date of February 29 in the Julian calendar?	February 29 is discounted
If you need a date of four days less, what do you subtract from the Julian calendar?	-4
What is the difference in time between the calendars?	10 minutes 48 seconds
With what other difference did the Gregorian calendar concern itself?	accumulated difference
When was the vernal equinox at the end of the third century?	20 March or 21 March
In order to account for the full moon coming after the equinox, when was the equinox set?	22 March
How did the Gregorian calendar set these same of the full moon not preceding Easterconditions?	removing ten days
When did the Council of Trent agree to the corrected calendar?	1563
To what time did the Council require the date of the vernal equinox to be set?	325
What did mathematicians of the time want to use to set the date of Easter?	motions of the sun and moon
What method was used instead of computations of the sun and moon?	tabular method
Whose modified proposal was adopted?	Aloysius Lilius
When were the rights to publish the calendar granted?	3 April 1582
Who awarded the rights to publish the calendar?	the pope
What problem caused the papal brief granting the right to publish to be withdrawn?	demand for copies
When were the rights to print the calendar withdrawn?	20 September 1582
Where were the first calendars printed?	Rome
What year did the Roman Republic use for dates?	consular year
What event started the consular year?	consuls first entered office
What was the date of the consular year before 222 BC?	1 May
What was the date of the start of the consular year from 222 BC?	15 March
When did Rome begin to use the Julian calendar?	45 BC
What other system of calculations are inherent in the Gregorian calendar?	system of weeks
Why is calculating the days of the Gregorian calendar not simple?	irregularities
After each country adopted the calendar how did the weekly cycle continue?	uninterrupted
What was the previous day's date by the Julian calendar?	Thursday, 4 October 1582
What was the date of adoption for the calendar?	Friday, 15 October 1582
Who thought that the seasonal drift in the date of Easter unacceptable?	Roman Catholic Church
What even is tired to the date for Easter?	spring equinox
What did the Church of Alexandria use to calculate the date of Easter?	Metonic cycle
Where did the Church of Alexandria place the vernal equinox?	21 March
Until 342 when did the Church of Rome think the vernal equinox fell?	25 March
Who was the architect of the Gregorian calendar?	Christopher Clavius
What did the architects of the calendar notice about the astronomical tables?	discrepancies
Whose solution to the discrepancies of the tables would have been agreeable to astronomers?	Petrus Pitatus
When did Pitatus offer his solution to the leap year problem?	1560
What is the theory about leap year called?	Gregorian leap year rule
What designation was added to British dates to differentiate them from countries not using the new calendar?	"Old Style" (OS) and "New Style"
When was the Calendar act enacted?	1750
With what did the Calendar Act align the British calendar?	Gregorian calendar
What did the use of Old Style and New Style cause?	confusion
What law did the British make to cause the use of the Gregorian calendar?	Calendar Act of 1750
The Gregorian calendar is an improvement over what other calendar?	Julian
How many days must be skipped to align the calendar with mean solar days in a year?	three Julian leap days
What is the approximate error for every 3,300 years?	one day
What is the error rate of the vernal equinox per every 7,700 years?	1 day
What was the error rate in the Julian calendar?	1 day in 128 years
What Microsoft executive was in charge of 360 development?	J Allard
What manufacturer was enlisted to design the 360's graphics processor?	ATI
Where did Peter Moor work before being recruited to help on the 360?	Sega of America
Original 360 Alpha dev kits used what existing system's hardware?	Apple's Power Mac G5
What CPU did the 360 use?	IBM's Xenon processor
The Xbox 360 Pro included what size hard drive storage?	20 GB
What was the official name of the lower-priced 360 SKU at launch?	Xbox 360 Core
The Xbox 360 Elite eventually launched at what price point?	US$479
The 360 Pro's original storage was replaced by a hard drive of what size in 2008?	60 GB
What did Microsoft name the SKU that replaced the 360 Core?	Xbox 360 Arcade
How many titles did the 360 have at launch in North America?	14 games
What title was the console's best seller in 2005?	Call of Duty 2
How many copies did Halo 3 sell?	8 million copies
Halo 3 was released in what year?	2007
Other than Call of Duty 2, how many games sold at least 1 million copies the first year of the 360?	Five
What 3 video formats did the 360 support natively at launch?	Windows Media Video (WMV) format (including high-definition and PlaysForSure videos), as well as H.264 and MPEG-4
Support for what video format was added in 2007?	MPEG-4 ASP
How are music player controls accessed by 360 users?	the Xbox 360 Guide button
What is one feature of 360 photo slide shows?	transition effects
What was the name of the non-subscription Xbox online gaming service?	Xbox Live Silver
What was the "color" name given to the premium version of Xbox Live?	Gold
What key feature is not supported by the free version of Live?	multiplayer gaming
Which popular gaming titles have their own online service outside Xbox Live?	EA Sports games
Voice support came online with what feature addition?	Xbox Live Vision
What is the name of the 360's online service?	Xbox Live
What is the name of the feature that allows users to download games from Live?	Xbox Live Arcade
What can people owning both a PC and 360 do?	stream media
What is the name of the 360's motion sensing camera peripheral?	the Kinect
The 360's multimedia capabilities transformed it from a game console to what?	a hub for living-room computing entertainment
What was the software attach rate in the US for the 360 by March of 2008?	7.5 games per console in the US
What are two prominent 360 exclusive franchises?	the Halo franchise and Gears of War
Why were early multi-platform games considered superior on the 360?	the difficulties of programming for the PS3
The 360 earned 38 nominations and 12 wins from what organization in 2007?	Game Critics Awards
Microsoft hoped to have how many titles available for the 360 by the end of 2008?	over 1,000
What hardware defect code plagued the 360?	"General Hardware Failure" error
What is the flashing indicator of a general hardware error known as?	Red Ring of Death
How did Microsoft react to general hardware error problems?	Microsoft extended the Xbox 360's manufacturer's warranty to three years
What other error code was eventually covered by this warranty extension?	E74 error code
Where did users see the flashing light error codes display on their 360s?	the ring around the power button
What online source called the 360 the 6th greatest console of all time in 2009?	IGN
TechRadar honored the 360 by calling it what?	most influential
What 360 peripheral was the fastest selling consumer electronic device in history?	Kinect
According to PC Magazine, the 360 created the prototype for what?	online gaming
What magazine ranked the 360 as the second best console of the 1993-2013 period?	Edge
What problem hurt Nintendo's Wii console?	collapse of third-party software support in its later years
The Playstation 3 originally struggled for market share for what reasons?	due to being too expensive and initially lacking quality titles
Why was the 360 considered a market success for Microsoft?	it strengthened Microsoft as a major force in the console market
What is the successor to the 360 called?	Xbox One
Which console sold the most units in the seventh generation era?	Nintendo Wii
What was the original user interface for the 360 called?	Xbox 360 Dashboard
Who designed this user interface?	AKQA and Audiobrain
The simple dashboard could be accessed by pressing what controller button?	the Xbox Guide button on the gamepad
How many tabs were on the 360 dashboard interface?	five
The tabs on the user interface were called what?	Blades
What was a classic title originally offered by the Xbox Live Arcade?	Ms. Pac-Man
What was a new, original title originally available from Arcade?	Assault Heroes
What date did the Xbox Live Arcade launch on?	November 3, 2004
When was Arcade Live relaunched with 360 support?	November 22, 2005
What is the name of the online virtual arcade that launched in 2010?	Game Room
At what conventions did Microsoft announce IPTV support through the 360?	Consumer Electronics Shows
Which Microsoft executive announced IPTV as "soon" in 2007?	Bill Gates
Who was Microsoft's president of Entertainment & Devices in 2008?	Robbie Bach
What UK company did Microsoft partner with to bring IPTV to the 360?	BT
What Microsoft executive announced the launch of version 2.0 of Mediaroom?	Steve Ballmer
What XBox Live service allows users to buy games and downloadable content?	Xbox Live Marketplace
Which levels of Xbox Live membership may access the Marketplace?	Free and Gold members
What hardware is required to use the Marketplace?	A hard drive or memory unit
What virtual currency is used to make Marketplace purchases?	Microsoft Points
Prepaid cards for Microsoft Points are available in what denominations?	1,600 and 4,000
What was the initial launch window of the 360 console?	2005–2006
What was one adverse condition that characterized early versions of the console?	high failure rate
What were the designations of the two redesigned 360 models and when did they come out?	Xbox 360 S in 2010, and the Xbox 360 E in 2013
As of June 2014, how many 360s across all SKUs have been sold worldwide?	84 million
When did the Xbox One launch?	November 22, 2013
What sales figure was the 360 the first console of its generation to surpass?	10 million
When did the 360 surrender its lead in total sales?	June 2008
What console eventually passed the 360 in total sales?	the Wii
During what 32-month later period was the 360 the best selling console?	January 2011 and October 2013
When did the Xbox achieve 10 million units sold?	May 2008
Besides online gaming and media distribution, what other feature made the 360 influential, according to TechRadar?	game achievement feature
How many years after initial launch of the console was Kinect released?	Five years
Besides it's features, what did Kinect do for the 360 in terms of sales?	extended the life of the console
What is Kinect?	motion capture camera
How did Microsoft describe Kinect?	a "controller-free gaming and entertainment experience"
When was Kinect first announced?	June 1, 2009
At what event was Kinect announced?	Electronic Entertainment Expo
What was the secret code name for Kinect while in development?	Project Natal
How can users utilize the Kinect to interact with their 360 consoles?	by using gestures, spoken commands and presented objects and images
How did Microsoft modify the architecture of the 360 to reduce failure rates?	a reduction in the number, size, and placement of components
What was the root cause of hardware failures with the 360?	heat
When the newer 360 S models have their power buttons flash red, it means?	system overheating
How does the 360 S then react to an overheating situation?	imminent system shutdown until the system has cooled
How did Microsoft attempt to deal with potential heat-related expansion with GPU and CPU components?	dabs of epoxy on the corners and edges
What was the name of the 360's video store service?	Xbox Video Marketplace
When was this video service launched?	November 22, 2006
When do movies rented through this marketplace expire?	14 days after download or at the end of the first 24 hours after the movie has begun playing
What resolution are videos sold through this service?	720p
What sound standard is supported for the marketplace videos?	5.1 surround audio
How did the original Xbox fare in Japan in general?	sold poorly
How many original Xboxes were sold in Japan between 2002 and 2005?	2 million units
Between 2005 and 2011, how many 360 consoles were sold in Japan?	1.5 million units
What two console manufacturers dominate the Japanese market?	Sony and Nintendo
Lackluster sales caused Japanese retailers to take what action with the 360?	scaling down and in some cases discontinuing sales
How many major hardware revisions has the 360 had?	Two
By what other name is the 360 S model known?	"Slim"
Which SKUs did the 360 S replace?	the original "Elite" and "Arcade" models
What component of the 360 S prevents overheating issues prevalent in prior versions?	a redesigned motherboard
What video input format is not supported by the 360 E?	S/PDIF
How many launch titles did the 360 have in Japan?	Six
What was the name of the Japanese developer that strongly supported the 360?	Mistwalker
What was Mistwalker's first title for the 360?	Blue Dragon
Blue Dragon surpassed this sales figure in Japan?	200,000 units
What was Mistwalker's second 360 title to be released?	Lost Odyssey
What PC operating system is required to stream content to a 360?	Windows XP with Service pack 2 or higher
What modified AV protocol does the 360 utilize?	UPnP
What codecs are supported for 360 streaming from uShare?	MPEG-2, MPEG-4, WMV
What video formats are supported for UPnP streaming?	WMV, MOV, TS
What extra features do Xbox Live Gold members get?	integrated online game playing capabilities outside of third-party subscriptions
What information does Microsoft allow users to retain when transitioning Live subscriptions?	profile information, friends list, and games history
What does a user need to do to transfer a Live account to the new system?	users need to link a Windows Live ID to their gamertag on Xbox.com
What is the annual cost of a Live Gold membership in USD?	$59.99
How many users are subscribed to Xbox Live?	30 million
What hardware device was merged with the video marketplace?	the Zune
Where and when was the Zune HD marketplace announced?	E3 2009
The Zune video marketplace was merged with what Live feature?	Xbox Live Video Store
What was the new name of this Live video store?	Zune Marketplace
How many countries were slated for the Zune Marketplace launch?	7
When did wars between Britain and France in North America start?	1689
What was the most important North American conflict between France and Britain called?	Queen Anne's War
What French colony did Great Britain conquer in Queen Anne's War?	Acadia
When was the final French and Indian War fought?	1754–63
What future American founding father fought in the French and Indian War?	George Washington
What was the biggest war the US got involved with in the early 19th century?	the War of 1812
What conflict caused Britain to blockade trade?	a major war with Napoleon's France
What uprising did Britain support in North America?	Indian insurrection
What country was the first the US ever declared war upon?	the United Kingdom
What was the initial US strategy in the War of 1812?	invading British Canada, hoping to use captured territory as a bargaining chip
Who was the Secretary of War who modernized the US military at the beginning of the 20th century?	Elihu Root
Which military academy did Root help grow?	West Point
What military advisement committee was established by Root?	General Staff
What officer rotation doctrine was developed under Root's guidance?	the principle of rotating officers from staff to line
What then-US protectorate did Root write a government charter for?	the Philippines
When World War I started, what was the official US position?	neutral
When did World War I commence?	August 1914
What German war policy precipitated US involvement in WWI?	submarine attacks
What year did the US enter World War I?	1917
The United States built its army prior to joining the war in what way?	peacetime draft
The Vietnam War was an element of what US diplomatic policy?	Containment
Communists were defeated in what country in 1972?	Indonesia
What term did critics of the Vietnam War use to describe it?	a "quagmire"
When did the draft end?	1973
Which president ended the draft?	1973
How many nations were against Iraq in the US-led coalition?	34
What precipitated the Persian Gulf War?	the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait
When did this precipitating event take place?	August 1990
When did hostilities in the Persian Gulf War begin?	January 1991
How many US veterans of the Persian Gulf War have been classed as permanently disabled?	180,000
In what African country did US troops participate in peacekeeping operations?	Somalia
What was the name of the Somalian warlord who directed massacres of peacekeeping troops?	Mohamed Farrah Aidid
In what Somalian city did American troops become trapped?	Mogadishu
How many US soldiers were killed in the battle of Mogadishu?	Eighteen
What is the title of the book and movie about the Mogadishu uprising?	Black Hawk Down
When did the US send troops to the Philippines to battle terrorists?	January 2002
Terrorists in the Philippines were linked to what larger terrorist organization?	al-Qaida
Where did anti-terrorist fighting take place?	the Sulu Archipelago
How many troops did the US initially send to the Philippines?	1,200
What was the name of the Philippine terrorist group the US was sent to help combat?	Abu Sayyaf
What battle ended a British invasion from Canada in the Revolutionary War?	Saratoga
When was the battle of Saratoga fought?	1777
What Prussian expatriate helped train the Continental army?	General von Steuben
What two European countries entered the Revolutionary War against Britain?	France and Spain
What advantage did Britain lose when the European countries entered the war?	its naval advantage
What was the US policy when France declared war on England in 1793?	to remain neutral
What treaty with England conflicted with the United States' Treaty of Alliance with France?	the Jay Treaty
Where did US ships and French privateers fight between 1798 and 1800?	the Caribbean
What US President negotiated a truce with France to end the undeclared war at sea?	John Adams
When was the Treaty of Alliance with France signed?	1778
What treaty ceded territory to the US extending west to the Mississippi River?	Treaty of Paris
What three major tribes occupied these formerly British territories?	Shawnee, Cherokee, Choctaw
When was the Battle of Wabash fought?	1791
What was the decisive battle in the Northwest territories against the native population there?	the Battle of Fallen Timbers
When was this deciding battle fought?	1794
What dividing line separated slave states from free states?	the Mason–Dixon line
When was Lincoln elected?	1860
How did slave states react to Lincoln's election?	states in the South seceded from the United States
When did Confederate forces bombard Fort Sumter?	April 12, 1861
What was the first state to formally secede?	South Carolina
Where did the American army fight the Spanish in the Spanish American War?	Cuba
The army in this war was primarily made up of what sort of units?	volunteers and state militia
What colonies did Spain hand over to the US after the war?	Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines
What island territory voluntarily joined the US as a colony in 1898?	Hawaii
What is the name of the naval base the US leased from a newly independent Cuba?	Guantánamo Bay Naval Base
When was the Philippine-American War fought?	1899–1902
Where did the US defeat occupying Spanish forces prior to the Philippine American War?	Manila
Who led American forces in this war?	General Elwell Otis
How many troops did the US send to the Philippines?	100,000
Who was the rebel leader captured by US forces at the end of this war?	Emilio Aguinaldo
How many battleships did the US Navy lose at Pearl Harbor?	eight
How many Americans were killed during the Pearl Harbor attack?	2,403
What term describes the overall US strategy in the Pacific in WWII?	island hopping
When did the Allies invade North Africa?	1942
Which two Japanese cities were hit with atomic bombs?	Hiroshima and Nagasaki
What country supplied troops to North Korea during the Korean War?	the People's Republic of China
What country supplied advisors, pilots, and war materiel to North Korea?	the Soviet Union
What country was the principal ally of South Korea during the war?	the United States
What organization did all combatants on both sides of the war belong to?	United Nations
Which two countries were the primary fighters for territory in the Korean War?	North and South Korea
When did North Korean forces initiate attacks on US and UN forces in the Korean war?	1950
What South Korean city did the US and ROK forces defend while building reinforcements?	Pusan
What type of attack was used on Inchon?	amphibious invasion
Chinese troops attacked the UN forces when they crossed what river?	the Yalu River
What general was fired for defying President Truman's containment strategy?	Douglas MacArthur
What acronym was given to South Vietnamese troops?	RVN
What acronym was given to North Vietnamese army regulars?	NVA
By what name were fighters of the National Liberation Front known?	Viet Cong
The VC operated in what geographic area?	South Vietnam
The NVA was aided by military and financial aid from what two countries?	Soviet Union and China
What two northern Vietnamese cities did the US avoid bombing at the outset of the war?	Hanoi and Haiphong
What was the major supply trail for the Northern Vietnamese forces?	the Ho Chi Minh Trail
What US commander's strategy caused a loss of public opinion in the US?	William Westmoreland
Who helped orchestrate bombing campaigns in the Vietnam War?	the White House
When did the US start bombing Hanoi?	1972
When did fighting between Palestinians and the Lebanese begin?	1983
When did US marines land in Lebanon?	1982
When did a suicide bomber successfully attack the marine barracks in Lebanon?	October 23, 1983
How many marines were killed in the attack?	241
When did President Reagan withdraw marines from Lebanon?	February 1984
What is the main reason the US-led coalition won a decisive victory in the Persian Gulf War?	US technological superiority
US airstrikes on Iraqi air defenses and command and control facilities began when?	on 17 January 1991
What faults in the Iraqi forces led to their rapid defeat?	poor strategic and tactical leadership and low morale
Who ordered Iraqi forces to hold their ground despite air bombardments?	Iraqi President Saddam Hussein
When did US ground forces attack Iraqi positions?	24 February
How long did ground combat operations last in the Persian Gulf War?	100 hours
Who ordered the cease-fire that effectively ended hostilities?	US President George H. W. Bush
What did some US Politicians think Coalition forces should have been allowed to have done?	pressed on to Baghdad and removed Hussein from power
Coalition nations did what with regards to invading Northern Iraq to precipitate the cease fire?	refused to participate
Why did Coalition nations fear the removal of Hussein from power?	it would create a power vacuum and destabilize the region
What term is given to the attempt by the US and her allies to fight global terrorist groups?	The War on Terrorism
What religious groups are primarily targeted by this war?	Islamic Extremist
What is one prominent, specific terrorist group targeted by the War on Terrorism?	al-Qaeda
The War On Terrorism was caused by what event?	the September 11, 2001 attacks
Since the start of the war on Terrorism, attacks on US service members have occurred in which two US states?	Arkansas and Texas
What demand did the US make before invading Iraq in 2003?	that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein leave Iraq
How many US troops participated in the invasion?	250,000
What country refused to allow forces to stage within it?	Turkey
How long did the first phase of fighting last?	approximately three weeks
How long did the US and its coalition partners have to occupy Iraq?	9 years
What declaration established a no-fly zone over Libya?	United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973
What is the name of the Libyan leader opposed by US and UN forces?	Muammar Gaddafi
What was the name of the military action against Libya?	Operation Unified Protector
What was the goal of this operation?	to protect civilians
The Libyan conflict was primarily fought between which groups?	Gaddafi's loyalists and Libyan rebels fighting to depose him
What was the biggest problem General Washington faced?	logistics
Where were the two major surrenders of British forces in the war?	Saratoga (1777) and Yorktown (1781)
What percentage of the Colonial population were loyal to the Crown?	20%
What did Washington do after defeating the British Army?	he retired quietly to his farm in Virginia.
What advantage did Washington have over the British generals?	he had a better idea of how to win the war than they did
Where was the Barbary Coast?	modern day Libya
Who sent pirates to capture merchant ships?	The Berbers
How did the United States initially deal with this problem?	The U.S. paid protection money until 1801
What American naval officer led a raid that destroyed a captured American ship?	Stephen Decatur
What city did William Eaton capture to end the first Barbary War?	Derna
What was the Confederate overall strategy to win the Civil War?	getting Britain and France to intervene
What was the Union's original war aim?	capturing the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia
Who led the Confederate forces defending Richmond throughout the war?	Robert E. Lee
How did the war effect both sides?	the material and personnel of the South were used up, while the North prospered
When in the 19th century was the US navy modernized?	the 1880s
What replaced the older sailing ships in the navy?	modern steel battleships
By what name was the US fleet known at the start of the 20th Century?	the Great White Fleet
Who ordered this fleet to sail around the world?	President Theodore Roosevelt
What was the purpose of this order?	to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater
What early 20th century conflict sent tens of thousands of refugees to the US?	The Mexican Revolution
US forces were sent to occupy what Mexican City during the Revolution?	Veracruz
What was the name of the Mexican general who attacked an American city in New Mexico?	Pancho Villa
What foreign organization encouraged Villa's guerilla war against the US?	The German Secret Service
What US General led troops against Villa?	General John J. Pershing
What general sentiment was the result of losses in World War I?	isolationism
Congress refused to allow the US to join what organization?	the League of Nations
What legislation was passed to discourage the country from getting involved in a foreign war?	Neutrality Acts
Which US President sought to circumvent Neutrality acts to aid Britain?	Franklin D. Roosevelt
What was the name of the 1940 program to send arms to Britain?	the Lend-Lease Act
How many Americans served in the military in World War II?	Over 16 million
How many American service personnel died in World War II?	400,000
What other country besides the United States became a super power after World War II?	the Soviet Union
What name is given to those Americans who served in World War II?	the Greatest Generation
Both during and after the conclusion of  World War II, the United States formed a firm alliance with what country?	Britain
The policy of containment in Asia was aimed at what ideology?	Communism
What was the psychological turning point of the war?	The Tet Offensive
When did this offensive take place?	1968
When were US forces withdrawn from Vietnam?	1973
The policy of supplying arms and war materiel for the Vietnamese to fight their own war was called what?	"Vietnamization,"
When did Britain declare martial law in a North American colony?	1774
What colony was placed under martial law?	Massachusetts
What were the first conflicts of the American Revolution?	Lexington and Concord
Who appointed Washington to serve as commander in chief?	The Continental Congress
When did the colonies declare independence?	July 4, 1776
What quality made the US only a minor military power after the Revolutionary War?	having only a modest army
Why was the US military so small initially?	A traditional distrust of standing armies
The founding fathers had faith in what military groups?	local militia
What did early American leaders worry a large standing army would involve America in?	foreign wars
Early leaders also feared a large army would allow what internal conflict to take place?	a domestic tyrant to seize power
What two tribes particularly resisted being confined to reservations?	the Sioux and Comanche
What caused a spike in difficulties between settlers and indigenous peoples on the western plains after the Civil War?	population expansion, railroad construction, and the disappearance of the buffalo herds
Who were two of the military leaders tasked with overseeing American policy of putting Indians on reservations?	William Tecumseh Sherman and Philip Sheridan
When was the Battle of Little Big Horn fought?	1876
What US officer led the troops who were destroyed at Little Big Horn?	Col. George Armstrong Custer
What naval officer developed new doctrines for gunnery at the turn of the 20th Century?	Rear Admiral Bradley A. Fiske
What aircraft did Fiske call for the development of?	torpedo plane
What assistant naval secretary did Fiske serve under?	Franklin D. Roosevelt
When did Fiske propose his reforms to the way the Navy operated?	1913–15
What was the name given to American soldiers in Europe in 1918?	doughboys
What was the official name of the American army that went to fight in Europe in 1918?	American Expeditionary Forces
Who had overall command of the American forces in Europe?	John J. Pershing
When did fighting on the western front end?	November 11, 1918
What was the name of the conditional surrender that ended fighting on the western front?	the Armistice
What was the American priority in mobilization prior to entering World War II?	air power
When did the US officially enter World War II?	8 December 1941
What event led to America entering the war?	the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii
At the start of the conflict with the Allies, what did Japan do?	seized American, Dutch, and British possessions across the Pacific and Southeast Asia
What country served as an American forward base to wage war with Japan?	Australia
When was the Vietnam War fought?	between 1959 and 1975
Besides Vietnam, what other countries saw fighting in this war?	Cambodia and Laos
What was the name of the strategic bombing of North Vietnam?	Operation Rolling Thunder
When did American military involvement ramp up in Vietnam?	1964
What congressional declaration gave President Johnson authority to send troops to Vietnam?	the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
What conflict was supposed to have provided Iraqi forces with battle experience?	8 years of war with Iran
Some observers thought that the Persian Gulf War would have tank battles similar to what war?	North Africa during World War II
What equipment did the Iraqi army possess?	late model Soviet tanks and jet fighters
Prior to the Persian Gulf War, where and when was the last major American military conflict?	Vietnam nearly 20 years earlier
What problem did the Iraqi forces have?	the antiaircraft weapons were crippled
What organization captured significant segments of Iraq and Syria?	ISIL
What legal ethos does ISIL operate under?	Sharia law
What actions did ISIL take against Western journalists and aid workers?	kidnapping and decapitation
How did the US intervene against ISIL?	airstrikes in Iraq over ISIL held territories
What was the goal of US and coalition airstrikes in Syria?	degrading and destroying ISIL and Al-Nusra-held territory
Where was the band Blue Cheer from?	San Francisco
What classic song did Blue Cheer cover?	"Summertime Blues"
What was the hit off Steppenwolf's self-titled debut lp?	"Born to Be Wild"
What movie featured that Steppenwolf single?	Easy Rider
The lyrics to "Born To Be Wild" contain the first reference to what hard rock style?	heavy metal
The band Rush is what nationality?	Canadian
What are the first three Rush albums?	Rush, Fly by Night and Caress of Steel
What nationality was Thin Lizzy?	Irish
What was Thin Lizzy's hit single?	"The Boys Are Back in Town"
The Scorpions hailed from what country?	Germany
What is the title of Bon Jovi's third lp?	Slippery When Wet
How many copies did this record sell?	12 million
What was the band Europe's international hit?	The Final Countdown
What was Van Halen's 1986 album called?	5150
Who was the new lead singer for Van Halen on 5150?	Sammy Hagar
What Aerosmith ballad debuted at number one on the charts?	"I Don't Want to Miss a Thing"
What was the title of AC/DC's 1995 double lp?	Ballbreaker
Bon Jovi's 1995 album was called what?	These Days
What commercially successful sub-genre emerged from the grunge movement?	post-grunge
When did Aerosmith's album Get A Grip come out?	1993
What are two examples of glam metal bands?	Bon Jovi and Def Leppard
What two genres cut into hard rock's popularity at the end of the 1980s and early 1990s?	grunge and later Britpop
What were some hard rock bands of the 1970s?	Led Zeppelin, The Who, Deep Purple, Aerosmith, AC/DC and Van Halen
What style did some hard rock bands embrace in the 1980s?	pop rock
What genre laid the roots for hard rock?	electric blues
Who recorded "Rumble"?	Link Wray
When was "Rumble" released?	1958
What were two of Dick Dale's better known songs?	"Let's Go Trippin'" (1961) and "Misirlou" (1962)
What city's blues style produced hard rock precursors in electric blues?	Memphis
What was the landmark hard rock album recorded by the Rolling Stones in 1972?	Exile on Main St.
Which Led Zeppelin album featured the hit "Stairway to Heaven"?	Led Zeppelin IV
What two hard rock songs are featured on Deep Purple's Machine Head album?	"Highway Star" and "Smoke on the Water"
Who was Deep Purple's guitarist?	Ritchie Blackmore
Who was the drummer for The Who?	Keith Moon
Who was the original lead singer of AC/DC who died?	Bon Scott
Who was the Led Zeppelin drummer who passed away?	John Bonham
What singer replaced Ozzy Osbourne in Black Sabbath?	Ronnie James Dio
What was Ozzy Osbourne's first solo album?	Blizzard of Ozz
What are some thrash metal bands?	Metallica, Anthrax, Megadeth and Slayer
Guns N Roses released both Use Your Illusion albums in what year?	1991
What band's debut was titled Shake Your Money Maker?	The Black Crowes
What was the title of Def Leppard's 1992 album?	Adrenalize
Adrenalize followed what 1987 Def Leppard record?	Hysteria
Adrenalize topped US album charts for how long?	five weeks
When did the band The Darkness break up?	2006
The Sword, High on Fire, Witchcraft and Wolfmother are all examples of what hard rock sub-genre?	retro-metal
What is the title of Airbourne's debut lp?	Runnin' Wild
Glam metal band Steel Panther is from what city?	Los Angeles
What are some Swedish sleaze metal revivalist bands?	Vains of Jenna, Hardcore Superstar and Crashdïet
Who were three Chicago blues players who influenced hard rock?	Elmore James, Muddy Waters, and Howlin' Wolf
Who recorded "You Really Got Me"?	The Kinks
"Shapes of Things" was a 1966 single by what band?	The Yardbirds
What garage rock classic was recorded by The Kingsmen?	"Louie Louie"
When did the Rolling Stones release "(I Can't Get No" Satisfaction"?	1965
When did Free break up?	1973
What band did Free lead singer Paul Rodgers help form?	Bad Company
Bad Company's self titled debut album was released in what year?	1974
What nationality was the band Nazareth?	Scottish
What was Queen's massive 1975 hit single called?	"Bohemian Rhapsody"
What sub-genre of hard rock does Def Leppard belong to?	the New Wave of British Heavy Metal
What was Def Leppard's second album called?	High 'n' Dry
What were the three Top 40 singles from Def Leppard's Pyromania album?	"Photograph", "Rock of Ages" and "Foolin'"
What band had the first glam metal album to hit number one on the Billboard charts?	Quiet Riot
When did Motley Crue's album Shout At The Devil come out?	1983
What was the title of Nirvana's 1991 album?	Nevermind
What was the hard rock style that emerged in the early 1990s?	grunge
What are some grunge bands with a strong 1970s influence?	Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains, Mother Love Bone and Soundgarden
What 1990s hard rock band had a big stadium rock sound?	Stone Temple Pilots
What element made Oasis unique among 1990s Britpop bands?	a hard rock sound
When did the Foo Fighters album In Your Honor come out?	2005
Three Days Grace is from what country?	Canada
The band Jet is from what country?	Australia
What supergroup featured members of Foo Fighters, Queens of the Stone Age and Led Zeppelin?	Them Crooked Vultures
What was the title of Buckcherry's 2007 hit single?	"Sorry"
What instrument is usually at the center of a hard rock sound?	The electric guitar
Rhythm guitar in hard rock usually plays what?	repetitive riffs with a varying degree of complexity
In hard rock, an electric guitar can also be used for what?	a solo lead instrument
What carries the backbeat in hard rock drumming?	snare
What instrument works in tandem with the drums to provide hard rock rhythms?	The bass guitar
Who was the guitarist for the band Cream?	Eric Clapton
Who was the guitarist in the Kinks?	Dave Davies
Who played guitar in The Who?	Pete Townshend
When did The White Album come out?	1968
Keith Richards is the guitarist of what band?	The Rolling Stones
Who recorded the album School's Out?	Alice Cooper
Tres Hombres is the name of an album by what band?	ZZ Top
Who was the lead singer of Montrose?	Sammy Hagar
Kiss' double live album Alive! came out in what year?	1975
Who had a hit single with "(Don't Fear) The Reaper"?	Blue Öyster Cult
What was the title of Deep Purple's 1980s reunion album?	Perfect Strangers
What album was Van Halen's commercial high point?	1984
In what year did ZZ Top release Eliminator?	1983
What band recorded "Keep On Loving You"?	REO Speedwagon
The hit single "Amanda" was recorded by what band?	Boston
What was Van Halen's last album with Sammy Hagar?	Balance
Who was the Guns N Roses drummer who was fired by the band?	Steven Adler
What former member of Extreme briefly served as the lead singer for Van Halen?	Gary Cherone
Who was the only original member left in Guns N Roses?	Axl Rose
Slash left Guns N Roses in what year?	1996
By the late 60s, what term was synonymous with hard rock?	heavy metal
What heavy metal group introduced darker themes to the music?	Black Sabbath
What genre was an influence on extreme metal in the 1980s?	hardcore punk
Hard rock is differentiated from heavy metal by containing more of an influence of what genre?	bluesy
In heavy metal, riffs typically form what element of a song?	stand-alone melodies
Led Zeppelin's first two albums both came out in what year?	1969
What was the title of Deep Purple's hard rock 1970 album?	In Rock
Black Sabbath's lyrics contained references to what cultural touchstones?	occult and elements of Gothic horror
What is the title of Black Sabbath's 1970 album?	Paranoid
What is one band directly influenced by Black Sabbath?	Judas Priest
What two genres made inroads on hard rock in the 1970s?	disco in the US and punk rock in the UK
What punk band's songs rarely exceeded two minutes in length?	The Ramones
What were three midwestern hard rock bands?	Kansas, REO Speedwagon and Styx
What city was Van Halen originally from?	Los Angeles
Which Van Halen instrumental showcased the guitar mastery of Eddie Van Halen?	"Eruption"
How many copies did Whitesnake's 1987 self title album sell?	17 million
What was the title of Aerosmith's 1987 comeback album?	Permanent Vacation
Def Leppard's album Hysteria churned out how many hit singles?	seven
What Guns N Roses album was the second best selling debut of all time?	Appetite for Destruction
What Guns N Roses song became a number one single?	"Sweet Child O' Mine"
What hard rock supergroup contained members of Soundgarden and Rage Against the Machine?	Audioslave
What was the title of Bon Jovi's 2000 hit single?	"It's My Life"
What band released an album called Stiff Upper Lip in 2000?	AC/DC
Who was the lead singer of Stone Temple Pilots?	Scott Weiland
What was Guns N Roses long delayed 2008 album called?	Chinese Democracy
what is the name of the region east of the Rocky Mountains?	"Great Plains
who brought the term great plains into widespread usage?	Nevin Fenneman's
what year was Nevin Fenneman's study?	1916
what was theregion called before "the great plans"?	the High Plains
what type of land is much of the great plans?	open range
when did ranchers usually have a cattle round up?	spring and fall
in a cattle round up, what did ranchers do to the new calves?	branded
from 1866-95 about how many cattle did cowboys herd?	10 million
who was the spanish conquistador who had encounters with europeans and native americans?	Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
who crossed a section of oklahoma and texas?	Hernando de Soto
what is the section of oklahoma and texas that  Hernando de Soto traveled?	the De Soto Trail
who thought the great plains were the locations of Quivira and Cíbola?	The Spanish
what did the spanish think the cities of Quivira and Cíbola were rich in?	gold
what is the name of the line that divides the great plains?	The 100th meridian
about how much rainfall does the great plains get per year?	20 inches
what do high winds in the area sometimes cause?	dust storms
what type of climate does the eastern great plains fall into?	humid subtropical climate
after about what year did railroads bring hunters to the great plains?	1870
what animal did hunters kill off for their hides?	bison
what farmers rushed in to settle the land with the help of the railroads?	European farmers
what did the railroads offer the farmers that rushed in to settle the area?	packages of land and transportation
how much of the population have the rural plains lost since 1920?	a third
who declated the American frontier "closed" in 1893?	Frederick Jackson Turner
how many ghost towns are in the state of Kansas?	more than 6,000
how much prarie land does the "Buffalo Commons" want to return?	139,000 square miles
who usually organized shared meals and potluck events?	Women
around when did the great plains become productive for crop growing	1950s
what is the large underground layer of water in the great plains called?	Ogallala Aquifer
what type of irrigation is used in the great plains?	Center pivot irrigation
what is the great plains?	broad expanse of flat land
where does the great plains lie?	west of the Mississippi River
what is the region known for?	extensive cattle ranching
who is the North American Environmental Atlas made by?	Commission for Environmental Cooperation
what countries is the Commission for Environmental Cooperation made up of?	Mexican, American, and Canadian governments
what mainly opened the great plains for settlement?	railroads
what did the railroads make it easy to do?	ship wheat and other crops
who did the railroads sell cheap lands to?	immigrants
who two new technologies were introducted in the 1930s?	sewing and washing machines
about how long ago did the climate become favorable?	about 25 million years ago
what animals did the grasslands provide a new home for?	mammals
what diet did the mammals switch to from browsing diets?	grazing diets
the spread of grasslands and what have been strongly linked?	development of grazers
when did the US pass the Homestead ACt?	1862
how much land did the Homestead Act allow a person to claim?	up to 160 acres
how long did the person have to live on the land?	five years
when was the Kinkaid Act brought about?	1904
the dominion act was passed in what year	1871
What technology is used by night-vision devices?	active near-infrared illumination
What discipline uses infrared telescopes to see through molecular clouds?	Infrared astronomy
What color shift indicates that space objects date from the early days of the universe?	red
What devices are used to observe insulated system heat loss?	Infrared thermal-imaging cameras
Along with industrial and medical, in what applications is infrared radiation used?	scientific
At what wavelength does the human eye become significantly less sensitive to light?	700 nm
What sort of light is generated by IR lasers?	near-IR
Up to what wavelength does the human eye perceive IR LED sources as red?	780 nm
Up to what wavelength does the human eye perceive certain intense lights as being dull red in color?	1050 nm
What objects are notably bright in near IR?	Leaves
What is the term for the property that describes how a surface's thermal emissions deviate from the ideal of a black body?	emissivity
How will the infrared image of an object with a higher emissivity appear in relation to one with lower emissivity?	hotter
Along with pyrometers, what devices can receive inaccurate results if emissivity is not set correctly?	infrared cameras
What is the technique that analyzes the constituent bonds of molecules to identify them?	Infrared vibrational spectroscopy
What happens to a molecule if an oscillation results in a dipole being changed?	it will absorb a photon that has the same frequency
What do the vibrational frequencies of molecules usually correspond to?	the frequencies of infrared light
What is the term for light radiation in the 4000–400 cm−1 spectrum?	the mid-infrared
What is used in infrared photography to capture the near-infrared spectrum?	infrared filters
What devices are often equipped with infrared blockers?	Digital cameras
What is the technique that involves imaging with terahertz radiation?	'T-ray' imaging
What is another name for terahertz radiation?	far-infrared
What is a notable recent development in T-ray imaging?	terahertz time-domain spectroscopy
What technique is used in art to examine underlying layers of a painting without damaging it?	Infrared reflectography
What shows up particularly well in reflectograms?	carbon black
What is the term for differences in the painting and underdrawing made by the original artist?	pentimenti
Who discovered infrared radiation?	William Herschel
To whom did Herschel present his work on infrared radiation?	the Royal Society of London
In what year did Herschel publish his work on infrared radiation?	1800
What device did Herschel use to discover the infrared?	a prism
What did Herschel call the infrared spectrum?	Calorific Rays
What is a commonly used term for infrared radiation?	heat radiation
What percentage of the Earth's heat is derived from the Sun's infrared light?	49%
What is the common range of emitted radiation of room temperature objects, in micrometers?	8 to 25
Other than infrared light, what type of light is responsible for heating the Earth?	visible
What is another term for infrared homing?	Infrared tracking
What devices make use of infrared homing?	Missiles
What is a common name for missiles that make use of infrared seeking?	heat-seekers
Along with aircraft and people, what objects notably create and retain heat?	vehicle engines
What does IR stand for?	infrared
Along with Cirrus, what types of clouds are cold and high?	Cumulonimbus
What color do Cirrus clouds appear in infrared?	white
Along with Stratus, what clouds are lower and warmer?	Stratocumulus
What color are Strarus clouds in infrared?	grey
What is the range of the near-infrared channel in micrometers?	1.58–1.64
What limits the sensitivity of infrared telescopes on Earth?	water vapor in the atmosphere
To somewhat avoid the water vapor in the atmosphere, where can an observatory be sited?	at a high altitude
Along with aircraft, what object can be used to carry a telescope aloft?	balloon
What sorts of telescopes completely avoid water vapor in Earth's atmosphere?	Space telescopes
What is the nearest wavelength to the radiation that a human eye can see?	Near-infrared
Along with the emission peaks and vs. bands mechanisms, what other physical mechanism is used to define near-infrared?	water absorption
In micrometers, when do common silicon detectors cease to be sensitive?	1,050
What is the lowest level of sensitivity, in micrometers, for InGaAs?	950
What is the term for transit energy flowing as a result of differences in temperature?	Heat
What type of heat transmission can propagate through a vacuum?	thermal radiation
What object emits thermal radiation in the X-ray spectrum?	the solar corona
The visible, ultraviolet and X-ray spectra are all above what spectrum?	infrared
What is the range of the electromagnetic spectrum in micrometers?	0.9–14
In nanometers, what is the electromagnetic spectrum's range?	900–14,000
What law states that infrared radiation is emitted by objects based on temperature?	the black body radiation law
What happens to the amount of radiation an object emits as temperature increases?	increases
What type of cameras see infrared radiation?	Thermographic
What irradiates clouds of gas in the galaxy and makes them glow?	imbedded stars
What can be detected via infrared prior to their emitting visible light?	protostars
What objects emit less of their energy as infrared light versus visible light?	Stars
What sort of equipment uses the infrared spectrum in the absence of sufficient visible light?	night vision
What do night vision devices convert ambient light photons into?	electrons
Along with a chemical process, what type of process is used by night vision devices to convert infrared into visible light?	electrical
What is the IrDA?	the Infrared Data Association
What does the acronym LEDs stand for?	light-emitting diodes
What is a term for when something is switched on and off?	modulated
What device is used to transform infrared radiation into an electric current?	silicon photodiode
Why does infrared not cause trouble for devices in adjacent rooms?	IR does not penetrate walls
What letter represents the index of refraction?	n
What letter represents the extinction Coefficient?	k
What equations are used to figure out the index of refraction and extinction Coefficient?	Forouhi-Bloomer dispersion
Along with critical dimension and depth, what can the infrared light reflectance be used to determine in regard to high aspect ratio trench structures?	sidewall angle
What reflectance is measured from a semiconductor wafer's surface to determine the index of refraction?	light
What is the name of the technique used in scanners to minimize the effects of dust and scratches?	Infrared cleaning
Along with red and blue, what is the third visible color channel?	green
Along with replacement via inpainting, what procedure is used in infrared cleaning to remove the effect of scratches and dust?	scaling
Along with the visible light channels, what channel is used to locate scratches and dust in scanners?	infrared
Along with the surface of the Earth, what objects absorb radiation from the sun?	clouds
After Earth surface's absorbs radiation, in what spectrum is much of it re-emitted?	infrared
Along with water vapor, what atmospheric substance primarily absorbs the infrared emitted by the Earth?	cloud droplets
What notable warming effect does the presence of infrared absorbers contribute to?	greenhouse
What term refers to  the variety and variability of life on Earth?	Biodiversity
What types of variations does Biodiversity refer to?	genetic variation, ecosystem variation, or species variation
What type of biodiversity happens near the equator?	Terrestrial biodiversity
Where on Earth is biodiversity the most abundnant?	It is richest in the tropics.
Where is sea surface temperature the highest?	along coasts in the Western Pacific
Who is the author of the biodiversity research paper?	Bruce A. Wilcox
Who commissioned the biodiversity research paper?	International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN)
At what event was the biodiversity research paper presented?	1982 World National Parks Conference
What year did the United Nations Earth Summit define "biological diversity"?	1992
What model correlates much better than the hyperbolic model?	the Phanerozoic
What model is widely used in macrosociology?	hyperbolic model
What models imply that changes in diversity are guided by a first-order positive feedback?	exponential and logistic models
What model implies a second-order positive feedback?	Hyperbolic model
What can be accounted for by a feedback between diversity and community structure complexity?	The hyperbolic character of biodiversity growth
What has some responsibility for offering variety in what we eat?	Interspecific crop diversity
What is the variety of alleles within a single species?	Interspecific crop diversity
When do we rely on agricultural diversity to replant the land with something new?	If a crop fails in a monoculture
What can destroy a wheat crop?	a pest
What type of a society primarily grows monocultures?	agricultural society
What percentage of biodiversity has the planet lost since 1970	52%
What year was they study done by the World Wildlife Fund?	2014
What percentage accounts for the terrestrial wildlife gone?	39%
What percentage accounts for the marine wildlife gone?	39%
What percentage accounts for the freshwater wildlife gone?	76%
In which year was the study published that found biodiversity and genetic diversity are codependent?	2007
Who conducted the 2007 study?	National Science Foundation
What can cause a break down of a biodiversity system?	If any one type is removed from the system
Where are the most threatened ecosystems found?	in fresh water
What may unintentionally injure a species that depends on the species it replaces?	an introduced species
Where does the Prunus spinosa leaf much sooner?	In Belgium
What animal can its feeding habits disturbed by the Prunus spinosa?	leaves endemic and other local species unable to compete with the exotic species and unable to survive
What species struggle to with the introduction of new species?	endemic and other local species
What types of new species can be introduced?	The exotic organisms may be predators, parasites
What plays a vital role in harbouring floral and faunal species?	The forests
How many endemic floral species do forests harbor?	5150
How many endemic faunal species do forests harbor?	1837
What types of animals and plans are confined to a specific geographical area?	endemic species
What types of activities are granted rights in reserved forests?	hunting and grazing
What global agreement gives sovereign national rights over biological resources?	the Convention on Biological Diversity
What agreement commits countries to conserve biodiversity?	the Convention on Biological Diversity
What agreement commits countries to develop resources for sustainability?	the Convention on Biological Diversity
What is the process of collecting natural products?	bioprospecting
What can typically cause mass extinctions?	Rapid environmental changes
What percentage of species is estimated to be extinct?	More than 99 percent
How many species have ever lived on earth?	over five billion species
How many species currently live on earth?	Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million,
What is the estimated weight of the total amount of related DNA base pairs on Earth?	50 billion tonnes
Which era included a rapid growth period?	the Cambrian explosion
The Phanerozoic era covers what time period?	the last 540 million years
In which era, did the first phylum of multicellular organisms appear?	the Cambrian explosion
What type of diversity showed an overall exponential trend?	vertebrate diversity
In which event did the rainforests collapsed in the carboniferous?	the Permian-Triassic extinction event
Who describes the "Evil Quartet"?	Jared Diamond
What describes habitat destruction, overkill, introduced species, and secondary extinctions?	Evil Quartet
What describes Habitat destruction, Invasive species, Pollution, human over-Population, and Over-harvesting?	HIPPO
What is the most authoritative classification in use today?	IUCN's Classification of Direct Threats
What funding organization uses the IUCN's Classification of Direct Threats?	the World Wildlife Fund
What can threaten endemic species with extinction?	genetic pollution
What are another names for genetic pollution?	uncontrolled hybridization, introgression and genetic swamping
What causes genetic pollution?	either a numerical and/or fitness advantage of an introduced species
What are are side-effects of introduction and invasion?	Hybridization and introgression
What behavior causes swamping of a gene pool?	The abundant species can interbreed with the rare species
What is the estimate age of the Earth?	about 4.54 billion years old
What era contains the earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth?	the Eoarchean Era
What is the name of the era that predated life on Earth?	Hadean Eon
Where were the billion year old microbial mat fossils found?	Western Australia
Where were the 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks discovered?	Western Greenland
What suggests that the last few million years featured the greatest biodiversity in history?	The fossil record
Why are some scientists uncertain about the fossil record?	how strongly the fossil record is biased by the greater availability and preservation of recent geologic sections.
What is the estimate variation of the present global macroscopic species diversity?	from 2 million to 100 million
What appears increase continually in the absence of natural selection?	Diversity
What are two types of Agricultural diversity?	‘planned’ diversity or ‘associated’ diversity
What type of diversity includes the crops which a farmer has encouraged, planted or raised?	Planned diversity
What type of diversity arrives uninvited?	associated diversity
What type of diversity includes herbivores and pathogens?	associated diversity
What is becoming an international political issue?	Biodiversity's relevance to human health
What issue is closely linked with changes in biodiversity?	climate change
What changes in biodiversity have an effect on the climate?	changes in populations and distribution of disease vectors, scarcity of fresh water, impacts on agricultural biodiversity and food resources
What types of species disappear when a new disease is introduced?	those that buffer against infectious disease transmission
How many mass extinctions have happened since Life began on Earth?	five major mass extinctions
When was the period where the majority of multicellular phyla first appeared?	the Cambrian explosion
What happened in the Carboniferous?	rainforest collapse led to a great loss of plant and animal life.
When was the Permian–Triassic extinction event?	251 million years ago
How long did vertebrate recovery take?	30 million years
What century started the increase of species invasions?	1900s
Who intentionally and unintentionally moves species around?	humans
What invaders are causing changes in the Great Lakes region?	zebra mussels and the emerald ash borer
What invaders are causing changes along the North American Atlantic coast?	lion fish
How many plant species does Brazil's Atlantic Forest contain?	20,000 plant species
How many vertebrates does Brazil's Atlantic Forest contain?	1,350 vertebrates
Which country has the highest rate of species by area unit worldwide?	Colombia
Which country has about 10% of the species on Earth?	Colombia
What island separated from mainland Africa 66 million years ago?	Madagascar
What limits the amount of life that can live at once on Earth?	global carrying capacity
What type of animal shows a logistic pattern of growth?	life in the sea
What type of animal shows an exponential rise in diversity?	life on land
What percentage of potentially habitable modes have Tetrapods not yet invaded?	64 per cent
What was the increase in population from 1950 to 2011?	world population increased from 2.5 billion to 7 billion
What year started the increase of population to 7 billion?	From 1950
What is the forecast plateau that the population will reach during the 21st century?	more than 9 billion
Who is the former chief scientific adviser to the UK government?	Sir David King
What farms use biologically destructive pesticides	monoculture farms
What is one of the great agricultural challenges that farmers face?	The control of associated biodiversity
What farmers use integrated pest management strategies?	polyculture farmers
What farmers are generally less dependent on capital, biotechnology and energy?	polyculture farmers
What types of parks receive special protection against damage or degradation?	National park and nature reserve
Who selects National parks?	governments or private organizations
What is the goal of protecting National Parks from damage?	with the objective of biodiversity and landscape conservation
Who usually owns and manages National parks?	national or state governments
What activities are prohibited in national parks?	Forestry operations, grazing of animals and hunting of animals
Who is the German Federal Environment Minister?	Sigmar Gabriel
What year did Gabriel estimate 30% of of all species will be extinct by?	2050
How many plant species are close to extinction?	about one eighth
2012 studies estimated what percentage of mammals could be extinct in 20 years?	25%
What is systematically related to the numbers of species?	Habitat size
What animals are more sensitive to reduction in habitat area?	Physically larger species and those living at lower latitudes or in forests or oceans
How is a standardized ecosystem formed?	monoculture following deforestation
What leads to biodiversity loss is some countries?	lack of property rights or lax law/regulatory enforcement
What animal unintentionally invaded the US waterways?	the zebra mussel
What animal intentionally invaded Hawaii?	mongooses
What animals were not vulnerable to the mongoose?	nocturnal rats
What countries experienced unintended consequences from species invasion?	Indonesia and Malaysia,
What type of science is firmly fixated on the visible world?	Contemporary biodiversity physics
What type of life is more metabolically diverse than multicellular life?	microbial life
What type of life is more enviromentally diverse than multicellular life?	microbial life
What rate supports the Holocene extinction hypothesis?	Insect extinction rates
What term describes the number and variety of plants, animals and other organisms in existence?	biodiversity
What ensures the survival of human species by providing food, shelter, other resources to mankind?	biodiversity
What influences richness of biodiversity?	the climatic conditions and area of the region
What term describes all the species of plants in existence?	flora
Which scientist first used the term biological diversity?	Raymond F. Dasmann
What book first contained the term biological diversity?	A Different Kind of Country
What decade did the term biological diversity become common usage in science and economics?	the 1980s
Who introduced the term biological diversity to the scientific community?	Thomas Lovejoy
What term was common before biological diversity?	"natural diversity"
What provides critical support for drug discovery and the availability of medicinal resources?	Biodiversity
What percentage of US drugs are derived from plants, animals, and micro-organisms?	at least 50%
What field has biodiversity made critical advances in?	bionics
What percentage of worldwide drugs are derived from nature?	about 80%
What popularized the use of conventional hybridization to increase yield?	the Green Revolution
What did the high yield strains become resistant to?	local climate and diseases
Who has been pushing for hybridization?	Local governments and industry
What caused the loss of biodiversity?	Formerly huge gene pools of various wild and indigenous breeds have collapsed causing widespread genetic erosion
What is the ASCII based on?	English alphabet
How many specific characters are there in the ASCII code?	128 specified characters
How many are non-printing control characters?	33 are non-printing control characters
How many characters are printable characters?	95 printable characters
What is the space also known as what?	invisible graphic:223
Why was the code patterned so that most codes were together?	for ease of identification
How many positions are in the first two columns?	32 positions
What did the committee decide was important?	to support uppercase 64-character alphabets
Where was the letter A places in position?	41hex
ASCII was incorporated into what other character set?	Unicode
How many of the symbols are the same in the beginning of the ASCII and Unicode?	128 symbols
What set is backward compatible with 7-bit ASCII?	UTF-8
What casued the automatic paper tape reader to stop?	a Control-S
What caused the automatic paper tape reader to start again?	Control-Q
What was the warning signal called that warned the sender that there was impending overflow?	handshaking
What two controls can be configured with 33 ASR?	Control-R (DC2) and Control-T (DC4)
What are glass TTYs also known as?	CRTs or terminals
What did Gary Kildall clone to create CP/M?	RT-11
When was the introduction of PC DOS?	1981
What programming did IBM use in the 1970s?	EBCDIC
What was IBM's PC DOS marketed as by Microsoft?	MS-DOS
What was created to solve the problem for ANSI C?	C trigraphs
Why was their use limited?	their late introduction and inconsistent implementation in compilers
What did many programmers keep their computers on?	US-ASCII
What what happening to the words that were sent from programmers?	contained "{, }" and similar variants in the middle of words
What was ASCII based on?	teleprinter encoding systems
ASCII specifies correspondence between what?	digital bit patterns and character symbols
What does ASCII correspondence allow digital devices to do?	communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate character-oriented information
How many graphic symbols were used before ASCII?	11 to 25 special graphic symbols
How many codes were required for ASCII?	more than 64 codes
When was ASCII first commercially used?	1963
What was it used for?	a seven-bit teleprinter code for American Telephone & Telegraph's TWX (TeletypeWriter eXchange) network
What did TWX use before ASCII?	five-bit ITA2
Who is the father of ASCII?	Bob Bemer
What was the code first called in Europe?	Bemer-Ross Code
What does the "line feed" function do?	causes a printer to advance its paper
What character represents the "line feed" function?	character 10
What does character 8 represent?	backspace
What does RFC 2822 refers to what kind of control characters?	control characters that do not include carriage return, line feed or white space as non-whitespace control characters
What did some software do to the ASCII characters?	assigned special meanings
What interpretation became common in Unix systmes?	interpreted DEL as an input character as meaning "remove previously-typed input character"
What do most other systmes use the DEL to mean?	remove the character at the cursor
What did other systmes us for "remove previously-typed input character"?	BS
What do computers attached to the ARPANET use for line endings?	CR-LF
How were the connections supported?	by transmitting a standard text format over the network
Who else adopted this practice from Telnet?	The File Transfer Protocol
Why did Telnet define an ASCII as a Network Virtual Terminal?	so that connections between hosts with different line-ending conventions and character sets could be supported
What do computers using operating systems use for line endings?	LF
When was ISO/IEC 646 published?	1972
What was ASCII inteded to be?	one of several national variants of an international character code standard
When was ISO's first acceptance of an international recommendation?	1967
What was causing the confusion and incompatibility of the code points?	ASCII's choices for the national use characters to seem to be de facto standards for the world
What did most early home computers develop?	their own 8-bit character sets
What did Kaypro CP/M computers use?	the "upper" 128 characters for the Greek alphabet
What did IBM PC replace the control-characters with?	graphic symbols such as smiley faces
What did Digital Equipment Corporation develop?	Multinational Character Set (DEC-MCS)
What did Macintosh use instead of graphics?	typographic punctuation marks
Who surpassed ASCII?	UTF-8
ASCI was the most common character encoding on the world wide web until when?	December 2007
What is the definition of ASCII?	is a character-encoding scheme
What does ASCII code represent?	text in computers, communications equipment, and other devices that use text
What does ASCII stand for?	American Standard Code for Information Interchange
What happened after they decided agasint shifting?	ASCII required at least a seven-bit code
Why did the committee debate adding a shift function?	would allow more than 64 codes to be represented by a six-bit code
What is different in a shifted code?	some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes
Why did they decide against shifting code?	less reliable for data transmission as an error in transmitting the shift code typically makes a long part of the transmission unreadable
What was the "escape" character originally intended for?	to allow sending other control characters as literals instead of invoking their meaning
What does modern ESC code do?	most often used as an out-of-band character used to terminate an operation
What does ESC generally mean for graphical user interfaces and windowing systems?	an application to abort its current operation or to exit (terminate) altogether
What does EOF stand for?	end-of-file
What is still the conventional use of the ETX code?	to interrupt and halt a program via an input data stream, usually from a keyboard
What did older operating systems use to mark the end of the text?	Control-Z (SUB)
What else is the end-of-text code known as?	Control-C
What was ASCII developed from?	telegraphic codes
What was the first commercial use of ASCII?	a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by Bell data services
When did work on the ASCII standard begin?	October 6, 1960
When was the first edition of the standard published?	1963
When was the first major revision of the code done?	1967
Why did the committee consider a 8 bit code?	eight bits (octets) would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary-coded decimal
Why did the committee decide on 7bit instead?	minimize costs associated with data transmission
What allowed for a parity bit for error chicking if needed?	perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position
What was ASCII published as and when?	ASA X3.4-1963
How many code positions were left unassigned for furture standardization?	28 code positions
When was the change to ASCII made official?	May 1963
The lower case letters caused a differ in the patter, what did this cause?	simplified case-insensitive character matching and the construction of keyboards and printers
What is a retified versionof ASCII?	ISO/IEC 646
What type of extensions do these other character encodings have?	extensions for characters outside the English alphabet and symbols used outside the United States
Why did most countries need a adapted version of ASCII?	ASCII suited the needs of only the USA and a few other countries
Why are the other versions of ASCII not true ASCII?	true ASCII is defined strictly only by the ANSI standard
What was the most influential device that interpretated the characters?	Teletype Model 33 ASR
What was the Teletype Model 33 ASR?	a printing terminal with an available paper tape reader/punch option
When was paper tape popular?	until the 1980s
Why was paper tape better than magnetic tape?	less costly and in some ways less fragile
What code eventually became neglected?	code 15 (Control-O, Shift In)
Why were problems created when transferring files between systems?	The inherent ambiguity of many control characters, combined with their historical usage
Teletype machines had to have two codes to termanate a line, what were they?	"Carriage Return" (which moves the printhead to the beginning of the line) and "Line Feed" (which advances the paper one line without moving the printhead)
Where does the name "Carriage Return" come from?	on a manual typewriter the carriage holding the paper moved while the position where the typebars struck the ribbon remained stationary
What side does the carriage have to be pushed to when starting a new line?	right
When was the first typewritter with a shift key created?	1878
What were used instead of 0 and 1?	using O (capital letter o) and l (lowercase letter L) instead
What layout did the Teletype Model 33 use?	which used the left-shifted layout corresponding to ASCII
Do shift values for symbols on modern keyboards correspond closely to the ASCII table?	do not correspond as closely
What is the official name of code 127?	delete
What was code 127 labeled as for the Teletype?	rubout
Why did Teletype have the code for "rubout"?	to make it an ignored character
Why is adding two characters at the ned of a line problemsome?	introduces unnecessary complexity and questions as to how to interpret each character when encountered alone
What id Multics use to simplify plain text data?	line feed (LF) alone as a line terminator
What used carriage return(CR) alone as a line terminator?	Macintosh OS, Apple DOS, and ProDOS
Who adopted this practice from Multics?	Unix and Unix-like systems, and Amiga systems
When did Apple replace their CR with line feed (LF)?	since Apple replaced these operating systems with the Unix-based OS X operating system
What is the first step in the human digestive system?	the action of mastication (chewing)
What is saliva?	a liquid secreted by the salivary glands
What is in saliva that starts to digest the starches?	salivary amylase
What is the definition of bolus?	a small, round slurry mass
What is the action of the food morving down the esophagus into the stomach called?	peristalsis
What is the practive of coprophagia behaviours?	eating specialised faeces in order to re-digest food
Why do some animals pass food through their gut twice?	extract more nutrition
What happens with these soft feacal pellets?	excreted and generally consumed immediately
Are normal droppings also eaten?	not eaten
What are the two types of digestion?	internal and external digestion
When did external digestion develop?	earlier in evolutionary history
What still uses the external digestion system?	most fungi
What is the name of the tube that helps add in animal digestion?	gastrointestinal tract
Why is internal digection better than external?	more of the broken down products can be captured, and the internal chemical environment can be more efficiently controlled
What elements can transfer to plant cells?	Agrobacterium Ti or Ri plasmids
Where do transferred genes enter?	the plant cell nucleus
What do bacteria use as carbon and energy sources?	opines
What happens to infected plant cells?	end
What are endosymbionts of the bacteria?	The Ti and Ri plasmids
Where are teeth found?	in the jaws (or mouths)
What are teeth used for?	to tear, scrape, milk and chew food
What are teeth made out of?	enamel, dentine and cementum
What in human teeth enables proprioception?	a blood and nerve supply
What happens when you bite something you cant chew?	our teeth send a message to our brain and we realise that it cannot be chewed, so we stop trying.
What is the fourth and final stomach compartment in ruminants?	The abomasum
What is the abomasums close equivalent?	a monogastric stomach
What does this site serve primarily as?	a site for acid hydrolysis of microbial and dietary protein, preparing these protein sources for further digestion and absorption in the small intestine.
What happens to digesta when it moves to the small intestine?	the digestion and absorption of nutrients occurs
What is also digested in the small intestine?	Microbes produced in the reticulo-rumen are also digested in the small intestine
What does a earthworms digestive systme consist of?	a mouth, pharynx, esophagus, crop, gizzard, and intestine.
What does an earthworm eat?	dead grass, leaves, and weeds
What helps the earthworm grab grass leaves and weeds?	The mouth is surrounded by strong lips
What is the food coated with for easier passage?	mucus
What part of the earthworm helps churn and mix the dirt and food?	The powerful muscles of the gizzard
Where does the digestions of some fats start?	in the mouth
Where are fats mainly digested?	the small intestine
What happens when there is a presence of fat in the small intestine?	produces hormones that stimulate the release of pancreatic lipase from the pancreas and bile from the liver
What does bile from the liver help do?	helps in the emulsification of fats for absorption of fatty acids
What is one molecule of fat?	a triglyceride
What is digestion?	the breakdown of large insoluble food molecules into small water-soluble food molecules so that they can be absorbed into the watery blood plasma
In some organisms, how are these molecules absorbed?	these smaller substances are absorbed through the small intestine into the blood stream
What are the two ways that food is broken down?	mechanical and chemical digestion
What is mechanical digestion?	the physical breakdown of large pieces of food into smaller pieces which can subsequently be accessed by digestive enzymes
What is chemical digestion?	enzymes break down food into the small molecules the body can use
What are three digestions phases?	the cephalic phase , gastric phase, and intestinal phase
Where does the cephalic phase occur?	at the sight, thought and smell of food, which stimulate the cerebral cortex
Where are taste and smell stimuli sent to?	the hypothalamus and medulla oblongata
How long does the gastric phase take?	3 to 4 hours
How is the gastric phase stimulated to start?	by distension of the stomach, presence of food in stomach and decrease in pH
What happens in a chennel transupport system?	several proteins form a contiguous channel traversing the inner and outer membranes of the bacteria
What three protien subunites are in the chennel transupport system?	the ABC protein, membrane fusion protein (MFP), and outer membrane protein (OMP)[specify]
What does this secretion system transport?	various molecules, from ions, drugs, to proteins of various sizes
What other method does Gram-negative bacters use to release material?	the formation of outer membrane vesicles
What happens with the pinch off part of the outer membrane?	, forming spherical structures made of a lipid bilayer enclosing periplasmic materials
What does the release of vesicles seem to demenstrate?	response to stress conditions
What virulence factors do some bacterial species have?	some have immunomodulatory effects, and some can directly adhere to and intoxicate host cells
What muscle movements are used for digestion?	swallowing and peristalsis
What does every stpe of digestion require?	energy
What does needing energy to digest impose?	an "overhead charge"
Over head charges influence what?	lifestyle, behavior, and even physical structures
Where does digestion begin?	in the mouth with the secretion of saliva and its digestive enzymes
What is food formed into before it is swallowed?	a bolus
Where does food go after the esophagus?	the stomach
What is the action of food being moved into the stomach?	peristalsis
What does gastric juice consist of?	hydrochloric acid and pepsin
What is lactase?	an enzyme that breaks down the disaccharide lactose to its component parts
What are lactoses component parts?	glucose and galactose
Where are glucose and galactose absorbed?	small intestine
What percent of the population are unable to eat unfermented milk-based foods?	Approximately 65 percent
What is knon as when you are  unable to eat unfermented milk-based foods?	lactose intolerance
What is the resulting thick liquid called?	chyme
What does chyme mix with in the duodenum?	digestive enzymes from the pancreas and bile juice from the liver
Where does hyme go after the duodenum?	the small intestine
Where is chyme absorbed into?	blood
Where does 95% of absobtion of nutrients occur?	the small intestine
What is the firs phase in preparation for digestion  in mammals?	the cephalic phase
What is the cephalic phase?	saliva is produced in the mouth and digestive enzymes are produced in the stomach
What digestions begin in the mouth?	Mechanical and chemical digestion
What happens in the stomach after the food is chewed and mixed with starches?	The stomach continues to break food down mechanically and chemically through churning and mixing with both acids and enzymes
Where does absorption occur?	in the stomach and gastrointestinal tract
Where does protein digestion occur?	in the stomach and duodenum
What are the three main enzymes that break down food?	pepsin secreted by the stomach and trypsin and chymotrypsin
What are digestive enzymes mostly secreted as?	inactive precursors, the zymogens
What are dipeptidases broken down into?	amino acids
What organ secretes chymotrypsin?	the pancreas
What tool did Hoover use to find bootleggers?	wiretapping
In what supreme court case was it ruled that FBI wiretaps did not violate the Fourth Amendment?	Olmstead v. United States
What Act did Congress pass to outlaw non-consensual phone tapping?	Communications Act of 1934
In what case was it ruled that evidence obtained by the FBI via wiretapping was inadmissible in court?	Nardone v. United States
What is now necessary to tap someone's telephone?	a warrant
Which president was the first to use wiretaps to find bootleggers?	Hoover
What case centered around a bootlegger caught through phone tapping?	Olmstead v. United States
What did Congress pass to outlaw phone tapping?	Communications Act of 1934
What is now required to wire tap a citizen?	a warrant
Is a warrant required before or after a wiretap?	beforehand
Which group broke into an FBI office in Media, Pennsylvania?	Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI
Did the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI take files?	Numerous files were taken
What files was the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI's raid mainly focused on?	COINTELPRO program
What did the files about COINTELPRO reveal?	investigations into lives of ordinary citizens
How did the US react to these discoveries?	The country was "jolted"
Did the FBI reassign agents from counter-intelligence to violent crime?	the FBI reassigned more than 300 agents from foreign counter-intelligence duties to violent crime
What priority were violent crimes in the 1990s, according to the FBI?	sixth national priority
Did the new priorities of the FBI mean cutting other departments?	With reduced cuts to other well-established departments
Was terrorism considered a threat after the cold war?	terrorism was no longer considered a threat
What agency pioneered DNA testing?	The FBI
What agencies were to blame for 9/11?	FBI and Central Intelligence Agency
Did 9/11 lead to more FBI oversight?	acceded to most of the recommendations, including oversight
Did many believe the FBI was resisting important changes?	resisting any meaningful changes
Did the people believe they were served well by the FBI?	not been well served
Where is the CJIS located?	Clarksburg, West Virginia
When was the CJIS created?	1991
What purpose does the CJIS serve?	main repository for information
Where is the data for the NCIC located?	Under the roof of the CJIS
Do states have access to CJIS?	Many state and local agencies use these data
Who is responsible for day-to-day FBI operations?	The FBI director
Who assists the FBI director?	his deputies
What acts were passed relating to the FBI after 9/11?	Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act
Who used to brief the President?	FBI director
Who now reports to the President?	Director of National Intelligence
What compiles data from around 17,000 law enforcement agencies?	The Uniform Crime Reports
What does UCR focus on?	violent crimes, hate crimes, and property crimes
Where was the UCR created?	1920s
What percentage of COINTELPRO resources were targeted at FBI labeled subversive groups?	85%
Did the FBI target MLK?	including Martin Luther King, Jr.
What percentage of COINTELPRO resources were used to target white hate groups?	15%
What were the key white hate groups targeted?	Ku Klux Klan and the National States' Rights Party
What was the term for the liberal groups appearing at this time?	New Left
What is the FBI comparable to?	British MI5 and the Russian FSB
What kind of agency is the FBI?	FBI is primarily a domestic agency
How many field offices does the FBI have in major cities?	56
Around how many offices does the FBI have in minor cities?	400
Who serves as the representative of the Director of National Intelligence?	senior-level FBI officer
What was the bureau's first task?	visiting and making surveys of the houses of prostitution
What act was the bureau initially tasked with enforcing?	White Slave Traffic Act
What was the other formal name of the Mann Act?	White Slave Traffic Act
When was the Mann Act passed?	June 25, 1910
When was the bureau renamed?	In 1932,
When did the FBI become concerned about Civil Rights?	1950s and 1960s
What ties did the FBI believe civil rights leaders had?	communist ties
Who did Hoover send an open letter denouncing?	Dr. T.R.M. Howard
What agency had Dr. T.R.M. Howard criticized?	FBI
What was the controversial domestic surveillance operation in this era?	COINTELPRO
When did the FBI begin investigating espionage?	1940s
How many Nazis were arrested?	Eight
What project broke Soviet codes?	the Venona project
What agency did Hoover not tell about the code break and the discoveries gained from it?	CIA
When did a committee oppose the FBI's organized crime informant program?	In 2003
How many innocent men did the FBI allow to be convicted?	four
What was the death sentence reduced to?	life in prison
How many of the men died in prison?	Two
How much was the US government ordered to pay in damages?	$100 million
When did the FBI increase it's counter-terrorism role?	Between 1993 and 1996
What prompted the FBI increase in counter-terrorism?	World Trade Center bombing
Where was the World Trade Center?	New York City, New York
When was Oklahoma city bombed?	1995
What did agents within the FBI do to investigations of the agency?	obstructed
What FBI agent was killed during attacks on the World Trade Center?	Leonard W. Hatton Jr
What tower was Leonard W. Hatton Jr attempting to evacuate?	South Tower
What did the FBI's new director want?	re-engineering
What was the new head of the FBI's top priority?	countering every federal crime
What part of the FBI did Mueller want to re-engineer?	structure and operations
When did the Washington Post publish excerpts from the book Spying Blind?	July 8, 2007
How many chances to disrupt the 9/11 attacks did the FBI dismiss?	23
What two agencies had a lack of co-operation?	FBI, CIA
What was to blame for the FBI's failure?	FBI's decentralized structure
What did the FBI's decentralized structure prevent?	effective communication
What increased the powers of the FBI?	USA PATRIOT Act
What was one of the most controversial parts of the Patriot Act?	sneak and peek provision
What new residential powers did the FBI now have?	search a house while the residents are away
Could the FBI inquire into library records?	FBI also resumed inquiring into the library records
Who's library records did the FBI look into?	those who are suspected of terrorism
When did the FBI lab first appear?	1974
Where was the FBI lab?	J. Edgar Hoover Building
Who uses the FBI lab services?	state, local, and international agencies
How much does the FBI charges for lab services?	free
Where is the second FBI lab?	FBI Academy
When did the FBI begin the Trilogy project?	2000
What project centered on upgrading FBI Information Technology Infrastructure?	Trilogy project
Did the Trilogy project go over budget?	far over budget
When did the FBI abandon the VCF project?	January 2005
What gun are FBI special agents issued?	Glock Model 22 pistol or a Glock 23 in .40 S&W caliber
What are FBI special agents issued if they fail their first qualification?	Glock 17 or Glock 19
What did the FBI adopt in May 1997	Glock .40 S&W pistol
What did the FBI adopt the Glock .40 S&W pistol for?	general agent use
What class was the first to receive the Glock .40 S&W pistol?	New Agent Class 98-1
What group of people may apply to join the FBI after age 37?	preference-eligible veterans
What is the minimum age to join the FBI?	23
Is American citizenship required to be an FBI agent?	must also hold American citizenship
What is a SSBI?	Single Scope Background Investigations
Who conducts SSBIs?	Office of Personnel Management
Did the FBI keep files on Elvis Presley?	including celebrities such as Elvis Presley
What activities was the FBI concerned with during the Vietnam war?	antiwar activities
What kinds of treats were celebrities receiving?	threats or extortion attempts
What party was the FBI concerned with?	Communist party
Who tipped of Bulger?	his former FBI handler
What act was the indictment under?	Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act
How long did Bulger remain at large?	16
Was Bulger on the 10 Most Wanted Fugitives List?	prominently listed
What did the revelations about Bulger cause?	great embarrassment
What was Virgil Griffith focused on?	computation and neural-systems
What part of the government was editing its own wikipedia page?	United States Congress
What was Griffith's tool designed to detect?	conflict of interest edits
What did Griffith's tool help increase?	transparency
How as Griffith's wikipedia scanner viewed by wikipedia?	positively
When did the FBI announce Robert Hanssen's arrest?	20 February 2001
What was Hanssen arrested for?	spying for the Soviet Union
When was Hanssen a spy for Russia/the SU?	1979 to 2001
How many life time sentences is Hanssen serving?	15
What much money did Hanssen receive in cash?	$1.4 million
What agency is the domestic intelligence and security service for the US?	FBI
What organization is the FBI a subset of?	U.S. Department of Justice
What Director does the FBI report to?	Director of National Intelligence
How many categories of federal crimes does the FBI have jurisdiction over?	200
Who was Director from 1924 to 1972?	J. Edgar Hoover
How many years was Hoover the FBI director?	48
What laboratory was Hoover responsible for creating?	Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory
What was the other name for the Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory?	FBI Laboratory
When did the FBI laboratory open?	1932
What kind of work was the FBI focused on?	domestic
How many LEGAT offices does the FBI operate?	60
Why does the FBI operate LEGAT offices?	coordination with foreign security services
Do LEGAT offices conduct unilateral operations in host countries?	not usually
What do oversea operations require?	coordination
When did the Bureau begin compiling a custodial detention list?	1939
When would the people on the custodial detention list be arrested?	in the event of war with Axis
Who were the majority of names on the custodial detention list?	Issei community leaders
When was Pearl Harbor bombed?	December 7, 1941
What group did the FBI continue surveillance on?	Japanese Americans
What was the Top Hoodlum Program a response to?	organized crime
What did the Top Hoodlum Program gather information on?	mobsters
After the RICO Act took effect what did the FBI start investigating?	former Prohibition-organized groups
What groups did Hoover deny the existence of?	National Crime Syndicate
Is the RICO Act still used today?	The RICO Act is still used
What spurred the FBIs technological upgrade?	CALEA
What team underwent a technological upgrade in 1991?	CART
What were CITAC and NIPC created to deal with?	Internet-related problems
What were computer viruses seen as a threat to?	US operations
Did the FBI increase electronic surveillance?	FBI increased its electronic surveillance
What precision did the FBI believe they could reach with chemical signatures?	single box of bullets
How long was the National Academy of Sciences independent review?	18-month
What did the National Academy of Sciences independent review discover about the FBIs analytical model?	deeply flawed
Why did the FBI stop doing bullet lead analysis?	National Research Council
What is the FBI's main tool against organized crime?	RICO
What act is the FBI required to enforce?	Civil Rights Act of 1964
What organization does the FBI prosecute violations of the United States Civil Rights Act with?	DOJ
What organization does the FBI share jurisdiction with?	DEA
What Substance act does the FBI enforce?	Controlled Substances Act of 1970
When does the FBI work with the US Coast Guard and US Customs and Board Protection?	seaport and airport security
When does the FBI work with the National Transportation Safety Board?	investigating airplane crashes
What organization in the US government investigates the largest array of crimes?	ICE-HSI
What organization did General Ashcroft assign to lead organization in terrorism investigations?	FBI
What are the FBI and ICE-HSI both members of?	Joint Terrorism Task Force
Where are agents sent to become FBI Special Agents?	The FBI Academy
Where is the FBI Academy?	Quantico, Virginia
How long is the course required for all special agents?	21-week
What other groups does the FBI Academy train?	state and local law enforcement agencies
Did the FBI investigate Martin Luther King Jr.?	frequently
Who did MLK begin criticizing in the mid-1960s?	the Bureau
What group did MLK believe needed more attention from the FBI?	white supremacists
What did Hoover call MLK?	notorious liar
What kind of letter did the FBI send to MLK?	anonymous
What is the goal of the NIBRS?	address limitations inherent in UCR data
Who uses the NIBRS?	the United States
What is the NIBRS used for?	collecting and reporting data
What does the NIBRS collect information on?	crimes
Does the NIBRS system or UCR system have more detailed data?	NIBRS
What Puerto Rican leader did the FBI spy on?	Pedro Albizu Campos
What party was Pedro Albizu Campos part of?	Nationalist
How many times was Pedro Albizu Campos convicted of attacks on US officials?	three
Who released the Campos operation to the public?	Luis Gutierrez
When was the Abizu Campos operation made public?	1980s
What office contains the FBI's administrative offices?	Office of the Director
Who manages each FBI branch?	An executive assistant director
What is a FBI branch divided into?	offices and divisions
Who heads an office or division?	an assistant director
Who leaders the sub-divisions of offices or divisions?	deputy assistant directors
Where is the FBI located?	J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington, D.C.,
Where are specialized FBI functions located?	Quantico, Virginia
Where is the FBI's data campus?	Clarksburg, West Virginia
What act is the FBI required to process requests for?	FOIA
How many sets of fingerprints does the FBI have?	96 million
What was the electronic eavesdropping system used by the FBI during the Clinton presidency?	Carnivore
What did Carnivore monitor?	email and electronic communications
What was Carnivore renamed to?	DCS1000
When did the FBI abandon Carnivore?	2001
What kind of software replaced Carnivore?	commercially available
Who appoints FBI directors?	President of the United States
What legislative body confirms FBI directors?	United States Senate
How long is the term of a FBI director?	five years
What made Hoover stop serving as the FBI Director?	his death
Who is the current FBI director?	James B. Comey
When did the FBI first appear in popular media?	1930s
What notable TV show was concerned with FBI investigations of the paranormal?	X-Files
What is the TV drama 24 designed on?	FBI Counterterrorism Division
Who is the movie Point Break Based on?	undercover FBI agent
Who is the movie Donnie Brasco based on?	Joseph D. Pistone
How many times did FBI agents first their weapons from 1993 to 2011?	289
How many times were FBI shots not justified?	5 cases
How many people were wounded in the cases where FBI shooting was not justified?	none
How did Samuel Walker describe the number of unjustified shots fired?	suspiciously low
On what was the shooting of an innocent Maryland man deemed justified?	the man's actions
When did Puerto Rican Nationalist Filiberto Ojeda Ríos die?	2005
Who killed Filiberto Ojeda Ríos?	FBI agents
How did some people describe Filiberto Ojeda Ríos's death?	assassination
How did the FBI respond to requests to release information beyond the initial press release?	The FBI refused
What US court dismissed the Puerto Rican case for information crucial to their own investigation of Filiberto Ojeda Ríos's killing?	Supreme Court
Adolescene is viewed as what?	a transitional period between childhood and adulthood
A thorough understanding of adolescence in society depends on what?	information from various perspectives, including psychology, biology, history, sociology, education, and anthropology.
What is the purpose of adolescence?	preparation of children for adult roles.
What is the cultural purpose of adolescence?	preparation of children for adult roles
What is the transitional period between childhood and adulthood viewed as?	adolescence
Is adolescence a period of one transition or multiple transitions?	multiple transitions
What transitions occur during puberty in addition to living circumstances?	education, training, employment and unemployment
Puberty causes what to happen in boys?	a deeper voice and larger adam's apple
What releases testosterone?	The testes
What releases estrogen?	the ovaries
What causes gynecomastia?	obesity.
What causes puberty?	a surge in hormone production
A surge in hormone production triggers a number of physical changes during what stage of life?	Puberty
Which gland secretes a surge of hormonal agents into the blood stream?	pituitary
Which part of the body releases testosterone in males?	testes
Which part of the body relesases estrogen in females?	ovaries
An imbalance in sex hormones, tissue responsiveness, or obesity can cause what in boys?	gynecomastia
How do a person's heart and lungs change during puberty?	increase in both size and capacity
Increased size and capacity of the heart and lungs result in what changes to the body?	increased strength and tolerance for exercise
Which sex tends to develop larger hearts and lungs?	males
Which sex tends to have more red blood cells than the other?	males
Which body system are a person's lungs a major proponent of?	respiratory
Is a person's brain fully developed by the time they reach puberty?	not
The biggest changes in the brain during puberty occur in the parts of the cortex that process what kinds of information?	cognitive and emotional
The brain reaches 90% of its adult size by the time a person reaches what year of age?	six
What parts of the brain continue to become more complex into the late teens?	creases
The brain reaches what percentage of its adult size by the time a person is six years old?	90%
Which neuromodulator is involved in regulation of mood and behavior?	Serotonin
Are the effects of serotonin limited to the limbic system?	not
Serotonin is a neuromodulator that is involved in regulation of what?	mood and behavior
Which system in the brain determines rewards and punishments, emotional experiences, and social information?	limbic
Which two neurotransmitters cause adolescents to be more emotional and more responsive to rewards and stresses?	dopamine and serotonin
Deductive reasoning leads to the development of what type of thinking?	hypothetical
Are adolescents or children more bound to concrete events?	children
What type of thinking provides the ability to plan ahead and makes adolescents more skilled debaters?	hypothetical
Adolescents develop a more sophisticated understanding of what mathematical concept thanks to their increased hypothetical thinking abilties?	probability
Are sexual actvity and risky behaviors more likely in boys that mature early or later?	early
Increased aggresiveness and early sexual maturation in adolescent boys are due to a surge of what?	hormones
Are early or late maturing boys generally taller and stronger than their friends?	Early
What is one reason a late maturing boy may be less confident when comparing himself to others?	poor body image
How is wisdom defined?	capacity for insight and judgment that is developed through experience
Wisdom increases between age fourteen and what?	twenty-five
Is wisdom the same thing as intelligence?	not
Do adolescents perform significantly better on IQ tests than other age groups?	not
What word is defined as the capacity for insight and judgement that is developed through experience?	Wisdom
How is adolescence defined biologically?	the physical transition marked by the onset of puberty and the termination of physical growth
How is adolescence defined cognitively?	changes in the ability to think abstractly and multi-dimensionally
How is adolescence defined socially?	a period of preparation for adult roles
Changes to sex organs, height, weight, and muscle mass are examples of which type of change?	biological
Increases in knowledge and the ability to think abstractly are examples of which kind of change?	Cognitive
Who founded the University of California, Berkeley's Institude of Human Development?	Jean Macfarlane
What year was the University of California, Berkeley's Instutute of Human Development founded?	1927
What was the Univerity of California, Berkeley's Institute of Human Development formerly called?	Institute of Child Welfare
What year was the Oakland Growth Study initiated?	1931
What year did data for the Oakland Growth Study stop being collected?	1981
What is a male's major landmark of puberty?	first ejaculation
At what average age does a male's first ejaculation occur?	13
What is a female's major landmark of puberty?	menstruation
Besides heredity, what other factors contribute to when menustration begins?	diet and lifestyle
Do girls who are malnourished start menustrating earlier or later than those with high-fat diets?	later
How can the ideal self be described in terms of the adolescent?	who the adolescent wishes to be
How can the feared self be described in terms of the adolescent?	who the adolescent does not want to be
Do adolescents demonstrate intended behavior moving towards the ideal or feared self?	ideal
What term is the beginning of menstruation given?	Menarche
How many years does regular ovulation follow menarche?	two years
What are two areas of the reproductive system that experience growth in females during puberty?	uterus, vagina
Do males or females appear physically mature before they are capable of reproduction?	females
What activity often results in a boy's first ejaculation?	masturbation
What are primary sex characteristics?	those directly related to the sex organs
What does the first stage of puberty involve for males?	growth of the testes and scrotum
After growth of the testes and scrotum, while male body part experiences growth next?	penis
Which male body parts enlarge and develop at the same time as the penis?	seminal vesicles, the prostate, and the bulbourethral gland
At what stage do parents see their children as equals?	early adolescence
During what stage of development is there increased parent-child conflict and a less cohesive familial bond?	puberty
During puberty and adolescence, do most children share the same or different attitudes and values as their parents?	same
Which part of the brain is involved in decision making and cognitive control?	prefrontal cortex
Which area of the brain is important for controlling impulses and planning ahead?	dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
Which part of the brain is important for evaluating rewards and risks?	orbitofrontal cortex
Which are the first areas to be pruned during puberty?	those involving primary functions
Motor and sensory skills are examples of what kind of brain function?	primary
What is one area in which peer groups can have positive influences on an individual?	academic motivation and performance
What are some of the negative experiences that peer pressure can influence during adolescence?	experimentation with drugs, drinking, vandalism, and stealing
At what age does succeptability to peer pressure peak?	14
What are some social skills that peer groups offer members the opportunity to develop?	empathy, sharing, and leadership
What view towards cognitive development during adolescence did Piaget take?	constructivist
Did Piaget believe that cognitive improvement was sudden and drastic or slow and steadied?	sudden and drastic
Besides the information-processing perspective, what is the other major approach to understanding cognitive change during adolescence?	quantitative, state-theory
The information-processing perspective towards cognitive development derives from the study of what?	artificial intelligence
Casual sexual encounters are often referred to as what?	hookups
Do most sexual experiences during adolescence take place within or seperate from romantic relationships?	within
Where do some adolescents feel is a safe place to seek out romantic relationships, try out dating and indentity exploration?	social media
What seperates "heavy" sexual activity from other forms of affection?	genital stimulation
For older adolescents, is sexual activity in a romantic relationship associated with lower or higher levels of deviant behavior?	lower
What is the term used to describe thinking about thinking itself?	metacognition
Are adolescents or children better able to understand that people do not have complete control over their thoughts?	Adolescents
The imaginary audience and personal fable peak at what age?	fifteen
At what age does self-consciousness in general peak?	fifteen
What questionaire has been used to measure the age in which adolescents should be able to engage in autonomous behaviors?	teen timetable
Do White or Asian parents tend to expect autonomy earlier than the other?	White
What has the teen timetable questionnaire been used to guage?	differences in cultural perceptions of adolescent autonomy
What is an example of a poor birth control method?	withdrawal
Are higher or lower levels of parental support associated with risky sexual behavior?	lower
Is exploratory sexual behavior seen as similar or seperate to other aspects of identity?	similar
Does having unprotected sex, multiple sexual partners, and poor communication increase or decrease individual and social risk?	increase
Does research favor or reject the hypothesis that adolescents and adults think about risk similarly but hold different values and therefore come to different conclusions?	favor
A priority in sexual attraction and dating can prove helpful in order to complete what reproductive advantage?	impress potential mates
What does research indicate may affect risk-taking behavior throughout the lifespan?	baseline sensation seeking
When does the search for identity begin for most individuals?	adolescent years
What are some factors that make developing and maintaining an identity during the adolescent years a difficult task?	family life, environment, and social status
What are two main aspects of identity development?	self-clarity and self-esteem
What are the three general approaches to understanding identity development?	self-concept, sense of identity, and self-esteem
Do adolescents with a less privileged upbringing have a more or less difficult time developing their identity?	more difficult
Identity achievement rarely occurs before what age?	18
Is there a final endpoint in identity development?	no
Evidence has supported which theorist's idea concerning stages of development?	Erikson
Does self-examination begin early or late in adolescence?	early
Which theorist argued that not everyone fully achieves identity?	Erik Erikson
How do adolescents initially define themselves?	crowd membership
How is Moratorium defined?	process of exploration
Which researcher developed the current method for testing an individual's process along the stages of identity?	James Marcia
James Marcia divides questions into how many categories?	three
Which term is defined as one's thoughts and feelings about one's self-concept and identity?	Self-esteem
Is there evidence to support a drop in self-esteem during adolescence?	no
Which type of self-esteem fluctuates rapidly and can cause severe distress and anxiety?	Barometric self-esteem
Which type of self-esteem remains stable throughout adolescence?	baseline self-esteem
What is the most important function of friendship?	having someone who can provide social and moral support
At what age does awareness of one's sexual orientation occur on average?	10
At what age does coming out to one's peers occur on average?	16
At what age does coming out to adults occur on average?	17
How many times higher is the suicide rate amongst LGBT adolescents than their heterosexual peers?	four
What are factors causing a hightened suicide rate amongst LGBT adolescents?	bullying and rejection from peers or family members
Are adolescents with authoritative parents more or less likely to complete secondary education by age 22?	more
Are adolescents that have a good relationship with their parents more or less likely to smoke, drink, fight, or engage in unprotected sex?	less likely
Which researchers conducted a 2009 study that concerned adolescents, their parents, and secondary education completion?	Adalbjarnardottir and Blondal
Are modern day teenagers exposed to more or less media than other generations?	more
How many hours of television does the average teenager watch per year?	1500
Teenagers' views on body mass, loe self-esteem, and atypical eating patterns results in what?	body dissatisfaction
How is "body dissatisfaction" defined?	The concept of a person being unhappy with their own image or appearance
What is the current divorce rate?	about 50%
Does divorce usually result in more or less contact with the noncustodial parent?	less
What new theory states that traumatic events during adolescence have lifelong effects?	epistemological trauma theory
Does a parental divorce during childhood or adulthood have a positive or negative effect on a person during early adulthood?	negative
What are a few examples of social and religious transition ceremonies?	Confirmation, Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, Quinceañeras, sweet sixteens, cotillions, and débutante balls
What are some physical ways that some cultures mark the transition into adulthood?	tattoos and scarification
Do cultural transitions into adulthood vary, or are they the same?	vary
Do romantic relationships tend to increase or decrease throughout adolescence?	increase
How many percent of adolescents have had a romantic relationship lasting one month or longer by age 15?	53%
At what average age did American males report their first sexual intercourse took place?	17.0
At what average age did American females report their first sexual intercourse took place?	17.3
Does the typical duration of relationships increase or decrease throughout the teenage years?	increases
How is culture defined?	symbolic and behavioral inheritance received from the past that provides a community framework for what is valued
Does culture affect all, some, or none of the aspects of an individual's life?	all
What is a challenge researchers face when studying culture and adolescents?	not to define the culture's role in adolescence in terms of their own cultural beliefs
Should culture be directly connected to a nation or ethnicity?	not
How do adolescents use online technology?	experiment with emerging identities and to broaden their peer groups
To what does "channel" refer in terms if adolescent communication?	form of communication
What is a potential negative effect of using newer online channels of communication?	cyberbullying
What percentage of sexually active teenagers will contract an STI?	One in four
Girls ages 15 to 19 have higher rates of what STD than any other age group?	gonorrhea
What ratio of all new HIV cases occur in those under age 21?	One-quarter
According to a survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, what percentage of parents want schools to discuss contraception with their children?	eighty-one percent
What percent of the teenage population is affected by herpes and HPV?	15
In what year was the Convention on the Rights of the Child created?	1989
What two countries have not legally committed to advancing an anti-discriminaory stance towards young people?	U.S. and South Sudan
A person below the age of majority may gain adult rights through what process?	legal emancipation
What is legally different for an individual who has reached the age of majority?	regarded as adults who are responsible for their actions
In developing countries, is it common for children to attend fewer or greater years of formal schooling?	fewer
Why, in developting countries, do children often attend fewer years of formal schooling?	so that, when they reach adolescence, they can begin working
According to family economic and financial education specialists, how do adolescents develop sound money management skills?	saving and spending money
What word refers to the first ejactulation of a male?	semenarche
What word refers to the first menstrual period in females?	menarche
What is the term for a culture that discourages sexual activity in unmarried adolescents?	Restrictive
What is the term for cultures that perceive sexual behavior among unmarried teens as acceptable or even encouraged?	permissive
Are males and females expected to express their sexuality in the same ways or are there discrepancies between genders and cultures?	discrepancies
Which of the Five-Factor Model dimensions does not demonstrate an association with drinking motives?	Openness
Is alcohol use a positive or negative emotion control mechanism?	negative
Which motivation for drinking alcohol results in low conscientiousness, lowered inhibition, and greater tendency towards aggression?	enjoyment
Drinking to cope with negative emotional states correlates strongly with what behavioral qualities?	high neuroticism and low agreeableness
According to research findings, does Internet use have a positive or negative effect on teen physical health?	negative
How can the Internet be beneficial for socially anxious teens?	easier to interact socially online
Why do research findings believe the Internet has a negative effect on teen physical health?	time spent using the Internet replaces time doing physical activities
Which online activity has been consistently associated with increased liklihood of depression?	cyberbullying
What is the most commonly abused substance during adolescent years in the U.S.?	alcohol
The heightened usage of what drug is most likely due at least in some part to the rising popularity of rave culture?	ecstasy
Aside from alcohol, what is the most commonly indulged drug habit during adolescent years?	marijuana
From the late 1990s to mid 2000s, was drug use in teens on the rise or decline?	decline
During what ages do reasons for alcohol consumption between males and females begin to diverge?	14–15
Do boys or girls view drinking in a more social light?	boys
Which gender reports most frequently using alcohol as a coping mechanism?	girls
Does age bring a greater or smaller desire to drink for pleasure rather than coping?	greater
From which language does the word "adolescence" originate?	Latin
What is the Latin meaning of the word "adolescere"?	to grow up
What is another term for legal adulthood?	age of majority
Physical growth and cognitive development generally observed in adolescents can extend to what age?	early twenties
In recent years, has the amount of social networking sites available to the public increased or decreased?	greatly increased
What percentage of teens say they text every day?	68%
What percentage of 12-17 year olds claim to have at least one social networking profile?	73%
What percentage of teens report visiting social netorking sites daily?	51%
What ratio of teens are "heavy" social media users, using two types of media daily?	One in four (23%)
Are girls reaching sexual maturation early more or less likely to develop eating disorers?	more likely
Nearly half of Americam high school girls hope to achieve what goal with their diet?	lose weight
Are early or late maturing girls more exposed to alcohol and drug abuse?	early maturing
Do early or late maturing girls have more unwanted pregnancies?	early maturing
Who performs better in school: sexually experienced or inexperienced teen females?	inexperienced
Is change in bodily distribution of fat and muscle the same or different between males and females during puberty?	different
Do boys or girls experience a more significant increase in body fat?	girls
Do boys or girls grow muscle faster during puberty?	boys
What is the ratio between muscle and fat among post-pubertal boys?	three to one
What is the ratio between muscle and fat amoung post-pubertal girls?	five to four
What is a secondary sex characteristic change?	every change that is not directly related to sexual reproduction
How many Tanner stages are there?	five
What was the occupation of the person who devised the Tanner categorization system?	pediatrician
Elevation of the breasts, development of pubic hair, and elevation of the nippes are examples of what type of changes?	Changes in secondary sex characteristics
Is deepening of the voice in males a primary or secondary sex characteristic?	secondary
Are children or adolescents more likely to question assertions and less likely to accept facts?	adolescents
Is refraining from touching a hot stoce a common sense or culturally-relative standard?	common sense
Is not dating until a certain age a common sense or culturally-relative standard?	culturally-relative
Who was the first president of the American Psychological Association?	G. Stanley Hall
From the '50s to the '80s, was the field's focus devoted to describing patterns of behavior or explaining them?	describing
What was the title of the publication that started the formal study of adolescent psychology?	Adolescence in 1904
Which theorist is known for his beliefs on evolution?	Darwin
Do children or adolescents define themselves based on values, thoughts, and opinions?	adolescents
Which idea is known as the ability of a person to have opinions and beliefs that are defined confidently, consistent, and stable?	self-concept
How do children tend to define themselves?	by physical traits
Greater self-awareness, greater awareness of others, and the ability to consider multiple possiblities at once are examples of what kind of developments?	cognitive
Which adolescent ethninticy is most often studied?	white
What social class of adolescents is most often studied?	middle class
The period of one's life that spans late adolescence and early adulthood is known as what?	youth
Is an inner city or crime-driven neighborhood more or less likely to be detrimental to one's development?	more likely
Why are children from suburban communities more likely to participate in activies that benefit their identity?	exposed to more opportunities and better situations in general
What has the largest affect over one's social development?	relationships
Do a teen's friends have a large or small impact on their social development?	large
Do adolescents become heavily emotionally invested in friends or are they generally anti-social?	heavily emotionally invested in friends
Does communication with peers increase or decrease during adolescence?	increases
Do children or adolescents tend to associae with friends of the opposite sex more?	Adolescents
How is adolescence defined socially?	a period of development characterized by a dramatic increase in time spent with peers and a decrease in adult supervision
Did adolescents report more sexual or social events to researchers?	social events
Why do researchers believe the social event reporting by adolescents (rather than sexual activity) is important?	focus on the more positive aspects of adolescents
Holding hands with one's partner and telling others about a relationship are examples of what kind of adolescent event?	romantic
What are the three main types of autonomy?	emotional independence, behavioral autonomy, and cognitive autonomy
How is behavioral autonomy defined?	encompasses an adolescent's developing ability to regulate his or her own behavior, to act on personal decisions, and to self-govern
Adolescent cultural differences are especially visible in which type of autonomy?	Behavioral
How is cognitive autonomy defined?	the capacity for an adolescent to partake in processes of independent reasoning and decision-making without excessive reliance on social validation
Is an adolescent's mental health at its best when their feelings of autonomy match closely with their parents or when they are at odds?	match closely
Do American teenagers spend more or less time in shool than adolescents in other countires?	less
Do American teenagers spend more or less time on leisure activities than adolescents in other countries?	more
Does the amount of time adolescents spend on work and leisure vary from culture to culture or reman relatively constant?	varies greatly
What are two potential reasons that adolescents in different cultures spend varying time on work and leisure activities?	cultural norms and expectations, as well as various socioeconomic factors
Is teenage alcohol drug use at al all-time high or low?	low
Do teens smoke marijuana or cigarettes more commonly?	marijuana
Are male or female late adolescents more likely to smoke cigarettes?	male
What is one possible explanation for the shift towards marijuana and away from cigarettes?	recent changing social and political views towards marijuana
Are motives behind teen alcohol use varied or uniform across different cultures?	uniform
What two reasons for adolescent drinking are shared across cultural contexts?	Social engagement and personal enjoyment
What percentage of Argentenian teens reported drinking to improve a bad mood?	7%
What is the most common reason for drinking among adolescents according to surveys in Argentina, Hong Kong, and Canada?	pleasure and recreation
In Hong Kong, did males or females most frequently report drinking to feel the effects of the alcohol?	males
The transition from child-to-adulthood can be broadly defined as what?	adolescence
How long does the United States believe adolescence lasts?	nearly a decade
Does the time frame of adolescence vary from culture to culture or remain universally agreed upon?	varies drastically by culture
Leaving school, starting a full-time job, getting married, and becoming a parent for the first time are markers in what stage of one's development, according to Hogan & Astone?	adolescence
Is adolescence usually accompanied by increased parental supervision or increased independence?	independence
Do milestones such as driving a vechile, serving on a jury, voting, and marriage all have a common age of responsibility?	different ages
Is the end of adolescence and beginning of adulthood easily agreed upon or does it vary by country?	varies by country
When do the first facial hairs present in pubescent males?	between 14 to 17 years of age
For how long does facial hair continue to get darker, coarser, and thicker?	2–4 years after puberty
Where does facial hair first present during puberty?	corners of the upper lip
Do males or females experience growth spurts first?	females
How much later on average do males experience their growth spurt?	two years later
What is the growth rate during peak height velocity for a male adolescent?	4 inches (10.3 cm) a year
What is the growth rate during peak height velocity for a female adolescent?	3.5 inches (9 cm)
Growth rates during adolescent are comparible to those of what other life stage?	toddler
Does the amount of white matter in the brain increase or decrease over the course of adolescence?	increases
Does the amount of grey matter in the brain increase linearly or follow an inverted-U pattern over the course of adolescence?	inverted-U pattern
During which process are unnecessary neuronal connections in the brain eliminated?	synaptic pruning
Does the brain become more or less efficient as a result of synaptic pruning?	more efficient
Who describes adolescence as the stage of life in which the individual's thoughts start taking more of an abstract form?	Piaget
What is another term for congitive skills that enable the control and coordination of thoughts and behavior?	executive functions
Which cortex is commonly associated with the coordination of thoughts and behavior?	prefrontal cortex
Does Piaget believe that egocentric thoughts decrease or increase during adolescence?	decrease
Do adolescents or children understand puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies most effectively?	adolescents
Children under what age often cannot comprehend sarcasm?	nine
Are puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies lower-order or higher-order logic?	higher-order
The appearance of more systematic, abstract thinking is a notable aspect of what type of development during adolescence?	cognitive
Most injuries sustained by adolescents are related to what?	risky behavior
Do adolescents, adults, or both weight the potential rewards and consequences of an action?	both
Do adolescents or adults seem to give more weight to rewards?	adolescents
Which theory proposes that adults and adolescents both weigh the potential rewards and consequences of an action?	behavioral decision-making theory
When does differentiation appear fully developed?	by mid-adolescence
Does the recognition of inconsistent content in one's self-concept typically bring distress or peace to an adolescent?	distress
When adolescents begin to qualify their traits, what are they demonstrating?	differentiation
In what year did Troiden propose a four-stage model for the development of homosexual sexual identity?	1989
What is Troiden's first stage of development known as?	sensitization
When does sensitization usually start?	childhood
In what stage is youth overwhelmed by feelings of inner turmoil regarding their sexual orientation?	identity confusion
Troiden's second stage is referred to as what?	identity confusion
Does intimacy between same-sex siblings increase or decrease during adolescence?	increases
When siblings act as peers, what positive effects are possible?	increase one another's sociability and feelings of self-worth
At what stage to mixed-sex siblings generally experience an increase in intimacy?	middle adolescence
Do adolescents associate with "cliques" on a large or small scale?	small
What are the positive effects that cliques may have on an adolescent?	help adolescents become socially acclimated and form a stronger sense of identity
How are cliques defined?	exclusive, single-sex groups of peers with whom they are particularly close
Do adolescents associate with "crowds" on a large or small scale?	larger
What percentage of adolescents reporting having experienced physical violence in a relationship?	10-45%
What percentage of adolescents reported experiencing psychological aggression?	a quarter to a third
Hitting, throwing objects, and slaps are examples of what type of aggression?	Physical
In heterosexual adolescent couples, is there a significant difference in the rates of male and female aggressors?	no
Does physical aggression decline or increase during high-school, college, and early adulthood?	decline
Does adolescent participation in family work and routines have a positive or negative influence on feelings of self-worth, care, and concern for others?	positive
How are household chores frequently divided?	self-care tasks and family-care tasks
What is one large determining factor in normative adolescent behavior?	The extent to which an adolescent is expected to share family responsibilities
Through what means does an adolescent develop a unique belief system?	interaction with social, familial, and cultural environments
The active seeking of new ideas rather than the unquestioning acceptance of adult authority is known as what stage of development?	Adolescence
What things are youth responsible for forming a set of beliefs about during adolescence?	themselves, the world around them, and whatever higher powers they may or may not believe in
Ceremonies, rituals, and confirmations are examples of what?	cultural traditions that intend to provide a meaningful transition to adulthood
What percentage of adolescent homes have access to the internet?	more than three-quarters
What percentage of adolescents use the internet at least occasionally?	90%
In the last decade, has the amount oftime adolescents spend on the computer increased or dereased?	greatly increased
What percentage of adolescents report using social networking sites?	(65%)
What online activity has the largest number of reported adolescent particpation?	video games
What is DIS?	a fusion of the literature of both developmental and intervention sciences
What are some of the negative things adolescents are susceptible to?	drug addiction, sexual abuse, peer pressure, violent crimes and other illegal activities
What does the DIS focus on in adolescents?	risky and inappropriate behaviors
What does the alcohol and illegal drug habits of teens tend to be shaped by?	the substance use of friends and other classmates
What is one possible reasoning behind many students choosing to continue their smoking habits from middle school into late adolescence?	addictive nature of cigarettes
Do peer acceptance and social norms have a greater or lesser effect on behavior at the onset of adolescence?	significantly greater
What is the range of consentual age variance between jurisdictions?	12 to 20 years
Is the age that peope are allowed to marry universally decided upon?	No
What are other areas in which legal societal age varies?	enlisting in the military, gambling, and the purchase of alcohol, cigarettes or items with parental advisory labels
What type of land is Antarctica considered to be?	desert
What is Antarctica's annual precipitation along the coast?	200 mm (8 in)
What is Antarctica's average temperature during the coldest part of the year?	−63 °C (−81 °F)
Approximately how many people live throughout the year at research stations across Antarctica?	anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000
What are some animals native to Antarctica?	mites, nematodes, penguins, seals and tardigrades
Which continent is the highest in elevation?	Antarctica
What is the annual precipitation rate of coastal Antarctica?	200 mm
What is the average coldest temperature?	−63 °C
What is the coldest recorded temperature?	−89.2 °C
Ehat is the vegetation type on Antarctica?	tundra
What does West Antarctica most resemble geologically?	the Andes mountain range of South America
How was the Antarctic Peninsula formed?	by uplift and metamorphism of sea bed sediments
During what eras was the Antarctic Peninsula formed?	late Paleozoic and the early Mesozoic
What are the most common rocks found in West Antarctica?	andesite and rhyolite volcanics
Where has evidence of volcanic activity been discovered in Antarctica?	Marie Byrd Land and Alexander Island
To what mountainous area is Antarctica geologically similar?	Andes
An uplift of what formed Antarctica?	sea bed sediments
Starting from the late Paleozoic era, when did Antarctica finish forming?	early Mesozoic
What are the most often found rocks in Antarctica?	andesite and rhyolite
What type of geologic activity occurred even after the formation of the ice sheets?	volcanic
What country was given the name Terra Australis instead of Antarctica?	Australia
Who was credited with popularizing the use of name Terra Australis to Australia?	Explorer Matthew Flinders
In what year did Matthew Flinders write his book A Voyage to Terra Australis?	1814
What did people once believe could not be found further south than Australia?	significant landmass
What explorer gave the name of Terra Australis to Australia?	Matthew Flinders
What was the name of Flinders book about his trip to Australia?	A Voyage to Terra Australis
When did Flinders write his book of discovery?	1814
What event caused people to misname Antarctica?	mistake
Part of what study is the census of Antarctic marine life?	Census of Marine Life
When was the census of sea life carried out in Antarctica?	International Polar Year
How many sea animals live in Earth's polar regions?	235
Besides birds, what large animals travel from one pole to the other?	cetaceans
What is the amount of difference in temperature  in the deep ocean?	5 °C
What explorer led the Nimrod Expedition into Antarctica?	Ernest Shackleton
Who led the party to first climb Mount Erebus?	Edgeworth David
Who led the return expedition to find the Magnetic pole?	Douglas Mawson
When did Mawson retire after leading several expeditions?	1931
When did Roald Amundsen reach the geographic south pole?	14 December 1911
When was the Antarctic Conservation Act passed by the U.S.?	1978
What type of penalty can importing plants and animals into Antarctica bring?	criminal
How many tonnes of Patagonian toothfish were illegally fished in 2000?	32,000
When did the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources  come into force?	1980
Over fishing of which species of fish helped promote regulations on fishing?	krill
Since what year has tourism been ongoing to Antarctica?	1957
What is expedition tourism to Antarctica subject to?	Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol
How many of the Antarctic tour operators belong to IAATO?	95%
What is the mode of travel for Antarctic tours?	small or medium ship
How many tourists went to Antarctica during the 2006-07 season?	37,506
What is the main mineral found on Antarctica?	coal
Where was coal first found on Antarctica?	Beardmore Glacier
What expedition discovered coal on Antarctica?	Nimrod Expedition
Where is iron ore found on Antarctica?	Prince Charles Mountains
Where are oil and gas deposits located near Antarctica?	Ross Sea
What type of research was Princess Elizabeth station built to study?	climate change
How much did the Princess Elizabeth station cost?	$16.3 million
What unique characteristic does the Princess Elizabeth station feature?	zero-emissions
From what country was the Princess Elizabeth station shipped?	Belgium
Who is the leader of the station design team?	Johan Berte
What type of ice originates on land and floats out to sea?	floating ice shelves
What events have occurred in recent decades to the ice shelves surrounding Antarctica?	collapses
Along what area has there been more collapsing ice shelves?	Antarctic Peninsula
What could the displacement of ice cause?	glacial outflow
What weather event would offset loss of ice shelves?	snow falling
What can not grow extensively in Antarctica?	vegetation
What does the climate of Antarctica inhibit?	plant growth
hat is low and limited in Antarctica?	diversity of plant life
How many species of Mosses are there in Antarctica?	100
Since what year have claims been suspended in Antarctica?	1959
What document regulates Antarctica's status?	Antarctic Treaty System
What latitude is defined as being Antarctica's border?	south of 60° S
How many countries signed the treaty protecting Antarctica from claims?	twelve
What does the treaty set Antarctica aside as?	scientific preserve
When did Cook's ships cross the Antarctic circle?	17 January 1773
What kept Captain Cook from getting too close to Antarctica?	field ice
How many men sighted Antarctica in 1820?	three
How close did von Bellingshausen and Lazarev come to Antarctica?	32 km
When was the first recorded landing on Antarctica?	1895
What has been an important atmospheric study since the 1970s?	ozone layer
When did scientists discover the hole in the ozone layer?	1985
Where in Antarctica is Halley Station?	Brunt Ice Shelf
What chemical was discovered to have caused the hole in the ozone?	chlorofluorocarbons
What agreement banned the use of CFC s?	Montreal Protocol
What type of climate did Gondwana have during the Cambrian period?	mild
In what hemisphere did west Antarctica share during the Cambrian?	Northern
Where was east Antarctica during the Cambrian period?	equator
What was the climate of Gondwana at the beginning of the Devonian period?	cooler
Where was Gondwana located by the end of the Devonian period?	South Pole
What is the Earth's most southern continent?	Antarctica
Which pole is located in Antarctica?	South Pole
What ocean surrounds Antarctica?	Southern Ocean
What is the size of Antarctica?	14,000,000 square kilometres
How much of Antarctica is ice covered?	98%
Where was the coldest temperature recorded on Earth?	Antarctica
What was the coldest temperature ever recorded?	−89.2 °C
On what date was the Earth's coldest temperature recorded?	21 July 1983
What is Antarctica topographically ?	frozen desert
What light caused condition is a serious problem for humans in Antarctica?	Sunburn
Who wrote a book describing a cold region in 350 B.C.?	Aristotle
What did authors Hyginus and Apuleious call the South Pole?	polus antarcticus
What map maker used the name Antarctica in his map of the 2nd century A.D.?	Marinus of Tyre
What did Chaucer call the area in 1391?	pol antartik
What was the old French words for the Antarctic?	pole antartike
In what do some scientists believe ozone depletion may have a role ?	climatic change
How much cooling can ozone depletion cause over Antarctica?	6 °C
What light does ozone absorb?	ultraviolet radiation
What can the wind changes due to cooling cause in the Antarctic ice?	accelerated melting
What does ozone depletion cause in the southern atmosphere?	enhanced polar vortex
Who has research stations in Antarctica?	Several governments
What is the span of population density per million square kilometers of researchers in Antarctica?	between 70 and 350
About long long do researchers stay when researching in Antarctica?	one-year
What station has an Orthodox church representative?	Bellingshausen Station
When did the Trinity Church begin its posting at Bellinshausen station?	2004
What is the southern most continent?	Antarctica
What is the size of Antarctica in square miles?	5,400,000
What is Antarctica's ranking among the continents?	fifth-largest
How many miles long is Antarctica's coast line?	11,165
What sea plankton doe many sea creatures rely on to live?	phytoplankton
During what season does the emperor penguin breed?	winter
What breed of penguin lives in Antarctica?	emperor penguin
What feature does the rockhopper penguin have around its eyes?	feathers
Which penguin breeds the furterest south of all the penguin breeds?	Adélie
What is the highest peak in Antarctica?	Vinson Massif
How high is the Antarctic mountain Vinson Massif?	4,892 m
In what mountainous area of Antarctica is Vinson Massif?	Ellsworth Mountains
What type of volcano was located in 2004 by researchers?	underwater
What is the Earth's most southern volcano?	Mount Erebus
When did negotiations start to regulate mining in Antarctica?	1983
When was the treaty to regulate mining agreed upon?	1988
What group led the fight to prevent mineral development in Antarctica?	Greenpeace International,
Which two countries refused to ratify the treaty to regulate mineral use in Antarctica?	Australia and France
What was the alternate treaty offered by Australia and France?	Madrid Protocol
What did most of Gondwana become when the polar ice melted?	desert
What plants were abundant during this time?	pteridosperms
What type of reptiles were common during the early Triassic?	Synapsids
When did the Antarctic peninsula form?	Jurassic period
During what period did Gondwana begin to break apart?	Cretaceous
What astronomical study is important research for Antarctica?	Meteorites
What is the supposed source of most Antarctica meteorites?	asteroids
When was the first meteorite found in Antarctica?	1912
What expedition found nine meteorites in 1969?	Japanese
What is it about Antarctic meteorites that is different form meteorites found in other places?	well-preserved.
What location means that Antarctica get little solar radiation?	South Pole
In what condition is most water in the Antarctica?	ice
What is the usual condition of precipitation in the Antarctic?	snow
What does the massed snow in Antarctica produce?	giant ice sheet
What are ice streams otherwise called?	glaciers
Where did the first semi-permanent residents of the Antarctic area live?	South Georgia
In what year did the sealers start staying on South Georgia?	1786
What was the profession of the residents of South Georgia?	sealers
What was the nationality of most whalers?	Norwegian
When did explorer Carl Anton Larsen become a British citizen?	1910
Where in Antarctica has warming been noticed?	Antarctic Peninsula
What do some researchers believe to be that cause of this warming?	carbon dioxide emissions
How much has west Antarctica warmed per decade in the last 5o years?	0.1 °C
What is thought to be the cause of glacier outflow?	inflow of warm water
What is the thinking of the cause  of the Antarctic Peninsula sea level.	atmospheric warming
What animal was greatly hunted during the 18th and 19th centuries?	Antarctic fur seal
What did  Sir James Weddell command?	British sealing expeditions
For whom is the Weddell seal named ?	Sir James Weddell
What is a very important species in the Southern Ocean?	Antarctic krill
Why is the krill so important to the Antarctic area?	important food
When did the Environmental Protocol become effective?	1998
What is the main concern of the Protocol?	conservation
What is seen as a major risk to Antarctica?	non-native species
What group advises the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting?	Committee for Environmental Protection
Besides conservation, what is the Environmental Protocol's goal to manage?	biodiversity
What does the Protocol on Environmental Protection seek to regulate?	resources
In what year was an agreement reached to ban mining in Antarctica?	1998
When will the mining ban be reviewed?	2048
What is the major economic activity near Antarctica?	trading of fish
How many tonnes of fish were reported caught in 2000-01?	112,934 tonnes
How do the meteorites found in Antarctica add to knowledge about the solar system?	better understanding
From where in the solar system could the meteorites have come?	Moon
Beside rare types of meteorites, what other types of meteorites have been found in Antarctica?	New types
About what nearby planet could the Antarctic meteorites hold data?	Mars
What do meteorites absorb that can be used to understand how old the meteorite is?	cosmic radiation
When did the Larsen-B ice shelf collapse?	2002
What Antarctic ice shelf collapsed in 2008?	Wilkins Ice Shelf
How large was the ice chunk that melted and refroze?	California
When did the most widespread melting of ice occur?	2005
How high could the temperatures have risen to cause the melting?	5 °C
When was the first time humans visited Antarctica?	19th century
What was Antarctica presumed to be by the ancient thinkers?	balance
What did Ptolemy suggest that a southern land mass would do to preserve?	symmetry
Of what did early explores think Australia and South America were part?	Antarctica
Early geographers thought that Antarctica was what in size?	larger
How much of Antarctica is covered by ice?	98%
How much of Earth's ice is in Antarctica?	90%
How thick is the ice that covers Antarctica?	1.6 km
How much of the Earth's fresh water is held in Antarctica?	70%
What is the amount of precipitation per year in the interior of Antarctica?	20 mm
What lake is thought to contain microbial life?	Lake Vostok
To what does the frozen surface of Lake Vostok resemble?	Europa
With what is Europa associated??	Jupiter's moon
When did NASA go on an expedition to Lake Untersee?	7 February 2008
For what was NASA searching?	extremophiles
In what period did Africa beak off from Antarctica?	Jurassic
When was Antarctica still joined to Australia?	end of the Cretaceous
What type of climate did Antarctica have in the Cretaceous period?	subtropical
When did Australia separate from Antarctica?	Eocene epoch
After the division from Australia, what began to appear?	ice
Which of the the poles is colder?	Antarctica
How high is the continent of Antarctica above sea level?	3,000 m
How does the Arctic Ocean warm the Arctic?	warmth is transferred
What contributes to the Antarctic cold?	orbital distance
What does temperature do with elevation?	decreases
Who was the first person born south of the 60th parallel?	Emilio Marcos Palma
Where is the continental limit of Antarctica?	60th parallel south
When was Palma born?	1978
What was the Palma family sent to Antarctica to determine?	suitable for family life
How many species of fungi have been found on Antarctica?	1150
What type of fungi help shape rock formations in Antarctica?	cryptoendoliths
How many of the extant fungi in Antarctica are lichen-forming?	400
What has the study of fungi in Antarctica shown about these organisms?	adaptations
How is it postulated that Mars life might have evolved?	similar to Antarctic
What did the British claim in 2012?	Queen Elizabeth Land
To what was the claim of land in tribute?	Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee
What was the response of the Argentine response to the British land claim?	protest
When did the British claim Queen Elizabeth Land in Antarctica?	18 December 2012
Of what war was 2012 the anniversary?	Falklands War
The entry of whom has caused some worry about the welfare of Antarctica?	visitors
What do environmentalists want enacted?	stricter regulations
What kind of tourist limit has been asked for by environmentalists?	tourism quota
What have the authorities produced in response to these requests?	site use guidelines
When did an Air New Zealand crash on Mount Erebus?	1979
What group of scientists study tectonics?	Geologists
Who is interested in the effects of harsh environment on humans?	Biologists
Which science is concerned with the study of the dynamics of ice?	Glaciologists
What kind of observations use  the high elevations and thin atmosphere for viewing space?	astronomical
Where is the largest neutrino telescope on Earth?	Amundsen–Scott station.
Who were Mary's parents?	Saint Joachim and Saint Anne
How old was Mary when she was consecrated as a virgin?	three years old
Who was Mary betrothed to?	Joseph
When she was betrothed to Joseph, approximately how old was Mary?	12–14 years old
Where was Mary consecrated as a virgin?	the Temple in Jerusalem
Which angel appeared to Mary?	Gabriel
What happened to Mary's body at death?	assumed directly into Heaven
What did Gabriel announce to Mary at the Annunciation?	her divine selection to be the mother of Jesus
How was Mary related to Jesus?	mother of Jesus
Which goespel begins its story of Mary with the Annunciation?	Gospel of Luke
When was the Assumption dogmatically define by the Catholic Church?	1950
In which papal document was the dogma of the Assumption defined?	Munificentissimus Deus
Which pope authored Munifentissimus Deus?	Pope Pius XII
Other than the Roman Catholic Church, which church holds the doctrine of the Assumption to be true?	Eastern Orthodox Church
What is another name for the Assumption of Mary?	Dormition
How long in total was the "blood of her purifying" for Mary?	40 days
Where did Mary bring a burnt offering and sin offering?	the Temple in Jerusalem
Who was presented at the Temple in Jerusalem?	Jesus
Who prophesized in Luke 2:25-38?	Simeon and the prophetess Anna in
To which Galilean city did Joseph and Mary take Jesus?	Nazareth
What was Zechariah's occupation?	priest
Which tribe did Elizabeth belong to?	Levi
Who was Aaron's wife?	Elisheba
Which tribe did Elisheba belong to?	Judah
Who was the third son of David and Bathsheba?	Nathan
Name the two women present with Mary at the Crucifixion of Jesus?	Mary of Clopas and Mary Magdalene
In art, what is the name for the motif of Mary cradling the body of Jesus?	pietà
In Matthew, who else besides Mary of Clopas and Mary Magdalene are with Mary at the Crucifixion?	Salome
What does pieta mean?	pity
What is a representation of Mary at the Crucifixion called?	a Stabat Mater
Which Egyptian goddess do some scholars ascribe similarities to?	Isis
What type of goddess is Isis?	Egyptian
What kind of relationship do some scholars believe exists between Isis and Mary?	iconographic
In which country is Ephesus?	Turkey
Whose visions led to the identification of the House of the Virgin Mary?	Anne Catherine Emmerich
Which disciple is known as "the Disciple whom Jesus loved?"	John the Evangelist
With whom is it believed that Mary lived with in Ephesus?	John
In which century was the House of the Virgin Mary found?	19th
In which year was the Second Council of Nicea?	787
In which year did the Synod of Constantinople confirm the veneration of images of Mary?	842
Which icon is most venerated in the Orthodox Church?	icon of the Virgin Theotokos
What is the name given to artistic depictions of Mary?	Marian art
In the Orthodox church, what types of icons are allowed to be venerated and prayed before?	flat, two-dimensional icons
Where is the site of the first Church dedicated to Mary?	Ephesus
Which goddess was worshipped in Ephesus before Mary?	Artemis
Who was the author of the book, "Survivals of Roman Religion?"	William E. Phipps
Which Queen furthered the cult of Mary in the 6th Century?	Queen Theodora
Where was Mary rumored to have died?	Ephesus
Jesus was known as the "King of Kings" because of his lieage from who?	King David
Which name is given to Mary because of her role as a protector of captives?	Our Lady of Ransom
Who was the mother of Jesus?	Mary
Which New Testament book provides a basis for the term Queen when referring to Mary?	Luke
Who wrote polemics regarding Roman Catholic beliefs about Mary?	Martin Luther
In which year was the Immaculate Conception dogmatized?	1854
Which pope was responsible for the dogmatization of the Immaculate Conception?	Pope Pius IX
What does Theotokos mean?	Mother of God
Where did Martin Luther preach a sermon on Marian devotion a month before his death?	Wittenberg
On what date does the Catholic Church celebrate the Feast of the Assumption?	August 15
What do Eastern Catholics call the Feast of the Assumption?	Dormition of the Theotokos
On what date of the Julian calendar do Eastern Catholics celebrate the Domition of the Theotokos?	August 28
How many Great Feasts does the Eastern Orthodox Church celebrate?	12
Do Protestants celebrate Marian feasts or not?	do not
Which color is traditionally used to portray Mary in paintings?	blue
What rock was used as the source of blue pigment in paints in Medieval and Renaissance Europe?	lapis lazuli
From which country was lapis lazuli imported?	Afghanistan
Lapis lazuli was thought to be more valuable than which precious metal?	gold
Which ancient empire is thought to have started the tradition of portraying Mary in paintings using the color blue?	Byzantine Empire
According to Nontrinitarian belief, what is Mary's relationship to Jesus?	biological mother
Which Nontrinitarian theologian says that God cannot approach eveil spirits to redeem them?	Emanuel Swedenborg
Unittarians, Christadelphians and Jehovah's Witnesses are examples of what kind of church?	Nontrinitarians
"Mother of God" is an example of what kind of title?	Marian
By what name is Mary referred to in the Qur'an?	Maryam
Which Sura in the Qur'an describes the visitation of an angel upon Zakariya?	19
In how many places does the Qur'an give detailed accounts of Mary?	two
Which Gospel provides an identical account of the Virgin Birth as Sura 19 in the Qur'an?	Luke
Who was visited by an angel in Sura 19 of the Qur'an?	Zakariya
What term is used to describe the belief that Mary remained a virgin for her entire life?	Ever-Virgin
Which Latin father described the belief that Jesus' siblings were his cousins?	Jerome
Which churches teach that Jesus' brothers and sister were step-siblings from a previous marriage of Joseph the Betrothed?	Orthodox Churches
What document teaches that Jesus' brothers and sisters were older children of Joseph from a previous marriage?	Protoevangelium of James
Which doctrine describes the belief that Mary remained a virgin, even though she gave birth to Jesus?	The Perpetual Virginity of Mary
In Orthodox tradition, what comes next in precdence after The Theotokos in the order of the saints?	Angels
What are hymns to the Theotokos called in Orthodox tradition?	The Theotokia
In the liturgical sequences of the Eastern Church, who is placed next in prominence after Christ?	the Theotokos
What is Mary proclaimed to be in the Orthodox tradition?	"Lady of the Angels"
What do the Orthodox believe Mary remained to be before and after she gave birth to Christ?	a virgin
What is the mother church of the Angican Communion?	the Church of England
Which church in the United States is associated with the Angican Communion?	the Episcopal Church
What practice differentiates the Angican Communon from Protestant churches at large?	veneration of Mary
What branch of Christianity does the Angican Communion fall under?	Protestant
For what practice did the first Protestants criticize the Roman Catholics?	venerating Mary
In which century did the Council of Trent occur?	16th
Which Protestant churches still honor Mary?	Anglicans and Lutherans
During which historical era did Protestant interest in Mary almost disappear?	Age of the Enlightenment
Marian veneration became associated with which Christians after the Council of Trent?	Catholics
Which doctrine about Mary do Methodists reject?	the Immaculate Conception
Who was the founder of the Methodist movement?	John Wesley
What are the sources of beliefs about Mary held by Methodists?	Scripture and the ecumenical Creeds
The Methodist movement began in which church?	the Church of England
Which Marian doctrine did John Wesley uphold in founding Methodism?	the perpetual virginity of Mary
To whom was Mary dedicated while still in the womb?	Allah
Which prophet cared for Mary?	Zakariya
What is understood to be the Holy of Holies in Islam?	Al-Mihrab
Where did Mary reside in her chilhood?	the Temple
What did God provide for Mary?	heavenly "provisions"
Who suggested that Jesus was the son of a Roman soldier?	Celsus
What was the name of the Roman soldier said by Celsus to be the father of Jesus?	Panthera
Origen was a Church Father in which Egyptian city?	Alexandria
In which century did Celsus suggest that Jesus' father was a Roman soldier?	2nd
For what purpose did detractors use the idea of Mary's virginity and the virgin conception of Jesus?	to challenge the divinity of Jesus
What is the literal meaning of Theotokos?	Giver of birth to God
Which branch of Christianity gives a diminished role to Mary?	Protestants
What is Mary called in Islam?	Maryam
What is the basis for Mary's diminished role in Protestantism?	brevity of biblical references
Which two Protestant churches, along with the Roman Catholic and Orthodox churches, believe that Mary is the Mother of God?	Anglican, and Lutheran
What is the first stage of Jewish marriage?	betrothal
Which angel announced to Mary that she was to be the mother of the Messiah?	Gabriel
What did Joseph plan to do when told of Mary's coneption in a dream?	divorce her
Where did Mary live when she was visited by the angel Gabriel?	in Nazareth in Galilee
In his dream, who told Joseph about Mary's conception?	an angel of the Lord
Which Gospel says that Mary fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah?	Matthew
What Hebrew word is used to describe Mary in Isaiah 7:14?	alma
Until which century was the Virgin birth of Jesus held almost universally among Christians?	19th
Which verse in Luke states that Mary had "no relations with man" before Jesus' birth?	1:34
Along with the Nicene Creed, which other Christian creed asserts the Virgin birth of Jesus?	the Apostles' Creed
What title is given to Mary in the Catholic Church?	Blessed
What is the Latin word from which Mary's title of Blessed is derived?	beatus
How many Catholic dogmas are there regarding Mary?	four
Along with Mother of God, Immaculate Conception and Assumption of Mary, what is the other Catholic dogma related to Mary?	Perpetual virginity of Mary
What are Akathists?	standing hymns
How many of the Orthodox Great Feasts dedicated to Mary?	Five
What is name of the Orthodox hymn devoted to Mary?	the Akathist Hymn
Which event on the Orthodox calendar is related to Mary and icon veneration?	Sunday of Orthodoxy
What is the name given to the Annunciation in the 1662 Book of Common Prayer?	Annunciation of our Lady
On what date do most Anglicans celebrate the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin?	31 May
What is another name for the feast of the Presentation of Christ in the Temple in the Anglican Communion?	the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary
On what date is the Presentation of Christ in the Temple celebrated by Anglicans?	February 2
On what day was the Annunciation tradtionally celebrated in England until the 18th century?	New Year's Day
Which theologian described Mariology as "the heresy of the Catholic Church?"	Karl Barth
Protestants hold that Mary had what relationship to Jesus?	mother
Protestants reject what practices in relation to the Saints?	veneration and invocation
Protestants describe Mary as devoted to whom?	God
Who do Christians believe is prophesized in Isaiah 7:14?	Virgin Mary
Which verse in Matthew is believed to refer to Isaiah's prohecy of the Virgin Mary?	1:23
Which Gospel writer provided a version of the virgin birth that was different than Matthew's?	Luke
What is the English tranlation of the Greek word "parthenos?"	virgin
What is the meaning of the Greek word "heos?"	until
Who did Jesus say were his "brother, and sister, and mother?"	Whoever does the will of God
According to Jesus, who is "without honor except in his own town?"	A prophet
What do some Biblical scholars claim that Jesus' family did with his message during his ministry?	rejected
What is the term used for veneration of Mary in Roman Catholic theology?	hyperdulia
In what year was the hierarchy of latria, hyperdulia and dulia established?	787
Who is venerated in the Roman Catholic practice of dulia?	other saints and angels
Which theologian wrote that Mary is considered to be "superior to all created beings," but is not to be the object of worhip?	Sergei Bulgakov
What is the Roman Catholic term used to denote the worship of God?	latria
In what year did the Third Ecumenical Council occur in Ephesus?	431
Whose teachings were addressed at the Third Ecumenical Council?	Nestorius
What does the phrase "Mater Dei" mean?	Mother of God
What are the two Latin equivalents of the Greek term "Theokotos?"	"Deipara" and "Dei genetrix"
What is the literal translation of Theokotos?	Godbearer
On what date is the feast of the Immaculate Conception in the Latin Rite of the Roman Catholic Church?	December 8
Which pope proclaimed the Immaculate Conception of Mary?	Pope Pius IX
In what year did Pope Pius IX make his Ex Cathedra proclamation of the Immaculate Conception of Mary?	1854
According to the doctrine of Immaculate Conception, where was Mary when she first become filled with grace?	in her mother's womb
What is the Greek term that means the same thing as "original sin?"	ancestral sin
What book is considered to be the source of many Orthodox beliefs regarding Mary?	The Protoevangelium of James
At what age was Mary consecrated?	three
Which priest officiated at Mary's consecration?	Zachariah
While Mary lived in the temple, who was said to have fed her?	an angel
Which religion believes that God put a veil between Satan and Mary?	Islamic
According to Shabbir Akhtar, what role does Islam believe Jesus to hold?	a Messenger of God
Who does the Islamic religion hold to be the One, Unique God?	Allah
What term is used to refer to Christains by author Shabbir Akhtar?	People of the Book
Where in Jewish literature is the story about Panthera found?	the Toledot Yeshu
According to the Blackwell Companion to Jesus, for what purpose was the Toledot Yeshu written?	warding off conversions to Christianity
What is the meaning of the term "parthenos?"	virgin
During what historical period was the Toledot Yeshu written?	medieval
What event does Raymond E. Brown believe the Toledot Yeshu describes?	the birth of Jesus
What is the second busiest airport in Australia?	Melbourne Airport
What is another name Melbourne Airport is called?	Tullamarine Airport
What is Melbourne's main metropolitan train terminus called?	Flinders Street Station
What is Melbourne's main regional train and coach terminus called?	Southern Cross Station
What is Australia's busiest seaport for containerised and general cargo?	the Port of Melbourne
What airport serves Melbourne?	Melbourne Airport (also called Tullamarine Airport)
What is the main metropolitan train terminus called in Melbourne?	Flinders Street Station
What is the main regional train and coach terminus in Melbourne?	Southern Cross Station
What city is known to be home to Australia's most extensive freeway network?	Melbourne
What country has the world's largest urban tram network?	Australia
What passenger airport serves Melbourne?	Melbourne Airport (also called Tullamarine Airport)
What is the busiest seaport in Melbourne?	Port of Melbourne
What is the name of the main metropolitan train terminus called in Melbourne?	Flinders Street Station
Who has the most extensive freeway network?	Australia
What is the name of the coach terminus in Melbourne?	Southern Cross Station
What is another name for Melborne Airport?	Tullamarine Airport
Which airport is the second busiest in Australia?	Melbourne Airport (also called Tullamarine Airport)
Which port in Melborne is the busiest seaport for containerised and general cargo?	Port of Melbourne
What is Melborne's main metropolitan train terminus?	Flinders Street Station
Where is the world's largest urban tram network located?	Melbourne
Between what year's did Victorian aboriginal groups dispossessed?	Between 1836 and 1842
In 1844 how many Aborigines resident in squalid camps in Melbourne?	675
Who appointed five Aboriginal Protectors for the Aborigines of Victoria in 1839?	The British Colonial Office
Who were the people that were power political and economic force in Victoria in 1845?	240 wealthy Europeans
How many Aborigines were said to be resident in squalid camps in Melbourne in January 1844?	675
How many Aboriginal Protectors for the Aborigines of Victoria were appointed in 1839?	five
By what year did fewer than 240 wealthy Europeans hold all the pastoral licenses?	1845
During what years were Victorian Aboriginal groups largely displaced from their land?	Between 1836 and 1842
When was the gold rush over in Melbourne?	1860
How did Melbourne grow as major port for exporting the agricultural products?	gold mining
What was protected by high tarriffs?	wool
In 1863, why was Aboriginal population declining?	diseases, particularly smallpox, frontier violence and dispossession from their lands.
By what year was the gold rush largely over?	1860
What was one of the major agricultural products of Victoria around 1860?	wool
What were some of the reasons the Aboriginal population continued to recline?	introduced diseases, particularly smallpox, frontier violence and dispossession from their lands
Which disease in particular caused the Aboriginal population to continue a decline?	smallpox
The Aboriginal population declined by what estimated percentage by 1863?	80%
What is the most populas city in the Australian state of Victoria?	Melbourne
What is the second most populas city in Australia?	Oceania
Where is the Metropolis?	large natural bay of Port Phillip
What is the population of Melbourne?	4,347,955 as of 2013
What are inhabitants of Melbourne called?	Melburnians
Which city is the capital of Victoria?	Melbourne
Which city is the most populous city in Victoria?	Melbourne
Melbourne consists of how many municipalities?	31
What was Melbourne's population in 2013?	4,347,955
What are the inhabitants of Melbourne called?	Melburnians
When did severe depression hit Melbourne's city?	1890s
What went into liquidation in Melbourne around the 1890's?	16 small "land banks" and building societies collapsed, and 133 limited companies
When did new construction start in Melbourne?	late 1890s
When did Australia have a banking crisis?	1893.
During what decade did Melbourne suffer a sever economic depression?	early 1890s
How many limited companies went into liquidation during the 1890s depression in Melbourne?	133
How many "land banks" and building societies collapsed during the 1890s depression in Melbourne?	16
The Melbourne financial crisis was a contributing factor to what banking crisis in 1893?	Australian
When did new construction start to reimerge after the early 1890s depression in Melbourne?	late 1890s
What term is given to the slums established on the souther banks of the Yarra?	tent city
In what year was Melbourne Chinatown founded?	1851
Which ethninticities contributed an influx of interstate and overseas migrants to Melbourne?	Irish, German and Chinese
Which community is the longest continuous Chinese settlement in the Western World?	Melbourne Chinatown
During the second half of what century did the Burke and Wills expedition give an indication of immigration flows?	second half of the nineteenth century
In what year was a telephone exchange established in Melbourne?	1880
When was the first electric light installed in the Eastern Market?	1881
In what year was the first line of the Melbourne cable tramway system built?	1885
In what building was the Melbourne Internation Exhibition of 1880 held?	Exhibition Building
What weather phrase has become part of local popular culture in Melbourne and concerns the city's rapid change in weather?	four seasons in one day
What is the lowest temperature on Melbourne's record?	−2.8 °C (27.0 °F)
On what date did the lowest temperature in Melbourne's records occur?	21 July 1869
What is Melbourne's highest temperature recorded?	46.4 °C (115.5 °F)
On what date was Melbourne's highest temperature recorded?	7 February 2009
Is the observation deck in The Rialto currently opened or closed?	closed
On which of Melbourne's banks is the Eureka Tower located?	Southbank
Which tower is Melbourne's second tallest?	The Rialto
What building is the tallest building in the old CBD?	The Rialto tower
What is the tallest tower in Australia?	Eureka Tower
To what areas has Melbourne dedicated substantial international investment?	industries and property market
In what areas has major inner-city urban renewal occurred?	Southbank, Port Melbourne, Melbourne Docklands and more recently, South Wharf
Melbourne has sustained the highest population increase and economic growth rate in any Australian city according to what organization?	Australian Bureau of Statistics
How many years did Melbourne sustain the highest population increase and economic growth?	three
What effect has the housing boom had on house prices and rents?	increased
What is generating high demand for housing in Melbourne?	high population growth
Which of Melbourne's suburbs have seen significant brownfields redevelopment in recent years?	middle and outer-ring
What types of surburban development did Melbourne policies promote?	medium-density and high-density
Who was Melbourne named by?	the Governor of New South Wales, Sir Richard Bourke
What year was Melbourne officially declared a city?	1847
Who was Melbourne named in honor of?	the British Prime Minister of the day, William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne
What year did Melbourne cease in serving as the nations interim seat of government?	1927
Melbourne became the capital of what colony in 1851?	Victoria
In what year did Melbourne set a target to reduce carbon emissions to net zero?	2002
Which city notably opted not to become carbon neutral in 2009?	City of Glen Eira
By what year did Melbourne state it wished to be completely carbon neutral?	2020
Does Melbourne have one of the largest or smallest carbon footprints in the world?	largest
Who is responsible for regulating pollution in Melbourne?	EPA Victoria and several local councils
Who designed the Rialto Building in 1889?	William Pitt
Which building was listed as the 13th tallest residential building in the world in January 2014?	Eureka Tower
Who designed the Winfield Building in 1890?	Charles D'Ebro and Richard Speight
In what year was the Eureka Tower completed?	2006
How does Melbourne's skyline rank in terms of other skylines in Australia?	second largest
Tasmania was formerly known as what?	Van Diemen's Land
How many acres did John Batman claim to purchase?	600,000
Current central and northern Melbourne was explored by whom?	John Batman
How many elders did John Batman claim to have negotiated with?	eight
On what date did Batman reach Melbourne?	2 September 1835
What is locally referred to as the Australian Dream?	quarter acre home and garden
Do the Docklands, St. Kilda Road, and Southbank areas feature high-density or low-density forms?	high-density
Which year marked the start of the private automobile's popularity increase?	1945
Is much of Melbourne's metropolitan area characterized as low-density sprawl or high-density sprawl?	low density
When Victoria was established as a seperate colony, the need for what followed?	public buildings
During what two decades were the Parliament House, Treasury Building, Victoria Barracks, State Library, and General Post Office commenced?	1850s and 1860s
Melbourne's weath was due in part to what event?	gold rush
Which writer's festival is home to Melbourne?	Melbourne Writers Festival
What type of work are The Mystery of a Hansom Cab, Monkey Grip, and The Slap?	novels
What do the novels The Mystery of a Hansom Cab, Monkey Grip, and The Slap have in common?	set in Melbourne
Where are Peter Carey, Germaine Greer, and Thomas Browne from?	Melbourne
What occupation to Peter Carey, Germaine Greer, and Thomas Browne hold?	writers and poets
Which phrase was coined by George Augustus Henry Sala during a visit to Melbourne in 1885?	Marvellous Melbourne
In what year did the land boom reach its peak of development?	1888
In what year was a hydraulic facility established?	1887
In what year was the APA Building completed?	1889
What did Melbourne's hydraulic facilities help create that spurred high-rise developments?	elevators
Melbourne is the world's most liveable city according to whom?	Economist Intelligence Unit
For how many years has Melbourne been considered the world's most liveable city?	fifth year in a row
Which city is referred to as Australia's cultural capital?	Melbourne
What is one example of Australian contemporary dance?	Melbourne Shuffle
How many of the top twenty high school sin Australia are located in Mebourne according to the Better Education ranking?	six
According to the Toyal Melbourne Institute of Technology, how did Melborne rank as a top university city in 2008?	fourth
How many public universities are located in Melbourne?	seven
Is the University of Melbourne a public or private institution?	public
Has there been a recent increase or decrease in international students studying in Melbourne?	rapid increase
In what year were height limits lifted in the Melbourne CBD?	1958
Which was the first new indoor mall in Melbourne?	Chadstone Shopping Centre
What happened to many of the larger suburban mansions from the boom era?	demolished or subdivided
Which two areas saw a significant renewal after the post-war period and significantly modernised the city?	CBD and St Kilda Road
In what year was Melbourne the host city for the first Olympic Games held in the southern hemisphere?	1956
In what three years was Melbourne proclaimed the "World's Ultimate Sports City"?	2006, 2008 and 2010
Previous to Melbourne, where were all Olympic games held?	Europe and the United States
Where did the National Sports Museum reopen in 2008?	Olympic Stand
Which city is so far the southernmost city to host the Olympic Games?	Melbourne
In what year was the first plan for the city commissioned?	1837
On what date did the official general post office open?	13 April 1837
What was the first plan for the city in 1837 called?	the Hoddle Grid
What was the settlement originally named?	Batmania
Was Melbourne more or less affected by the Late-2000s financial crisis in comparison to other Australian cities?	less affected
Which market in Melbourne remained strong during the Late-2000s financial crisis and resulted in historically high property prices and rent increases?	property market
After Melbourne, which were the next two fastest growing Australian cities in 2009?	Brisbane and Perth
What is the name given to Melbourne's population strategy that was revised in 2008?	Melbourne @ Five Million strategy
How many of the big four banks are headquartered in Melbourne?	Two
Which two of the big four banks are headquartered in Melbourne?	NAB and ANZ
Which city is Australia's second-largest industrial centre?	Melbourne
Which south-eastern suburb is home to Nintendo's Australian headquarters?	Scoresby
Melbourne is home to a research and development hub for which auto manufacturer?	Ford Australia
In what two decades was the layout of Melbourne's inner suburbs established?	1850s and 1860s
In what year did the Melbourne Cricket Club secure possession of its now famous ground, the MCG?	1855
Around what year did Yarra rowing clubs and "regattas" become popular?	1859
In what year was the Melbourne Cup first run?	1861
What was the first public monumnet acquired in Melbourne in 1864?	the Burke and Wills statue
What percentage of Melburnians speak only English at home?	68.1%
What is the second-most-common language in Melborne?	Chinese
The Melbourne statistical division population has grown by how many people each year since 2005?	70,000
What factors make Melbourne more attractie than Sydney for overseas immigrants?	more affordable housing and cost of living
During which seasons are Melbourne's temperature differentials most pronounced?	spring and summer
Which type of weather fronts are responsible for severe weather such as gales, thunderstorms, hail, and heavy rain in Melbourne?	cold fronts
Is Melbourne known for changeable or steady weather patterns?	changeable
What is Melbourne's Koppen climate classification?	Cfb
What is one cause for Melbourne's fluctuating weather patterns?	Melbourne's location situated on the boundary of the very hot inland areas and the cool southern ocean
Which government project aimed to deepen Melbourne ports by dredging?	the Port Phillip Channel Deepening Project
Why was the Port Phillip Channel Deppening Project subject to controversy and strict regulations?	fears that beaches and marine wildlife could be affected
Up to how many cigarette butts enter the storm water runoff every day in Melbourne?	350,000
What initiative was launched in Melbourne in February 2010 as an effort to transition human society towards sustainability?	The Transition Decade
What causes increased pollution and levels of bacteria such as E. coli to rise in the Yarra River and its tributaries?	septic systems, as well as litter
Investment in what greatly accelerated the outward suburban sprawn and declining inner city population?	freeway and highway developments
Which government sought to rapidly accelerate the modernisation of Melbourne?	Bolte
The widening of what street helped to change the face of Melbourne into a car-dominated environment?	Hoddle Street
Did the 1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan change Melbourne into a more car-dominated or tram-dominated environment?	car-dominated
Did the rapid rise of motor vehicle ownership and highway developments lead to an increasing or declining inner city population?	declining
How many lines does the Melbourne rail network have?	16
Which rail station is Melbourne's busiest?	Flinders Street Station
Which Melbourne rail station was the world's busiest passenger station in 1926?	Flinders Street Station
During which financial year did the Melbourne rail network record its highest volume of passenger trips?	2013–2014
How often does the XPT to Sydney depart?	twice a day
Which university maintains two major campuses in Melbourne and Geelong and is the third largest university in Victoria?	Deakin University
What is the role of the DEECD?	'provide policy and planning advice for the delivery of education
Who oversees education in Melbourne?	Victorian Department of Education and Early Childhood Development (DEECD)
Which city is often referred to as Australia's garden city?	Melbourne
Which Australian state was once known as the garden state?	Victoria
Why is urban Melbourne divided into hundreds of suburbs?	addressing and postal purposes
Approximately how many sunny days does Melbourne receive annually?	48.6
What is the range of Melbourne's dewpoint temperatures in the summer?	9.5 °C (49.1 °F) to 11.7 °C (53.1 °F)
Which suburbs usually are affected by relatively narrow streams of heavy showers?	eastern suburbs
Is Port Phillip generally warmer or colder than the surrounding oceans and/or the land mass?	warmer
Which act sets functions for Melbourne such as urban planning and waste management?	Local Government Act 1989
From where does the Victorian state government operate?	Parliament House in Spring Street
Contrary to other countires, are public transport, traffic control, policing, and education the responsibility of local or state government?	state government
What are the dimensions of the Hoddle Grid?	1 by 1⁄2 mile (1.61 by 0.80 km)
What is the name of a popular arcade located within the Hoddle Grid?	Royal Arcade
Which edge of the Hoddle Grid fronts onto the Yarra River?	southern
Which railway station was the busiest in the world in the mid-1920s?	Flinders Street Station
On which street is the A.C. Goode House located?	Collins Street
In what year was construction on the Flinders Street Station completed?	1909
Who designed the A.C. Goode House?	Wright, Reed & Beaver
What style of architecture is the A.C. Goode House?	Neo Gothic
What are the two most popular sports in Melbourne?	Australian rules football and cricket
When was the first official Test cricket match played at the Melbourne Cricket Ground?	March 1877
Where is the Australian Football League headquartered?	Docklands Stadium
How many of the Australian Football League's teams are based in the Melbourne metropolitan area?	Nine
Up to how many AFL matches are played each week in Melbourne?	five
Which port is Australia's largest container and general cargo port?	The Port of Melbourne
How far upstream to water taxis run along the Yarra River?	South Yarra
How many shipping containers did the Port of Melbourne handle during a 12-month period in 2007, making it one of the top five ports in the Southern Hemisphere?	two million
Which is Australia's busiest port?	The Port of Melbourne
Where is Station Pier located?	Port Phillip Bay
How many people are employed by the ICT industry in Melbourne?	60,000
What percentage of Australia's ICT workforce is imployed in Melbourne's ICT industry?	one third
In 2008, Melbourne overtook what city with the amount of money that domestic tourists spent in the city?	Sydney
Domestic visitors spend about how much money in the city of Melbourne annually?	$15.8 billion
How many international visitors did Melbourne have in 2004?	1.88 million
Melbourne's population could overtake that of Sydney by 2037 or 2039 primarily due to what factor?	larger levels of internal migration losses assumed for Sydney
In how many scenarios will Sydney remain higher than Melbourne in population beyond 2056?	two
According to the first scenario projected by the ABS, how soon could Melbourne overtake Sydney's population level?	2037 or 2039
Which theatre was Melbourne's first live performance institution?	Pavilion
The Princess Theatre, Regent Theatre, and Forum Theatre are members of which of Melbourne's theater districts?	East End Theatre District
In what year did the Pavilion open?	1841
Where are the Melbourne Recital Centre and Southbank Theatre located?	Southbank
From what year does the Sidney Myer Music Bowl date?	1955
How many daily newspapers serve Melbourne?	Three
How many free-to-air television stations service Greater Melbourne and Geelong?	Six
From where is C31 broadcast?	transmitters at Mount Dandenong and South Yarra
What type of companies are Broadsheet and ThreeThousand?	Hybrid digital/print media
When did Melbourne Heart become known as Melbourne City FC?	June 2014
What are Melbourne's two ice hockey teams named?	Melbourne Ice and Melbourne Mustangs
In which river was the annual Race to Prince's Bridge held?	Yarra
Where does the soccer club Melbourne Victory play home games?	Etihad Stadium
Which basketball club in Melbourne plays in the NBL?	Melbourne United
Does Melbourne have a high or low dependency on the automobile?	high
Which freeway spans the large Bolte Bridge?	CityLink
How many private vehicles travel Melbourne's 13,870 miles of road?	3.6 million
Which freeway links Melbourne and Sydney?	Hume Freeway
What have Postcode 3000 and Melbourne 2030 aimed to do?	curtail urban sprawl
How many people did Carlton have per km2 between 2012 and 2013?	9,000
How many people did Fitzroy have per km2 between 2012 and 2013?	7,900
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics as of June 2013, inner city Melbourne had a population density of how many people per km2?	12,400
Where are Million Dollar Minute and Family Feud based?	Melbourne
Where are Dancing with the Stars, MasterChef, and The Block filmed?	in and around Melbourne
Neighbours, Kath & Kim, Winners and Losers, Offspring, and Underbelly are examples of what kind of media produced in Melbourne?	Television shows
Which national news-based programs are based in Melbourne?	The Project, Insiders and ABC News Breakfast
Which city is known as the game show capital of Australia?	Melbourne
How many airports does Melbourne have?	four
Which airport is the city's main international and domestic gateway?	Melbourne Airport
Which airport is the second busiest in all of Australia?	Melbourne Airport
What are the only forms of public transport to and from the city's main airports?	Buses and taxis
Which rail station was the world's busiest passenger station in 1927?	Flinders Street Station
In the 1940s, what percentage of travellers used public transport?	25%
In 2003, what percentage of travellers used public transport?	7.6%
In what year was the public transport system privatised?	1999
What was the target percentage of public transport mode share that was set by the state government in 2006?	20%
Who manages the water storage and supply for Melbourne?	Melbourne Water
Who owns Melbourne Water?	the Victorian Government
Which is Melbourne's largest dam?	Thomson River Dam
Where is the Thomson River Dam located?	Victorian Alps
How much of Melbourne's water capacity is the Thomson River Dam capable of holding?	60%
Melbourne experienced rapid growth after 1851 due to the discovery of what?	gold
Melbourne and which other regional cities became the wealthiest cities in the world during the Gold Rush era?	Ballarat and Geelong
How much did Melbourne's population increase within months of the gold rush?	three-quarters, from 25,000 to 40,000 inhabitants
By what year had Melbourne overtaken Sydney as Australia's most populous city?	1865
Where was the first federal parliament convened in 1901?	Royal Exhibition Building
The Governor-General of Australia resided at the Government House in Melbourne until what year?	1930
Where was the federal parliament moved after 1927?	Canberra
On what date was the first federal parliament convened?	9 May 1901
During which years did Melbourne experience an economic downturn?	1989 to 1992
The Australian Grand Prix moved to Melbourne from where?	Adelaide
Which city is the center of Australia's "rust belt"?	Melbourne
Which government in 1992 began a campaign to revive the economy?	Kennett
Which body of water and township of the same name marks the border between Melbourne and Geelong?	Little River
Little River marks the boundary between Melbourne and which city?	Geelong
Little River marks the boundary between Geelong and which other city?	Melbourne
Has Melbourne's air quality improved or declined since the 1980s?	improved significantly
What factors deplete Melbourne water supplies?	Drought in Victoria, low rainfalls and high temperatures
Which government announced a $3.1 billion Wonthaggi desalination plant in June 2007?	Bracks Government
How many litres of water will the Wonthaggi desalination plant be capbale of treating per year?	150 billion litres
Which factors make Melbourne one of the moust vibrant destinations in Australia?	The climate, waterfront location and nightlife
For how many years in a row has Melbourne held the top position in a survey of the world's most liveable cities?	five
How many international overnight visitors came to Melbourne during the year ending March 2014?	just under two million
How many domestic overnight visitors came to Melbourne during the year ending March 2014?	57.7 million
What is Australia's largest free community festival?	Moomba
What was the world's first feature film?	The Story of the Kelly Gang
In what city was the world's first feature film shot in 1906?	Melbourne
Why were films banned by Victorian politicans in 1912?	perceived promotion of crime
What year were bushranger films banned by Victorian politicians?	1912
In what "lull" year was On the Beach filmed?	1959
What are the most common type of housing outside inner city Melbourne?	Free standing dwellings with relatively large gardens
Is residential architecture in Melbourne defined by a single architectural style or an eclectic mix of buildings?	single architectural style
Are townhouses, condominiums, and apartment buildings found more prevalent in the metropolitan area or outside the city?	metropolitan area (particularly in areas of urban sprawl)
In which areas does Melbourne's diversified economy have strengths?	finance, manufacturing, research, IT, education, logistics, transportation and tourism
Which city is home to Australia's largest and busiest seaport?	Melbourne
Which company is the world's largest mining company?	BHP Billiton
Which city is home to Australia's second busiest airport?	Melbourne
How much money in trade does Australia's largest and busiest seaport handle?	$75 billion
Which city has the largest Greek-speaking population outside of Europe?	Melbourne
What is the most common surname in Melbourne's phone book?	Smith
Which city in Greece is Melbourne's sister city?	Thessaloniki
What is the secondmost common surname in Melbourne's phone book?	Nguyen
Which Melbourne based university has campuses in Malaysia?	Swinburne University
Which university is the second oldest in Australia?	The University of Melbourne
Which Melbourne based college has a research centre in Prato, Italy?	Monash
What is the Group of Eight?	a coalition of leading Australian tertiary institutions offering comprehensive and leading education
What are examples of Youth radio stations?	ABC Triple J and youth run SYN
Which music stations strive to play under represented music?	Triple J, and similarly PBS and Triple R
Which radio station caters for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender audiences?	JOY 94.9
Which station caters to sports fans and enthusiasts?	SEN 1116
3MBS and ABC Classic FM play what type of music?	classical
What are the origins of Melbourne's tram network?	the city's 1880s land boom
How many passenger trips were made by tram in Melbourne between 2013-2014?	176.9 million
How many tram stops are on Melbourne's tram network?	1,763
How many routes does Melbourne's bus network consist of?	almost 300
How many passenger trips were recorded on Melbourne's buses in 2013-2014	127.6 million
When was John born?	24 December 1166
Who did Henry marry?	Eleanor of Aquitaine
Who was Henry's ally?	Holy Roman Emperor
Who backed John's elder brothers?	Eleanor
Where did Henry travel to?	Paris
Who returned to Brittany?	Geoffrey
Who was imprisoned?	Eleanor
When did Richard die?	6 April 1199
Who was the sole surviving son?	John
Where was John crowned?	Westminster
Whose army pressed up the Loire valley?	Arthur
When did Philip summon John to attend court?	1202
What was John summoned as?	Count of Poitou
What principle did John's predecessors use?	vis et voluntas
What quality did Henry II and Richard possess?	divine majesty
What century were there contrary opinions expressed about the nature of kingship?	12th century
What did John suffer from?	royal schizophrenia
What happened at the start of John's reign?	sudden change in prices
How long did the inflationary pressure continue?	13th century
When did John address problems with the English currency?	1204 and 1205
How did he address the problems with the English currency?	carrying out a radical overhaul of the coinage
Who was Henry's favorite child?	John
When was John appointed the Lord of Ireland?	1177
When did Richard I become king?	1189
Who unsuccessfully attempted a rebellion against Richard's royal administrators?	John
Who was John's second wife?	Isabella of Angoulême
 Nicholas Vincent was described as what?	downright mean
When did John have conjugal relationships with Isabella?	1207 and 1215
How many children did John and Isabella have?	five children
When did war with France break out?	1202
When was John excommunicated?	1209
When was the Magna Carta peace treaty agreed upon?	1215
Who won victory over Louis and the rebel barons?	Henry III
What prevented the departure of the planned 1205 expedition?	Baronial unrest in England
When did Poitou depart?	1206
Why did John divert south?	to counter a threat to Gascony from Alfonso VIII of Castile
Why did Philip move south?	to meet John
When was Henry crowned King of England?	1170
What was Henry promised as part of his future inheritance?	Normandy and Anjou
Who became the Duke of Brittany?	Geoffrey
What was John's nickname?	Lackland
How tall was John?	5 ft 5 in
What did John build up?	travelling library of books
Who became a connoisseur of jewels?	John
What did John do in fits of rage?	biting and gnawing his fingers
When did Hubert Walter die?	13 July 1205
What lead to the king's excommunication?	a dispute with Pope Innocent III
Who said Pope Innocent was an ambitious and aggressive religious leader?	historian Ralph Turner
When did John make his first visit to Ireland?	1185
How many knights accompanied John to Ireland?	300
How did John offend the local Irish rulers?	making fun of their unfashionable long beards
Who did Henry fight a short war with in 1183?	Richard
How did Henry the Young King die?	dysentery
Who became the Duke of Aquitaine in place of Richard?	John
When did the war end?	1184
When were the papal terms for submission accepted?	May 1213
How many marks did John surrender?	1,000
Where was the agreement formalised?	Bulla Aurea
Who did John explore an alliance with?	French king Philip II
What did John do when Richard did not return from his crusade?	assert that his brother was dead
Who captured Richard?	Duke of Austria
When did the king return to England?	1194
Who refused to work with Puiset?	Longchamp
When was Longchamp isolated in the Tower of London?	October 1191
Where did Walter of Coutances return to?	England
Where did the rebel barons congregate?	Northampton
Who was the rebel baron leader?	Robert fitz Walter
What did John instruct Langton to do?	organise peace talks with the rebel barons
How long did the new peace last?	two years
When was John's decision to marry Isabella?	August 1200
John acquired key land between Poitou and where?	Gascony
John moved south into where?	France
Who renewed the anti-French alliances?	Baldwin IX of Flanders and Renaud of Boulogne
When was the Treaty of Le Goulet negotiated?	May 1200
What nickname did John's policy earn him?	John Softsword
The rebel barons invited who to lead them?	French prince Louis
Who was Henry II's granddaughter?	Blanche of Castile
What did John do once he contained Alexander in Scotland?	he marched south to deal with the challenge of the coming invasion
Who did John attempt to convince?	Pope Innocent III
Where was Arthur imprisoned?	Falaise
Who was kept imprisoned by John for many years?	Eleanor
What victory strengthened John's position?	Mirebeau
Who deserted John in favor of Philip?	William de Roches
How was John's financial situation?	tenuous
Who was declared the protector of Henry III after John's death?	William Marshal
Who gave up their claim to the English throne?	Louis
What agreement failed?	Magna Carta
Until when did Henry III continue his attempts to reclaim Normandy?	1259
What was one of John's principal challenges?	acquiring the large sums of money needed
When did Richard sell many royal properties?	1189
Where did John derive income from?	fines, court fees and the sale of charters and other privileges
What was of particular importance to John?	administration of justice
When was the system of coroners first introduced?	1194
Why was John motivated?	potential of the royal legal process to raise fees
When did new interpretations of John's reign begin to emerge?	1940s
Who wrote an essay in 1945 that proposed a "new approach?"	Vivian Galbraith
Who suggested that Ireland was less stable by 1216 than previously supposed?	Lewis Warren
John was deeply suspicious of who?	the barons
What famous knight was subjected to John's malevolentia?	William Marshal
How many marks did De Braose refuse to pay?	40,000
When did De Braose die?	1211
Who did Henry II express his fury and ill-will towards?	Thomas Becket
What was exacerbated by the tradition of Angevin royal ira et malevolentia?	the king to rely on his own men at the expense of the barons
John had to additional ability to do what?	cripple his vassals
John spent much of 1205 doing what?	securing England
When did John recreate a version of Henry II's Assize of Arms?	1181
How many knights out of ten would be mobilised?	one
John focused on trying to retake what?	Normandy
John did not regard the loss of Duchy as a permanent shift in what?	Capetian power
What was John's preferred plan?	use Poitou as a base of operations
John remained what throughout his reign?	Lord of Ireland
When did the king cross into Ireland with a large army?	1210
During Richard's rule, what did John successfully do?	increased the size of his lands in Ireland
When was the political relationship between England and Scotland disputed?	late 12th and early 13th centuries
Who forced William the Lion to swear fealty to him?	Henry II
What did John force William to sign?	Treaty of Norham
John treated the interdict as what?	the equivalent of a papal declaration of war
John seized the lands of who?	those clergy unwilling to conduct services
When did Innocent excommunicate the king?	November 1209
How many marks did the church lose?	100,000
John felt Langton was overly influenced by what?	the Capetian court in Paris
Who was barred Langton from entering England?	England
when did Innocent place an interdict on England?	March 1208
John besieged what castle?	Roche-au-Moine
Who refused to advance with the king?	The local Angevin nobles
Who won the battle of Bouvines?	Philip
How long was the truce intended to last for?	six years
When did John begin his final campaign to reclaim Normandy?	1214
Who did John build alliances with?	Emperor Otto, Renaud of Boulogne and Count Ferdinand of Flanders
When did John leave for Poitou?	February 1214
Who made the first move in the war?	rebels
What did the rebels seize?	Rochester Castle
Who lead the rebellion against the 1211 settlement?	Llywelyn the Great
What was John's strategy?	isolate the rebel barons in London
Who suspected that the proposed baronial council would be unacceptable?	rebel barons
John appealed to who for help?	Innocent
The failure of the agreement lead to what?	First Barons' War
What did the king lose on his way to the west?	significant part of his baggage
When did John face a stalemate?	October 1216
When were the Crown Jewels lost?	as he crossed one of the tidal estuaries
When did John begin a fresh, vigorous attack?	September 1216
Where did John march from?	Cotswolds
Where did John contract dysentery?	King's Lynn
Who invaded northern England?	Alexander II
Which historians were favourably inclined towards the king?	Tudor historians
What praised John's "great renown" as a king?	John Speed's Historie of Great Britaine
When did political and religious changes alter the attitude of historians towards John?	16th century
What heavily influenced nineteenth-century fictional depictions of John?	Ivanhoe
Who played John in 1938?	Claude Rains
Who was John depicted alongside?	Robin Hood
Which historians wrote early in John's life?	Richard of Devizes, William of Newburgh, Roger of Hoveden and Ralph de Diceto
How did historians feel about John's behavior under Richard's rule?	unsympathetic
John attempted conversion of what in exchange for military aid?	Islam
When did popular representations of John begin to emerge?	Tudor period
What was Anthony Munday's play?	The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington
In The Troublesome Reign of King John, John portrayed the king as what?	proto-Protestant martyr
Who was critical of John's performance as king?	Contemporary chroniclers
What historian summarised the contemporary historical opinion of John's positive qualities?	Jim Bradbury
John remains a recurring character within what culture?	Western
Henry II wanted to secure the southern borders of what?	Aquitaine
Who was Alais?	the daughter and heiress of Humbert III of Savoy
What castles did Henry II transfer into John's name?	Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau
Richard withdrew what towards John?	malevolentia
Who was the Count of Mortain?	John
When did John successfully conduct a sudden attack and siege of Evreux castle?	1195
Who was Isabella engaged to?	Hugh of Lusignan
Hugh of Lusignan was an important member of what?	a key Poitou noble family
John treated Hugh with what?	contempt
What did John attempt to relieve in late 1203?	Château Gaillard
Who blocked John's relief operation?	Philip's forces
When did Gaillard fall?	March 1204
What was John's only remaining possession on the Continent?	Duchy of Aquitaine
How many times did John levi scutage payments?	eleven
When did John initiate a new round of appointments?	1194
Who were subject to huge taxes?	The Jews
When did John create a new tax on income and movable goods?	1207
Many of John's mistresses were what?	married noblewomen
How many children did John have with mistresses during his first marriage?	five
How many of John's known illegitimate children were born after he remarried?	None
How many galleys were available by the end of 1204?	50
54 vessels were built between what years?	1209 and 1212
Who was appointed "keeper of the galleys?"	William of Wrotham
Where did John visit every year between 1204 and 1211?	Wales
Who did John marry Joan to?	Llywelyn the Great
What did John use to increase his own territory and power?	marcher lords and the native Welsh
When did a royal expedition to enforce agreements occur?	1211
Where were Monastic communities allowed to celebrate Mass in private?	1209
When was the Holy Viaticum for the dying authorised?	1212
What threat was John worried about?	French invasion
Where did John hold a council in January 1215?	London
Where did John recruit mercenary forces from?	Poitou
John announced his intent to become what?	a crusader
When did John retake Rochester Castle?	November
John marched against who in January 1216?	Alexander II of Scotland
John sent William Longespee to retake what?	north side of London and East Anglia
When did John die?	18 October
When was a new sarcophagus made for him?	1232
Where was John buried?	Worcester Cathedral
Who blamed John's family background for his cruel personality?	James Ramsay
What documents trace a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England?	Domesday Book and Magna Carta
What period in the 19th century were historians more inclined to draw on the judgements of the chroniclers?	Victorian
John lost the duchy of Normandy to who?	King Philip II of France
What led to the sealing of the Magna Carta?	baronial revolt
The collapse of the Angevin Empire contributed to the growth in power of what dynasty?	Capetian
Where did Eleanor leave to?	Poitiers
John was taught by who?	Ranulph Glanville
John was assigned what whilst he was at Fontevrault?	magister
John spent the conflict traveling alongside who?	his father
When did Henry II appropriate the estates of the late Earl of Cornwall?	1175
Who dismissed William FitzAldelm as the Lord of Ireland?	Henry
Who took over as joint justiciar with Puiset after Mandeville died?	Longchamp
Who convinced Richard to allow John to join into England?	Eleanor
When did Richard become king?	September 1189
Warfare in Normandy was shaped by what?	defensive potential of castles
What were mercenary forces called?	Brabançons
What castle was built at a strategic point?	Château Gaillard
Who accompanied John?	William de Roches
Why was Philip forced to withdraw in the east?	southern flank weakening
Who was caught by surprised?	Arthur
What did John inherit in England?	sophisticated system of administration
Who dealt with income and expenditure?	the Treasury and the Exchequer
John followed in the tradition of who?	Henry I and Henry II
John's royal household was based around what?	several groups of followers
Who were the curia regis?	senior officials and agents of the king
The mercenary leaders became infamous in England for what?	their uncivilised behaviour
Historians suspected that John was at best what?	impious
Who was later declared a saint?	Hugh of Lincoln
Many records showed what?	John's offerings to the poor
What did John do during the truce of 1206-1208?	focused on building up his financial and military resources
By 1212, John had successfully concluded alliances  with who?	Otto IV
John launched his new fleet to attach the French where?	the harbour of Damme
Who did John want to be appointed Archbishop of Canterbury?	John de Gray
Who did Innocent disavow?	Reginald and John de Gray
Who did John force to change their support to John de Gray?	Canterbury chapter
Where did many of the disaffected barons come from?	north of England
Who was appointed justiciar?	Peter des Roches
What was the final straw that precipitated the baronial uprising during John's final years as king?	The failure of John's French military campaign
When did John meet the rebel leaders at Runnymede?	15 June 1215
A council of how many barons was created to monitor John's future adherence to the charter?	twenty-five
The peace agreement was renamed what?	Magna Carta
When did Prince Louis int to land in the south of England?	May 1216
Why did John hesitate to attack Louis?	due to the risks of open battle
When did the rebels regain the south-east of England?	end of the summer
When was Isabel released from imprisonment?	1214
Who did Joan marry to become queen consort?	Alexander II of Scotland
How many legitimate children did John have?	five
Who was John's eldest son?	Henry III
What biographers argue that John was an unsuccessful monarch?	Ralph Turner and Lewis Warren
Modern historians have been over lenient towards what?	John's numerous faults
John Gillingham considers John what?	a less effective general
What hindered the competetive ability of Apple when it was introduced?	expensive
Where did Macintosh initially find success in the market?	education and desktop publishing
Which platform, when improved in the 1990's, took market share from Macintosh?	Wintel
What type of advantage did Intel's Pentium over Macintosh systems in the 1990's?	performance
Who became the top PC manufacturer in 1994, leaving Apple in 3rd place?	Compaq
How much RAM did the first Maciuntosh board have?	64 kilobytes (kB)
Whose idea was it to run Apple Lisa's graphical programs on the Macintosh?	Bud Tribble, a member of the Mac team
What did Tribble first incorporate into the Mac?	Lisa's Motorola 68000 microprocessor
Which design feature did Smith eventually use to make production of a newly designed board more cost-efficient?	fewer RAM chips than the Lisa
What feature was missing from the final Mac design produced by Smith?	memory slots
How much did Apple spend to advertise in a special post-election issue of Newsweek?	$2.5 million
What was the name of the big promotion Apple ran in the special edition of Newsweek?	"Test Drive a Macintosh"
What did Apple allow potential buyers to take home and try for 24 hours?	a Macintosh
How were many computers returned during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion that made them unsellable?	a bad condition
Who was the CEO of Apple during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion?	John Sculley
What was the longest-lived Macintosh in Apple's history while it was in production?	The Mac Plus
How long did the Mac Plus remain in production, unchanged?	just over four years and ten months
In 1986, what did Apple introduce to allow developers to create software for Macintosh on Macintosh?	Macintosh Programmer's Workshop
What did Apple's HyerCard and MultiFinder add to the Macintosh?	cooperative multitasking
After their unveiling in 1987, what did Apple begin bundling with every Macintosh?	HyperCard and MultiFinder
What Macintosh first included an on-board MMU?	the Macintosh IIx
What was the first Mac to be "32-bit clean"?	the Macintosh IIci
What was the starting price of the Macintosh llfx when it was unveiled?	US$9,900
How many Apple II CPUS's did the new Macintosh llfx include?	two
How fast was the processor on the new Macintosh llfx?	40 MHz
Which Mac is known for improving the handling of color graphics?	Mac OS, System 7
Who did Apple pay expensive consulting fees to before doing in-house work?	Frogdesign
What was established for bringing Apple's design work in-house?	the Apple Industrial Design Group
Who was responsible for crafting a new look for all Apple products?	Apple Industrial Design Group
How did the Mac System 7 improve multitasking?	co-operative multitasking
Who returned to Apple in 1997?	Steve Jobs
What did Steve Jobs order the OS version 7.7 to be branded as?	Mac OS 8
What did the branding of the Mac OS 8 effectively end?	the clone line
What effect did Mac's decision to brand the Mac OS8 have on companies such as Motorola?	significant financial losses
How much money did Umax lose when it exited the low-end Mac clone market?	USD$36 million
What did dated architecture on the Mac OS line make necessary?	replacement
What programming language was the Mac OS initially developed in?	Pascal
What language replaced Pascal for System 7?	C++
What was the fuly overhauled successor to Mac OS 9?	Mac OS X
Upon release, what interface allowed Mac users to sample Apple's new operating system and provide feedback for the actual release?	Aqua
What is the only mainstream computer platform to successfully transition to a new CPU architecture?	Macintosh
What is the standard amount of RAM included with almost all current Mac models?	8 GB
Which MacBook Pro port can transfer data at speeds up to 10 gigabits per second?	Thunderbolt
When was the iMac G5 released?	October 2005
Which interface did Apple introduce that was capable of being operated by an Apple Remote or keyboard for accessing media stored on the computer?	Front Row
What is the standard amount of RAM shipped with most Mac models?	8 GB
What processors are used by the current Mac product family?	Intel x86-64
How many data transfer ports are included in most current Macs?	two
According to Apple, how fast can the Thunderbolt port transfer data?	up to 10 gigabits per second.
Which technique was once used to boot an alternate operating system than Mac OS?	boot into Mac OS and then to hand over control to a Mac OS-based bootloader application
What was introduced that made using Mac OS alternative operating systems easier?	Open Firmware-based PCI Macs
What were Open Firmware-based PCI Macs used as a convenience because of?	bugs in the firmware implementation
Where does Mac hardware boot directly to in all Intel-based Macs?	EFI
Where does Mac harware boot directly to in most PowerPC-based Macs?	Open Firmware
Who was brought in to shape the marketing of Macintosh in 1982?	Regis McKenna
What role did Andy Cunningham and Jane Anderson have in the Macintosh launch plan?	primary authors
Who introduced the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept to Apple?	John Sculley
Which company first used the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept?	Pepsi
What did the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept create around a product?	a mystique
Who initiated a successful price war among PC manufacturers in 1994?	Compaq
Who did Compaq overtake in the price war of 1994?	IBM
What happened to Apple's market share with the release of Windows 95?	struggled
What unified Microsoft's MS-DOS and Windows products?	Windows 95
What significantly enhanced the multimedia capability of IBM PC compatible computers?	Windows 95
What percent of the desktop share in the U.S. did Apple have in 2003?	2.06
Who are IDC and Gartner?	research firms
What was Apple's market share in the U.S. by 2006?	6.1 percent
What percentage of unit sale increase did Apple see from 2005 to 2006?	30
What was the estimated installed base of Mac computers in 2009?	16%
When was the Macintosh SE released at the same time as?	the Macintosh II
What was the first compact Mac with a 20 MB internal hard drive and an expansion slot?	The Macintosh SE
What was the starting price of the Macintosh SE?	$2900
What did the location of the SE's expansion slot potentially expose an upgrader to?	high voltage
Who did Apple suggest users go to for performing updates on their SE's?	an authorized Apple dealer
What is partially credited for the significant boost in sales of Macs in recent years?	the success of the iPod and the iPhone
What allows users to easily sync data between an iPhone and a Mac?	iCloud cloud service
What consumer trend has hurt many personal computer manufacturers?	smartphones and tablet computers
Which smartphone has hurt personal computer manufacterers the most?	Apple's own iPhone
What are the top two computing devices consumers are choosing?	iPhone and iPad
What did Apple introduce in 1990 to combat competition from smartphones?	relatively inexpensive Macs
What was the less expensive version of the Macintosh SE that was offered until 2001?	The Macintosh Classic
Which Macintosh had a distinctive "pizza box" case?	LC
How many expansion slots did the Macintosh IIsi have?	only one
How did Apple's profit margin on the lower cost Mac's compare to the profit margin onearlier models?	considerably lower
When did Apple begin to favor aluminum in their design?	2006
Which Mac used aluminum in it's construction?	MacBook Pro
Which material did Apple add with the 2008 unibody MacBrook Pro?	Glass
Are aluminum and glass considered to be environmentally friendly or environmentally harmful?	environmentally friendly
What has Chief Designer Jonathan Ive been able to eliminate in Mac notebooks?	replaceable batteries
Who began the Macintosh project in 1979?	Jef Raskin
What was Jef Raskin's profession?	an Apple employee
What did Jef Raskin envision for a computer to be for an average consumer?	easy-to-use, low-cost
Why was the spelling of McIntosh changed to Macintosh?	for legal reasons
What did McIntosh Laboratory, Inc. manufacture?	audio equipment
Who discussed rumors of a mysterious "MacIntosh" project in 1983?	John Dvorak
Where was the Macintosh 128K manufactured?	Apple factory in Fremont, California
How much did the television commercial "1984" cost?	US$1.5 million
What did the television commercial "1984" introduce?	Macintosh 128K
What did Regis McKenna call the "1984" ad that was aired during the Super Bowl?	"more successful than the Mac itself."
When was the Macintosh branded as Mac?	1997
Who designed, develped, and marketed the Mac computers?	Apple Inc.
What did Steve Jobs introduce on January 24, 1984?	original Macintosh computer
What interface type did the original Macintosh include?	integral graphical user
When did Apple begin phasing out Macintosh in favor of "Mac"?	Since 1998
When was the activity of desktop publishing first used?	1985
What company was desktop publishing unique to at it's beginning?	Macintosh
What three things were combined to develop desktop publishing?	Mac, Apple's LaserWriter printer, and Mac-specific software like Boston Software's MacPublisher
What did desktop publishing enable users to do?	design, preview, and print page layouts complete with text and graphics
What applications strengthened Mac's position as a graphics computer?	Macromedia FreeHand, QuarkXPress, and Adobe's Photoshop and Illustrator
What year was Raskin hired by Apple?	September 1979
Who did Raskin immediately hire to help him on the Apple project in 1979?	his long-time colleague, Brian Howard
Who comprised the original Mac team besides Raskin?	Howard, Joanna Hoffman, Burrell Smith, and Bud Tribble
Who eventually lead the project on the Mac team?	Steve Jobs
How many Macs did Apple sell worldwide during the 2009 holiday season?	3.36 million
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2010?	7.3%
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2011?	9.3%
What ranking was Apple in the PC global market share during 2014?	about 6%
Who outperformed Apple in the 2014 PC global market share?	Lenovo, HP, Dell and Acer
In 1987, what did Apple spin off its software business as?	Claris
Which series of applications was Claris responsible for inventing?	"Pro" series
What did Claris rename the Informix Wingz spreadsheet program?	Claris Resolve
What was ClarisWorks renamed beginning with version 5.0?	AppleWorks
When was ClarisWorks reincorporated back into Apple?	1998
What two applications came bundled with Macs 2 days after "1984" was aired?	MacWrite and MacPaint
Why did many software developers choose not to redesign the Mac operating system and rewrite the programming code?	This was a time-consuming task
What year did Microsoft's MultiPlan migrate over from MS-DOS?	1984
What year was Apple's Macintosh Office suite introduced?	1985
What did Apple's "Lemmings" ad, which introduced Macintosh Office, do that made the ad unsuccessful?	insulting its own potential customers
According to NPD, who has generally dominated the premium PC market?	Apple
What was Macintosh ranked on the "list of intended brands for desktop purchases" for the 2011 holiday season?	third
Who did Macintosh displace from 2nd place on the 2012 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?	Hewlett Packard
Who did Macintosh displace from 1st place on the 2013 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?	Dell
Which of Apple's products is focused on the ultraportable niche of PC's?	MacBooks
What part of the Mac's could not be expanded easily in 1984?	memory
What did Mac's lack in 1984 and have no means to easily attach?	a hard disk drive
What did some small companies suggest Mac's 16 memory chips be replaced with?	larger-capacity chips
How much more memory did Apple's Macintosh 512K, introduced in 1984, have than the original?	quadruple
What was replaced in the upgrade that was offered for 128k Macs?	the logic board
On what grounds did Apple sue Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard in 1988?	they infringed Apple's copyrighted GUI
How was the lawsuit decided for Apple vs. Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard?	against Apple
How long did the FSF boycott GNU software for the Macintosh platform?	seven years
What are some of the issues Apple cited in the lawsuit against Microsoft and HP?	the use of rectangular, overlapping, and resizable windows
What did the FSF feel that Apple was trying to monopolize on?	GUIs in general
What did Apple's creation of too many similar models do to potential buyers?	confused potential buyers
What was the hardware manufactured by third parties for Apple's System 7 known as?	Macintosh clones
What did the Macintosh clones provide for consumers?	cheaper hardware
What did Macintosh clones succeed in increasing for Macintosh?	market share
Who did the Macintosh clones hurt financially?	Apple
When did Apple begin shipping computers with CD-RW drives?	early 2001
Who admitted that Apple was late to the party with writable CD technology?	Steve Jobs
What did Apple begin offering as standard features meant for playing DVD's?	DVD-ROM and DVD-RAM drives
Which Apple campaign did some people feel encouraged media piracy?	"Rip, Mix, Burn"
What is the name of one of Apple's unsuccessful products?	Power Mac G4 Cube
What was the name of Apple's first portable computer?	Macintosh Portable
When was the Macintosh Portable first released?	1989
What replaced the Macintosh Portable in 1991?	the PowerBook line
What was the 1993 PowerBook 165c Apple's first portable computer to feature?	a color screen
Which generation of PowerBooks introduced trackpads?	second
What was Apple's Mac OS X based on?	Darwin and NEXTSTEP
Who did Apple make Maverick free to?	everyone running Snow Leopard or later
What computers is Maverick compatible with?	most Macs from 2007 and later
What brought better multi display support to Mac?	Mavericks
When was Mavericks introduced?	2013
What desktop did Apple release after the discontinued Power Macintosh G3?	Power Mac G4 Cube
Why were sales of the Power Mac G4 Cube slow?	too expensive
What did the Power Mac G4 have trouble overcoming after they dropped their price and upgraded their hardware?	earlier perception
When was the Power Mac G4 discontinued?	July 2001
How did the actual sales of the G4's compare to the sales expectations?	one third of expectations
Historically, what is near-absent in Mac OS X compared to Microsoft Windows?	malware and spyware
When did Mac OS X experience a large increase in malware attacks?	early 2011
How was Mac's malware seen by many Mac users in 2011?	an increasing problem
How many users were affected by the increase in malware?	100,000
What were Apple support staff initially instructed not to assist with concerning malware?	the removal
What was the market share of OS X in North America by March 2011?	slightly over 14%
Being positioned as a higher end PC, what is it misleading to compare the Mac to?	a budget PC
Apple has remained profitable since what time?	Steve Jobs' return
According to market research, who does Apple draw it's customer base from?	a higher-income demographic
Whose return to Apple resulted in the company's reorganization?	Steve Jobs
Who refused to lower the profit margins on Mac computers in 1989?	Jean-Louis Gassée
What problem rocked the PC industry in 1989?	a component shortage
What did the component shortage of 1989 force Allan Loren to do with Macs?	cut prices
Who was Allan Loren?	Apple USA head
When was Microsoft Windows 3.0 released?	May 1990
What did Apple begin to eliminate in 2002?	CRT displays
Why was the new iMac G4 considerably more expensive than the G3?	higher cost of the LCD technology
Who did Apple create the more affordable eMac in April 2002 for?	the education market
What was the main problem with the eMac's CRT?	relatively bulky and somewhat outdated
After Apple's failed desktop sales, what products drove their sales growth?	the iPod portable music player and iTunes music download service
In 2009, how many Macs sold were laptops?	seven out of ten
What has helped Macs more directly compete with Windows on price and performance?	The use of Intel microprocessors
In 2010, what did Apple receive before other PC manufacturers?	Intel's latest CPUs
What are the top-selling form factors of the Mac platform today?	MacBooks
What is the name of the most inexpensive Mac offered?	Mac Mini
What did Apple consolidate in 1998?	its multiple consumer-level desktop models
What all-in-one product was created in 1998 through Apple's consolidations?	iMac G3
What did the iMac G3 do to the Mac reputation?	revitalized the brand
When was Mac's Xserve server discontinued?	2011
What took the place of Mac's Xserve server?	Mac Mini and Mac Pro
Why did Raskin leave the Apple team in 1981?	over a personality conflict with Jobs
According to Andy Hertzfeld, whose idea is the final Mac design closer to?	Jobs
What did Steve Jobs offer Xerox to visit and see their latest technology?	Apple stock options
Whose technology influenced the user interfaces of the Lisa and Macintosh?	Xerox PARC
What caused Steve Jobs to resign from Apple in 1985?	an internal power struggle
What did Jobs state that he expected Macintosh to become?	the third industry standard
How many applications were widely available during Macintosh's introduction?	Only about ten
How many companies did Apple promise were develping products for the new computer?	79
How many Macintoshes had Apple sold after one year?	280,000
How many databases did Apple have available the first year?	two
Whose technology did Apple take advantage of when introducing the Macintosh II?	Motorola
What powered the Macintosh II?	a 16 MHz Motorola 68020 processor
How much did the Macintosh II sell for?	$5500
What marked the start of a new direction for Macintosh?	The Macintosh II
What was the Macintosh II's new modular design similar to?	the IBM PC
When Microsfot Windows 3.0 was released, what was it commonly said to not be as good as?	Macintosh
Who was Microsoft Windows 3.0 commonly said to be good enough for?	the average user
What was responsible for the drop in Apple's margins in 1989?	a component shortage
Who made the decision in 1989 to cut prices on Mac computers?	Apple USA head Allan Loren
What was Microsoft Windows 3.0's performance comparable to?	Macintosh platform
What did Intel unsuccessfully try to push Apple to migrate to?	Intel chips
Which platform did Apple choose to use?	Motorola 68040
Who first rolled out Pentium processors in 1993?	Intel
How far behind was Macintosh set back compared to the new IBM compatibles?	a generation
When did Apple abandon Motorola CPU's?	1994
What color was Apples new iMac, which was introduced in 1998?	Bondi blue
What did the iMac replace most of Apple's standard connections with?	two USB ports
What did the iMac replace the floppy disk drive with?	a CD-ROM drive
What did the iMac need to use in order to write CDs or other media?	external third-party hardware
How many iMac units sold in the first 139 days?	800,000
When did Apple discontinue the use of PowerPC microprocessors?	2006
Who announced the capability to run Windows XP on an Intel-based Mac in 2006?	a group of hackers
How did hackers release their software for running Windows on Macs?	for download on their website
When did Apple announce software that would allow Windows XP to be run on Intel-based Macs?	April 5, 2006
What is the name of the software that Apple introduced for running Windows XP?	Boot Camp
Who was initially reluctant to embrace mice with multiple buttons and scroll wheels?	Apple
What was the name of the 1st multiple button mouse introduced by Apple?	Mighty Mouse
How many buttons did the Mighty Mouse have?	four
What did Apple introduce to take the place of a physical scroll wheel in 2009?	multi-touch gesture recognition
What Apple mouse 1st used multi-touch gesture recognition?	Magic Mouse
What type of software began to emerge following the release of Intel-based Macs?	third-party platform virtualization
At what speed do programs such as VirtualBox allow Microsoft Windows to run on Macs?	at near native speed
What is possible to run by using Boot camp, even though it is not condoned by Apple?	the Linux operating system
What do Macs lack that makes them unable to run many legacy PC operating systems?	the A20 gate
What has been the best-selling ultra-portable over Windows Ultrabooks in the U.S.?	MacBook Air
What earned the title as best all-around subnotebook/ultraportable?	MacBook Air
What did the Air receive before other PC manufacturers?	Intel's latest CPUs
Through 7/1/13, what percentage of all Ultrabook sales in the U.S. were MacBook Airs?	56
When was the competetive pricing of MacBooks especially effective?	when rivals charged more for seemingly equivalent Ultrabooks
What is another term for anti-aircraft warfare?	counter-air defence
NATO defines anti-aircraft warfare as measures to reduce what?	the effectiveness of hostile air action
Barrage balloons are an example of what type of weapons system?	passive measures
What is the primary effort been for most countries when it comes to anti-aircraft warfare?	homeland defence
What does NATO ascribe naval air defence as?	anti-aircraft warfare
What is the Russian term for air defence?	Protivovozdushnaya oborona
What are the AA systems called in Russian?	zenitnye
How is the Russian term for air defence abbreviated?	PVO
What is air defence called in French?	DCA
What is the generic term for an airplane or rocket in French?	aéronef
When were sensors initially developed?	during the First World War
Radar was supplemented by what in the 1980s?	optronics
What country created an integrated system for ADGB?	Britain
What did the integrated system for ADGB link?	the ground-based air defence of the army's AA Command
What agency stated that the arrangements were an air defence ground environment?	NATO
Which country had the most severe case?	Soviet Union
This separate service  was known as what in the Soviet Union?	Voyska PVO
What two systems did Voyska PVO have?	fighter aircraft and ground-based systems
What year did the PVO Strany become independent?	1954
What was the arm that was the Air Defence of the Ground Forces?	PVO SV
When did Serbian troops notice enemy aircraft approaching Kragujevac?	30 September 1915
How many bombs did the three aircraft drop on the city?	45
Which private shot down one aircraft with a cannon?	Radoje Ljutovac
What happened to the pilots that were in the aircraft shot down?	both pilots died
Which war was the cannon used in prior to this event?	First Balkan War in 1912
What was the problem with AA gunnery?	successfully aiming a shell to burst close to its target's future position
Different things could affect what with the shell?	predicted trajectory
What was updated on the gunsight as a target moved?	'off-set' angles for range and elevation
Where was the barrel pointed when the sights were on a target?	the target's future position
What two things figured the fuse length?	Range and height of the target
What showed that aircraft could be a significant contribution to the battlefield?	World War I
In addition to Zeppelins, what attacked London for four years with air attacks?	Gotha G.V bombers
The four year air attack was instrumental in Britain forming what?	an independent air force
The future of aircraft in war situations was important because of the growth in what two areas?	their range and weapon load
Where were most of the nations who had the strongest military after World War I?	Europe
How many different countries developed radar starting in the 1930s?	eight
Where was the Observer Corps based?	Britain
When was the Observer Corps formed?	1925
What did the Observer Corps observe and report on?	hostile aircraft flying over Britain
What was originally used to see hostile aircraft approaching?	radar
Who wanted the British to keep using machine guns in World War I?	RAF
The military was not allowed to use anything that was bigger than what?	.50-inch
What was determined to be the smallest effective round in 1935?	an impact fused 2 lb HE shell
What was lighter than the water-cooled pom-pom?	The air-cooled Bofors
What is the Kerrison Predictor's official name?	The Predictor AA No 3
What was under development in both the Soviet Union and Britain in the 1930s?	solid fuel rockets
Why was Britain mainly interested in solid fuel rockets?	for anti-aircraft fire
What were rockets called at this time?	unrotated projectiles
How big was the rocket that was introduced to handle dive bombing attacks?	2-inch
What size rocket was being developed at the end of the war?	3-inch
What did the British get a license to build?	the Bofors 40 mm
While light, the Bofors 40mm were powerful enough to take down what size aircraft?	aircraft of any size
What was produced to inspire people on the assembly line to work harder?	a movie
What was the movie made to inspire assembly line workers called?	The Gun
Who started making an unlicensed version of the 40mm at the beginning of the war?	Americans
What kind of aircraft is used to intercept and destroy other aircraft?	The interceptor aircraft
What particular aircraft did the interceptor target most?	bombers
When were interceptors like the F-102 Delta Dagger first built?	after the end of World War II
When were interceptors like the F-106 Delta Dart not being built anymore?	the late 1960s
The interceptors were no longer built because of the shift of the bombing role to what?	ICBMs
What is another possible weapon for anti-aircraft use?	the laser
When did personnel first start thinking about using lasers in combat?	the late 1960s
What laser can currently be used in the type of role that was first thought of in the late 1960s?	Tactical High Energy Laser
The use of lasers in anti-aircraft warfare is currently considered what?	experimental usefulness
When do some people believe that lasers can play a more prominent role in air defence?	in the next ten years
What is the air defence of a certain area called?	Area air defence
Armies as well as what group have operated area air defences?	Air Forces
What U.S. Air Forces operated area air defence?	CIM-10 Bomarc
What range do area defence systems have?	medium to long range
What was the objective of the MIM-104 Patriot Missile batteries during the first Gulf War?	to cover populated areas
Which country probably coined the term air defence?	Britain
What does ADGB stand for?	Air Defence of Great Britain
What year was the ADGB created?	1925
Who is probably the one who coined the term archie for anti-aircraft guns?	Amyas Borton
What George Robey line is believed to have started the archie nickname?	"Archibald, certainly not!"
What is the first purpose of air defence?	detect hostile aircraft
What is the second purpose of air defence?	destroy them
What is the critical issue in air defence?	to hit a target moving in three-dimensional space
Projectiles must either be guided to the target or aimed where?	at the predicted position of the target at the time the projectile reaches it
What two things must be considered in regards to the projectile and target?	speed and direction
What does NATO define as passive measures to protect people, buildings and equipment from air or missile attacks?	Passive air defence
Which group is heavily responsible for passive air defence?	ground forces
Passive air defence includes camouflage and what?	concealment
What was camouflaged during World War II?	important buildings
Some airfield runways were painted green during what war?	the Cold War
How many guns or missile launchers are typically in a battery?	2 to 12
In addition to guns or missile launchers, what else comprises the battery?	fire control elements
Where do batteries typically get deployed?	in a small area
Which missile batteries often have individual launchers several kilometres from one another?	SHORAD
Several dozen teams can deploy individually in small sections when what is handled by a specialist?	MANPADS
It was understood that ammunition needed to explode where?	in the air
In addition to high explosive, what else was used?	shrapnel
Airburst fuses could be which two things?	igniferious (based on a burning fuse) or mechanical (clockwork)
What were hydrogen filled balloons called?	Zeppelins
What was used as targets in training practices?	Smoke shells
What was the primary method for HAA fire?	aimed fire
Along with predicting the gun data from tracking the target, what else needed to be known about the target to enable the aimed fire?	its height
Another assumption was that the target would maintain a steady course along with what other two factors?	speed and height
Targets could be how many feet for the HAA to engage them?	24,000 feet
What kind of fuses were needed?	Mechanical
When were improvements developed for these guns?	throughout the inter-war period
What year was the M1 version approved?	1940
Only a few of the 105 mm static mounting AA guns were produced because work had started on which other gun?	90 mm AA gun
When did work begin on the 105 mm static mounting AA gun?	1924
What kind of guns did the United States end WW I with?	two 3-inch AA guns
Which country's air defence and aircraft has been under integrated command and control?	Soviet Union
What other group has also been under this integrated command and control?	NATO's Allied Command Europe
Who will deploy their own air defence if their is an air threat?	forces in the field
What can be deployed as an offensive measure to refuse airspace use to an opponent?	A surface-based air defence capability
What did the United States Army begin to develop after the first World War?	a dual-role (AA/ground) automatic 37 mm cannon
Who designed this cannon?	John M. Browning
How many rounds did this cannon fire per second?	125
What replaced the Browning 37nn because of jamming issues?	Bofors 40 mm
What other US group was interested in the Bofors?	US Navy
High altitude needs in Germany were going to be handled by what?	a 75 mm gun from Krupp
Who also collaborated in the design of the 75 mm gun?	Bofors
Because higher performance was needed, Krupp's workers designed what?	a new 88 mm design, the FlaK 36
Where was the first place the FlaK 36 was used?	Spain
What war was the FlaK first used in?	Spanish Civil War
What was one of the most often seen weapons that was used both on land and sea?	1940-origin Flakvierling quadruple-20 mm-gun antiaircraft weapon system
What weapons system did American troops use but received minute attention?	Allied smaller-calibre air-defence weapons systems
How many of the M2HB guns were mounted together on the M45 Quadmount weapons system?	four
This system was a direct answer to what?	the Flakvierling
The combat batteries of an Army AAA battalion were often spread how far apart from each other?	many kilometers
What acted as a physical obstacle to anti-aircraft defence?	barrage balloons
What were barrage balloons initially used as an obstacle to?	bomber aircraft over cities
How was a barrage balloon tethered to the ground?	steel cable
What did pilots have to do to avoid the barrage balloons?	fly at a higher altitude
What kind of success did barrage balloons have as far as bringing down aircraft?	minimal
What is an important number when it comes to guns engaging an aircraft?	The maximum distance
What can be used to determine the maximum distance for an AA gun?	only the ascending part of the trajectory
What is the term used to describe the height that a projectile would go to if it was fired vertically?	maximum ceiling
Few AA guns are able to fire which way?	vertically
The missile started being used more often instead of what weapon?	guns
Small missiles were designed that could be mounted on what?	armored cars and tank chassis
When did these missiles start to supplant gun-based SPAAG systems?	in the 1960s
What are man-portable missiles better known as?	MANPADs
When were MANPADs introduced?	the 1960s
Smaller weapons are able to be used because of their low cost as well as what other factor?	ability to quickly follow the target
Who designed the 40 mm autocannon?	Bofors of Sweden
When were the surface-to-air missile systems introduced?	1950s
Where were surface-to-air missiles first developed?	in Nazi Germany
How can land-based SAMs be deployed?	from fixed installations or mobile launchers
What kind of weapons can usually be found on smaller boats and ships?	machine-guns or fast cannons
These weapons can be deadly to aircraft that is low if it is linked to what?	a radar-directed fire-control system radar-controlled cannon for point defence
What type of ships are particularly well defended?	Carrier battle groups
Carrier battle groups can launch what to intercept incoming threats?	fighter jets
What type of weapon can be used against hovering helicopters?	Rocket-propelled grenades
What did some militia members in Somalia weld in the exhaust of the RPG tube to protect the shooter?	a steel plate
What were the Somalian militia members firing RPGs at?	US helicopters
An RPG fired at a steep angle has what reflecting off the ground?	the backblast
When an RPG is fired at a steep angle, who is in danger?	the user
What term is used to describe the altitude for a gun to shoot shells against a target that is moving?	"effective ceiling"
Who adopted the use of the term, effective ceiling?	The British
Along with other factors, how long must a target be engaged to have effective ceiling?	for 20 seconds
What affected the effective ceiling for heavy AA guns?	non-ballistic factors
What was the standard weapon until the 1950s?	guns firing ballistic munitions
After guns firing ballistic munitions lost their appeal, what weapon took their place?	guided missiles
Which range did not use guided missiles?	the very shortest ranges
Damaged aircraft can be out of action for days or what?	permanently
What is the largest calibre ground-based air defence guns?	at least 150 mm
When did the British see the need to add anti-aircraft capability?	8 July 1914
Where did the New York times report say towers with guns should go?	the coasts of the British Isles
What was built around naval installations?	complete circle of towers
Who manned AA guns and searchlights?	Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (RNVR)
Who used motorised two-gun sections?	Royal Garrison Artillery (RGA)
Who provided part of the air defence of the British Isles in WWI	Royal Navy
Who protected airfields in WWII?	RAF Regiment
The United States Air Force helped protect the UK during what 'war'?	Cold War
What year was ground-based air defence taken from RAF?	2004
What was disbanded in 1955?	British Army's Anti-Aircraft Command
What helped with better fuse setting?	range measurement
What was the first model of HRF (Height Range Finder) used by the British?	Barr & Stroud UB2
The HRF measured target distance and what else?	elevation angle
What was the HRF used with to set fuses?	Height/Fuse Indicator (HFI)
The fuse length could be set using height reported by whom?	HRF operator
What kind of guns started attracting attention?	balloon, or airship, guns
In addition to ammo proposals, what other need was articulated?	The need for some form of tracer or smoke trail
The impact and time types of what were analyzed?	Fuzing options
As of 1910, who had published info available for gun designs?	Krupp, Erhardt, Vickers Maxim, and Schneider
What gun made the scene in 1910?	French balloon gun
What two guns were propped up against a hillside to get the muzzles pointed up?	French 75 mm and Russian 76.2 mm
What anti-aircraft gun did the British Army begin to use?	13-pdr QF 6 cwt Mk III
What gun size was relined to take 13-pounder shells?	18-pdr guns
What was difficult to get set right on the new guns?	get their fuse setting correct
Where did most rounds shot at aircraft usually explode?	well below their targets
What treaty was supposed to stop Germany from having antiaircraft weapons?	Treaty of Versailles
When did covert antiaircraft training start in Germany?	in the late 1920s
When did the 10.5 centimeter FlaK 38 appear in Germany?	In the late 1930s
When did the design begin for the 12.8 centimeter FlaK?	1938
What did the FlaK 39 have?	220v 24 kW generators
What did the tachymetric devices do?	track targets and produce vertical and horizontal deflection angles
Which system had electrical tracking?	French Brocq
What gun was the French Brocq system used with?	75 mm
Which system used a pair of trackers?	British Wilson-Dalby gun director
Deflection settings were also called what?	aim-off
Poland and other European countries could not defend against what?	German attack
What battle marked the beginning of significant antiaircraft warfare?	Battle of Britain
What was under command of the Air Defence UK orgnisation?	Army's Anti-aircraft command
The Air Defence UK grew to have how many antiaircraft corps?	3
What was formed in 1941 to protect airfields?	RAF regiment
When was the successful test of the 3.6-inch HAA gun?	1918
When did the 3.7-inch HAA gun become preferred?	1928
What gun did the Royal Navy start using?	4.5-inch (114 mm) gun in a twin turret
How long of a running time did the Number 199 fuse have?	30-second running time
What was introduced in 1939?	Machine Fuse Setter
What was shown to be practically not possible during service trials?	ranging and tracking the new high-speed targets
How was target lead watched at short range?	by watching the tracers
Target area is relatively large at what range?	short range
At long range what, in theory, could be used to set ranging calculations?	slide rules
What small errors caused large errors in shell fall height and the time until exploding?	small errors in distance
In the 1920s, which company developed the automatic 20 mm?	Rheinmetall
Which Switzerland company obtained the patent for an automatic 20 mm gun during the first World War?	Oerlikon
Which company redesigned the rapid fire 2 cm FlaK 30?	Mauser-Werke
What did Germany add to the 20 mm to make it more effective?	a 3.7 cm
When was the first 3.7 cm FlaK 18 introduced?	1935
What were the large blockhouses called that the Germans developed?	Hochbunker "High Bunkers"
Another name for the High Bunkers was what?	"Flaktürme" flak towers
What was placed on the blockhouses by the Germans?	anti-aircraft artillery
What city had some of the last buildings to fall in 1945?	Berlin
What structure did the British build in the North Sea?	Maunsell Forts
Which military set up a large air defence network surrounding its larger cities?	the U.S. Army
What US system was created in the 1950s that included radar and computers?	the 75 mm Skysweeper system
The Skysweeper replaced the small guns that the Army was using, including which one?	the 40 mm Bofors
What does NADGE stand for?	NATO Air Defence Ground Environment
What did NADGE become?	the NATO Integrated Air Defence System
What was the name of the mechanical computer that used automation?	the Kerrison Predictor
What did the Predictor calculate after it was pointed at a target?	the proper aim point automatically
How did the Predictor display the information needed?	as a pointer mounted on the gun
What two things did the operators of the gun have to do?	followed the pointer and loaded the shells
What other country designed similar systems to the Predictor?	Germany
What did the muzzle flashes of the firearms used by the infantry reveal?	infantry positions
Along with speed of the modern jet, what else limits target opportunities?	altitude
Heavier artillery systems were typically used for what?	most anti-aircraft gunnery
Rocket research began prior to which war in some countries?	World War II
What unguided missile systems was fitted to warships?	the British 2-inch RP and 3-inch
When did the Bethnal Green disaster occur?	1943
What was the US military's counterpart to the British Stooge to counter the attacks by Kamikazes?	American Lark
Which country's research was ahead of all other countries for missiles?	Germans missile research
Which weapon caused a major shift in anti-aircraft strategy?	guided missile
Which company wanted to introduce missile systems during the second World War but was not successful?	Germany
What missile did the United States upgrade their defences with?	the Nike Ajax missile
The introduction of the Nike Ajax missile caused what to disappear?	the larger anti-aircraft guns
The introduction of what caused the larger anti-aircraft guns to disappear in the USSR?	SA-2 Guideline systems
Where can the future of projectile based weapons possibly be found?	the railgun
Testing is being done on weapons to create as much damage as what missile at a much lower cost?	a Tomahawk
When did the United States Navy test a railgun?	February 2008
How fast was the shell that the Navy fired from the railgun?	5,600 miles (9,000 km) per hour
When is the railgun expected to be ready?	2020 to 2025
What are two types of fuses used for shells?	barometric, time-delay, or proximity
At shorter ranges a light weapon with what is used on fast targets?	a higher rate of fire
What size of weapon calibers are better hitting at short range fast targets?	between 20 mm and 40 mm caliber
Smaller .50 caliber and 8 millimeter guns have been used in what?	smallest mounts
Air defence in such places as a carrier group are built around what?	a system of concentric layers
What protects the outer layer?	AEW&C aircraft combined with the CAP
The next layer's surface-to-air missiles are carried by what?	the carrier's escorts
What is the range in nautical miles of the RIM-67 Standard?	100
What is the rate of fire for a radar-controlled Gatling gun of 20 and 30 millimeter?	several thousand rounds per minute
What is likely to entirely replace gun systems?	missiles
What is being lead to specialty roles?	Guns
What gun is used in the Dutch Goalkeeper CIWS?	GAU-8 Avenger 30 mm seven-barrel Gatling gun
What RIM weapon permits mid-flight course adjustments?	RIM-116 Rolling Airframe Missile
What weapon's system uses guns and missiles?	Kashtan CIWS
Contemporary air defence systems are usually what?	mobile
What are larger weapon systems usually mounted on?	trailers
Radars, command posts and other such things are usually mounted on what?	a fleet of vehicles
A mobile weapons system is likely to pop up where?	places where it is not expected
What systems are really geared toward mobility?	Soviet
What military forces usually integrate air defnce as a separate arm or part of artillery?	Western and Commonwealth militaries
Air defence in the US Army is part of what arm?	artillery arm
Air defence in Pakistan was separated from the Army in what year?	1990
What type of countries have set branches for territorial air defence?	largely communist or ex-communist
Who had a separate military force for controlling nuclear ICBMs?	USSR
What do armies tend to have in depth?	air defence
Angara and Patriot are two examples of what type of system?	army-level missile defence systems
Stinger and Igla are two examples of what type of system?	smaller force levels
What does SPAAG stand for?	self-propelled anti-aircraft guns
What kind of platform are Roland and SA-8 Gecko?	all-in-one surface-to-air missile platforms
In agreement with NATO members, the US Air Force and which country has created tactics for air defence suppression?	Israel
The goal of what is to suppress opposing air defence systems?	Dedicated weapons
As better weapons are created, what systems continue to improve as well to counter them?	SAM systems with ECCM capabilities
What does AAAD stand for?	All-Arms Air Defence
What does GBAD stand for?	Ground Based AD
What does SHORAD stand for?	Short Range AD
What does MANPADS stand for?	Man Portable AD Systems
What does SAGW stand for?	Surface to Air Guided Weapon
What was one of the quickest areas to evolve in military technology in the 20th century?	air defence
The evolution of air defence was in answer to the evolution of what?	aircraft
In addition to radar and computing, what else did air defence want to exploit?	guided missiles
In addition to sensors and technical fire control, and weapons, what else did air defence evolution cover?	command and control
How are batteries typically grouped?	into battalions
What type of battalion is normally tasked to a manoeuvre division in the field army?	light gun or SHORAD
Which military section could have a full military structure?	Homeland air defence
Who commanded the UK's Anti-Aircraft Command?	a full British Army general
How many corps was the UK's Anti-Aircraft Command?	three AA corps
Air attacks headed by  Germany increased in 1915 in what area?	the British Isles
Who was tasked with the job to make improvements to the AA as a result of the German attacks?	Royal Navy gunnery expert, Admiral Sir Percy Scott
What was used because of night attacks?	searchlights
How many AA Sections were defending Britain by December 1916?	183
How many AA Sections were with the BEF in France during the same time?	74
What was many times unpopular with other troops?	AA guns
What was mounted on poles by forces?	machine-gun based weapons
What type of weapon is thought to have shot down the Red Baron?	anti-aircraft Vickers machine gun
What made acquiring targets and aiming more required?	increasing capabilities of aircraft
Heavy weapons shot at high-altitude targets and what shot at low-altitude targets?	lighter weapons
What year did the British adopt the new Vickers instrument?	1925
What was the Vickers device adopted by the British named?	Predictor AA No 1
What was the designation name of the Sperry device in the US?	M3A3
What did the British designate the Sperry device as?	Predictor AA No 2
What replaced the UB 2?	UB 7
When year did the Dambusters raid happen?	1943
What did the new system designed after the Dambusters raid supposed to do?	knock down any low-flying aircraft with a single hit
What replaced the 50 millimeter gun that was not accurate?	a new 55 mm gun
What type of control system did the 55 millimeter gun use?	a centralised control system
What was used to aim the guns after electrical commands were sent?	hydraulics
What was also utilized to control ground targets?	AAA battalions
Along with the 88, what other AAA battalion gun made a good anti-tank weapon?	90 mm M3 gun
What did the Americans use at the beginning of the war?	120 mm M1 gun stratosphere gun
What was the altitude range in feet of the stratosphere gun?	60,000 ft
What decade were the 90 and 120 millimeter guns used until?	1950s
What did advanced ally technology showcase it could defend against?	German V-1 cruise missiles
Where did the US Army's 419th and 601st locate at to defend London?	Folkestone-Dover coast
Where did the US Army 419th and 601st relocate to as part of the Antwerp X project?	Belgium
What city got attacked by more V-1 and V-2 missiles than any other?	Antwerp
What acquired and automatically tracked incoming targets?	SCR-584 radar
In what war did the armed forces from Argentina use the SAM Roland?	1982 Falklands War
What two units used the Rapier missile system?	British artillery and RAF regiment
What older system did the British naval use?	Sea Slug longer range systems
What new short range systems did the British naval use?	Sea Wolf
What was used in AA mountings on both land and water?	Machine guns
What can be deployed in fixed launchers but re-deploy at will?	Larger SAMs
What are the SAMs called that are launched by individuals in the US?	MANPADS
What does MANPADS mean?	Man-Portable Air Defence Systems
How are targets aquired for non-ManPAD SAMs?	air-search radar
Short range missiles are replacing what weapons?	autocannons
What continues to grow along with stealth technology?	anti-stealth technology
What can detect stealth aircraft?	Multiple transmitter radars
What can see stealth aircraft even with RCS?	Advanced forms of thermographic cameras
What is the most notable SAM that can detect a stealth target?	the S-400
How far away can the S-400 detect a target?	90 km away
Sanskrit is the primary sacred language of which religion?	Hinduism
How many scheduled languages are there in present-day India?	22
Which Indian state has Sanskrit as its official language?	Uttarakhand
Sanskrit is used as a pkilsosophical language in Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and which other religion?	Sikhism
Sanskrit is a standardized dialect of which language?	Old Indo-Aryan
What language is the sacred language of Hinduism?	Sanskrit
Besides its uses as language of religions, for what other application can Sanskrit be used?	lingua franca
Where is Sanskrit usually found?	India
From what is Sanskrit an adaption?	Old Indo-Aryan
From what language did Sanskrit originate?	Vedic Sanskrit
In what year was the daily newspaper Sudharma first published?	1970
Where are Sanskrit Vartman Patram and Vishwasya Vrittantam published?	Gujarat
In what year did daily news broadcasts in Sankrit begin on state-run All India Radio?	1974
Approximately how many weeklies, fortnightlies and quarterlies published in Sanskrit?	Over 90
What is the broadcast time for Sanskrit news on the DD National channel?	6:55 AM IST
What is the publication, Sudharma?	daily newspaper
Where is the newspaper Sudharma published?	Mysore, India
What language are many periodicals published in in India?	Sanskrit
Since what year has there been a daily broadcast on All India Radio?	1974
Where can the Sanskrit broadcasts be found online?	AIR's website
In Ancient India, which vernacular languages existed alongside Sanskrit?	Prakrits
The works of which two scholars were used to teach Sanskrit to the higher castes of India?	Pāṇini and Patanjali
The use of Sanskrit was considered to be a marker of what in Ancient India?	social class and educational attainment
What type of language were Prakrits?	Middle Indo-Aryan
Which Sanskrit linguist describes Sanskrit as a "particularly refined or perfected manner of speaking?"	Madhav Deshpande
What style of speech did linguist Madhav Deshpande say Sanskrit started out as?	perfected manner
Of what was Sanskrit once thought to be a divider?	social class
How was Sanskrit originally used?	ritual
Where was Sanskrit a learned language of the high classes?	Ancient India
With what did Sanskrit exist beside?	vernacular Prakrits
Around what time did the Gupta script become prevalent for writing Sanskrit?	between the fourth and eighth centuries
What types of script was used to write Sanskrit in the northwest part of Indai?	Kharosthi
Which script evolved from the Gupta script in the 8th century?	Śāradā
In what time period did the Devangari script become prevalent?	11th or 12th century
Which script replaced the Gupta script?	Devanagari
What were used to write Sanskrit?	Brahmic scripts
Between the forth and eighth century, what script evolved?	Gupta
What script was used in the northwest of India?	Kharosthi
From what was Gupta derived?	Brahmi
What script evolved from the Gupta script?	Śāradā
Tagalog is what kind of language?	Philippine
From what language is a large proportion of Tagalog derived?	Spanish
What is an example of a Sanskrit loanword used in Southeast Asian languages?	bhāṣā
What is the meaning of the Sanskrit loanword "bhāṣā?"	spoken language
What is an example of a traditional language that derives much of its vocabulary from Sanskrit?	Malay
Where were many Sanskrit words found?	Austronesian languages
In what older from of which language were more than half the words borrowed from Sanskrit?	Javanese
What Sanskrit borrowed word is found in many Asian languages?	bhāṣā
What is the meaning of bhasa?	spoken language
Where does traditional Malay get many of its loanwords?	Sanskrit
What are two examples of epic poetry written in Sanskrit?	the Ramayana and Mahabharata
What are prakritisms?	borrowings from common speech
Which Sanskrit literary language has been influenced by the Middle Indo-Aryan languages?	Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit
How long was Sanskrit a language of culture?	2000 years
What epic poems are written in post-Vedic Sanskrit?	Ramayana and Mahabharata
Where is a post-Vedic form of Sanskrit found?	Indian epic poetry
Of what are deviations in the epics thought to be the influence?	Prakrits
What is found to a lesser extent in Classical Sanskrit?	prakritisms
When was the time of Panini?	fourth century BCE
What type of text is the Samaveda?	Vedic texts
What was Sanskrit used for?	sacred purposes
How was Sanskrit viewed to be in relation to maintaining class?	conservative
To what did the use of Sanskrit as a upper class language produce a resistance ?	change
Who has said the Sanskrit is dead?	Sheldon Pollock
According to Pollock, how is Sanskrit solely used?	literary cultures
What is Sanskrit not  able to express?	the modern age
How is Sanskrit limited in it function towards ideas?	restatements
To what is Sanskrit restricted?	hymns
To what has the Central Board of Education of India relegated Sanskrit?	alternative option
Where has the Education Board ranked Sanskrit as a language option?	second or third
What grades in Indian schools have an option for Sanskrit study?	5 to 8
In what language states is Sanskrit considered an option?	Hindi
In what other type of schools is Sanskrit also taught?	gurukulas
What English school offers Sanskrit as a language study?	St James Junior School
Since what date has Sanskrit been offered as a language option in the U.S.?	September 2009
What is the credit towards in study in the U.S.?	Foreign Language
Who coordinates the study program of Samskritam as a Foreign Language?	Samskrita Bharati.
What school in Australia offers Sanskrit as a study?	Sydney Grammar School
Under what type of tradition did Sanskrit begin?	oral tradition
After what language evolved was writing introduced?	Prakrits
What does Sanskrit not have of its own?	native script
What feature of written text influenced the use of scripts?	regional scripts
Which writing systems have been used to write Sanskrit?	all
From what time has the Latin alphabet been used to transcribe Sanskrit?	late 18th century
What transliteration system is most common today?	IAST
How long has IAST been the standard system used for transliteration of Sanskrit?	since 1888
What is used in transliteration for computer systems?	ASCII
What transliteration scheme is often used on the internet?	ITRANS
What in the use of Sanskrit has influenced Sino-Tibetan languages?	Buddhist texts
What religion was spread to China through Sanskrit translations?	Buddhism
Who sent missionaries to China?	Ashoka
What were transliterated and added to the Chinese language?	Many terms
Where do many Sanskrit texts survive?	Tibetan collections
What language has influenced the languages of India?	Sanskrit
From what dialect is Hindi descended?	Khariboli
Of what is Hindi considered to be in relation to Sanskrit?	Sanskritised register
What is the percentage of Sanskrit words thought to be in modern Indo-Aryan languages?	fifty percent
What language texts  are as much as 70% Sanskrit?	Telugu
From when are the earliest dated Sanskrit inscriptions?	first century BCE
In what script are the earliest Sanskrit inscriptions?	Brahmi
In what language was Brahmi first used?	Prakrit
What language is the descendant of Sanskrit?	Prakrit
How were early sacred texts offered?	orally
What is the Sanskrit grammatical tradition?	Vyākaraṇa
In what period did Vyakarana begin?	late Vedic
How many sutras are in the Astadhyayi?	3990 sutras
Who composed Vartikas on the Panini sutras?	Kātyāyana
What is the abbreviated alphabet called?	Pratyāhara
According to Panini, from where did Sanskrit evolve?	earlier Vedic
To what time can the present form of Sanskrit be traced?	second millennium BCE
As what are Classical and Vedic Sanskrit often viewed?	separate dialects
What is Vedic Sanskrit meant to be used as?	the Vedas
What hymns are thought to be the earliest?	Rigveda Samhita
When is it thought that early speakers of Sanskrit came to India?	early second millennium BCE
What is the relationship between Indo-Iranian and Baltic languages?	close
From what direction did Sanskrit travel to come to India?	north-west
Sanskrit came from the north west and traveled to what present day countries?	India and Pakistan
What is the theory called dealing with the transfer of Sanskrit to India?	Indo-Aryan migration theory
What form of speech shows that Sanskrit and Prakrits existed together?	Sanskrit dramas
What type of speakers spoke Sanskrit?	multilingual
For what did Brahmins use Sanskrit?	scholarly communication
Until what period was high Sanskrit used?	British times
How large of a group in society use Sanskrit?	thin layer
What organization is trying to revive Sanskrit?	Samskrita Bharati
What kind of competitions does the All-India Sanskrit Festival have?	composition contests
How many speakers of Sanskrit were there by the 1991 census?	49,736
Where in India is Sanskrit still spoken by the population?	Mattur village
Who originally gave Mattur village to Sanskrit scholars?	king Krishnadevaraya
When was Sanskrit and Indian culture popular?	18th century
In what century was Indian culture accorded a more hostile reception?	early 19th century
How did the British academics show their feelings about Sanskrit?	neglect
What did British of the 19th century want India to be as soon as possible?	assimilated to Britain
Besides assimilation of British culture, what else did the British consider Indians to be?	inferior
Who wrote an opera in Sanskrit?	Philip Glass
On what was the Philip Glass opera based?	Bhagavad Gita
Which well known performer has used Sanskrit chants in her music?	Madonna
Which composer featured Sanskrit music in his movies?	John Williams
What is the source of the theme song of Battlestar Galactica?	Rigveda
What country is Valencia in?	Spain
What is the population of Valencia's urban area?	1.5 million
Where does Valencia rank among Spain's largest cities?	third
What body of water is Valencia located on?	the Mediterranean Sea
What is the city of Valencia the capital of?	the autonomous community of Valencia
What is the main type of employment in Valencia?	service sector occupations
What percentage of Valencia's workers are employed in industry?	5.5
What percentage of Valencia's workers are employed in the agricultural sector?	1.9
How much of Valencia's land is used for agriculture?	3973 hectares
What are Valencia's agricultural areas mainly planted with?	orchards and citrus groves
What airport is closest to Valencia?	Valencia Airport
What airport is south of Valencia?	Alicante Airport
What is the main train station in Valencia?	Estació del Nord
What group runs Valencia's public transit?	Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat Valenciana
What station in Valencia was built for high-speed trains?	Estación de València-Joaquín Sorolla
What promenade was built north of Valencia's port?	The Paseo Marítimo
How long is the Paseo Maritimo?	4 km (2 mi)
What Valencian landmark contains a conservation library?	San Miguel de los Reyes monastery
When did Valencia's rapid development begin?	the mid-1990s
What is an example of a section of Valencia that was majorly renovated?	the Carmen Quarter
How long did the English occupy Valencia?	16 months
At what battle were the Bourbons victorious?	Battle of Almansa
Who ordered Valencia punished for supporting Charles?	Philip V
What abolished Valencia's ancient charters?	Nueva Planta decrees
Who resigned in protest against Philip?	Cardinal Luis de Belluga
In what year did Christian troops lose control of Valencia?	1102
Who called himself the Emperor of All Spain?	Alfonso VI of León and Castile
Who wrote poetry about Valencia's capture by the Almoravids?	Ibn Khafaja
When did the Almohads gain control of the peninsula?	1145
Who prevented the Almohads from entering Valencia?	Ibn Mardanis
When was the Valencian Golden Age?	15th century
Of what area was Valencia the largest city?	Crown of Aragon
What building attracted merchants from other countries to Valencia?	Silk Exchange
Who borrowed money from Valencian bankers in 1492?	Queen Isabella I of Castile
What was Valencia's leading industry?	textile production
Who suppressed agermanats' uprising?	Germaine of Foix
When did a similar revolt occur in Castile?	1520–1522
What group in Castile was similar to the agermanats?	comuneros
Up to how many executions took place after the agermanats' revolt?	800
Whom did the comuneros rebel against?	Charles
What were Valencia's main food exports in the early 20th century?	wine and citrus
When was an exhibition held that showed agricultural and industrial progress?	1909
What architectural style was particularly successful?	Art Nouveau
What station was built in the Art Nouveau style?	North Station (Gare du Nord)
What markets were built in the Art Nouveau style?	Central and Columbus
What is Valencia's average yearly temperature?	18.4 °C
Which month is the hottest in Valencia?	August
Which month is the chilliest in Valencia?	January
In northern Europe, which months have temperatures similar to Valencia's in January?	May and September
What is the average maximum daytime temperature in August in Valencia?	28–34 °C
When was the age of Enlightenment?	18th century
Who in Valencia was influenced by the age of Enlightenment's ideas?	Gregory Maians and Perez Bayer
When was the Economic Society of Friends created?	1776
What was manufactured that helped the Valencian economy improve?	woven silk and ceramic tiles
Who reigned during the most affluent period of Bourbon rule?	Charles III
Whose regime prohibited political parties?	Franco
According to official figures, how many died in the flood of 1957?	eighty-one
What river flooded in 1957?	Turia
What park is located in the previous river bed?	Garden of the Turia
What suggested use for the river bed was rejected?	motorway
What percentage of Spanish exports does Valencia's port handle?	20
Valencia has the largest port on which coast?	Mediterranean western coast
Where does Valencia's port rank among Spanish ports in terms of total traffic?	second
What type of fruit is exported from Valencia?	oranges
Who helped repress the supporters of the Constitution and was later executed for it?	Elío
When was Elio killed?	1822
How was Elio executed?	by garroting
What are the years from 1823-1833 called?	Ominous Decade
Who was the last person killed by the Inquisition?	Gaietà Ripoli
What is the name of the cup that some Catholics think is the Grail?	Santo Caliz
Which pope used the Santo Caliz for mass in Valencia?	Benedict XVI
What century is the Santo Caliz from?	1st
When was the Santo Caliz used for mass in Valencia?	9 July 2006
According to legend, who took the Santo Caliz to Rome?	St. Peter
In what year did the cantonalist uprising occur?	1873
Who was sent to stop Valencia's uprising?	General Martinez-Campos
Who became king in 1874?	Alfonso XII
When did Alfonso XXII reach Valencia?	11 January 1875
Who was the Republican leader after the granting of male suffrage?	Vicente Blasco Ibáñez
Who designed the City of Arts and Sciences?	Santiago Calatrava
Where is the bridge named for Calatrava located?	centre of the city
What type of architecture does the Music Palace have?	modern
Which of Calatrava's creations contains an IMAX theater?	City of Arts and Sciences
How many official languages does Valencia have?	two
What is very similar to Valencian and is considered another variety of the same language?	Catalan
What language is official in Valencia besides Valencian?	Spanish
How many schools offer education completely in Valencian?	more than 70
When did Valencian regain its offical status?	1978
During what period has Valencia had a cultural surge?	the last thirty years
Which structural engineer's work has helped Valencia's reputation?	Santiago Calatrava
Which architect other than Calatrava has helped Valencia's reputation?	Félix Candela
What part of Valencia is undergoing improvements?	Old City
What church holds some of Spain's greatest frescoes?	Saints John
Who decorated the Saints John's dome?	Palonino
Who destroyed the Jesuit college?	the revolutionary Committee of the Popular Front
What was once headquartered in the former Dominican convent?	Capital General
What was once a college for nobles and is now a place of secondary education?	Colegio de San Juan
When did the Byzantines invade the Iberian peninsula?	554
When were the Byzantines expelled?	625
What archdiocese was Valencia under during the time of the Visigoths?	Toledo
Who took power in Valencia after the Roman administration was gone?	the church
After the Byzantines left, who was stationed in Valencia?	Visigothic military contingents
When was the dome built?	15th century
Who started the construction of the main chapel?	Archbishop Luis Alfonso de los Cameros
When was the main entrance constructed?	beginning of the 18th century
In what style is the door of the Apostles?	Gothic
Who painted the pictures that are in the San Francesco chapel?	Francisco Goya
What ruler attacked Valencia in 1238?	King James I of Aragon
When did Valencia surrender?	28 September
Who was expelled from Valencia after James I's victory?	the Muslim population
What were Valencia's new charters called?	Furs of Valencia
What group did the crusaders who attacked Valencia belong to?	Order of Calatrava
Which America's Cup competitions did Valencia host?	the 32nd and the 33rd
What equestrian event has Valencia hosted?	Global Champions Tour
What tennis event has Valencia hosted?	Valencia Open 500 tennis tournament
When was the Water Tribunal declared a cultural heritage of humanity?	2009
What Valencian festivals were declared Celebrations of International Touristic Interest?	Falles
Who commanded that Valencia be destroyed?	Abd al-Rahman I
What did Abdullah have built outside Valencia?	the Russafa
What was Valencia named during the time of Abdullah?	Medina al-Turab
When did Valencia surrender to the Moors?	by 714 AD
What feature of Valencia used to be a minaret?	El Micalet
When were the Serranos Towers constructed?	1392
What influential novel did Joanot Martorell write?	Tirant lo Blanch
Who was an early poet to use Valencian?	Ausiàs March
When was the University of Valencia founded?	between 1499 and 1502
What was the University of Valencia's original name?	Estudio General
What war took place from 1702-1709?	War of Spanish Succession
With whom did Valencia side in the War of Spanish Succession?	Charles of Austria
When did English cavalry enter Valencia?	24 January 1706
Who led the English cavalry into Valencia?	Charles Mordaunt, 3rd Earl of Peterborough, 1st Earl of Monmouth
What did Mordaunt capture on his way from Barcelona?	fortress at Sagunt
Who attacked Valencia with French soldiers but failed to capture it?	Moncey
When did Valencia surrender to the French?	8 January 1812
Who led the successful attack against Valencia?	Suchet
What forced Suchet to leave Valencia?	Battle of Vitoria
What city did Jose I make Spain's capital?	Valencia
What people group was descended from Muslim converts to Christianity?	Moriscos
When were the Jews expelled?	1609
Where did the Moriscos go when they were forced out of Spain?	North Africa
What proportion of the Valencia area's population were the Moriscos?	a third
When was the Taula de Canvi bankrupted?	1613
Who got rich from the Valencian orange crop and vineyards?	land-owners
Who had suppressed the Valencian language?	Philip V
What group still exists and promotes Valencian culture?	Lo Rat Penat
What poet was an early influence on the Valencian Renaissance?	Teodor Llorente
Who founded Lo Rat Penat?	Constantine Llombart
Who was Spain's 18th Prime Minister?	Espartero
When did Espartero rule?	16 September 1840 to 21 May 1841
What type of government did Espartero have?	progressive
Who ended up getting most of Valencia's church property?	local bourgeoisie
Whose troops threatened reprisals in Valencia?	General Cabrera
How many people died when the Valencia metro derailed?	43
When did the Valencia metro derail?	3 July 2006
Who said the Valencia derailment was fortuitous?	Vicente Rambla and Mayor Rita Barberá
On which Valencia metro line did the derailment occur?	1
How many people were gravely injured by the derailment?	more than ten
What was Valencia's population in 2000?	739,014
Where did Valencia rank in economic development among Spanish cities in the 1900s?	third
Where did Valencia rank in size among Spanish cities in the 1900s?	third
When was the Gare du Nord station finished?	1921
When was the Valencian regional exhibition held?	1909
Who was prime minister in 1936?	Manuel Azana
What building did the government move to in 1936?	Palau de Benicarló
How many bomb shelters were built?	over two hundred
When did the Italian Navy first attack Valencia?	13 January 1937
Where did the government relocate to in 1937?	Barcelona
What TV program questioned the official account of the crash?	Salvados
What happened at the same time as the crash, which may have contributed to the government downplaying it?	visit of the pope to Valencia
What evidence related to the crash remains missing?	book of train breakdowns
Which paper published an article that raised questions about the handling of the investigation?	El Mundo
When did El Mundo's article with information about the crash investigation come out?	March 2012
Who was the hospital's patroness?	Santa María de los Inocentes
What was the confraternity called after its separation from the hospital?	Cofradia para el ámparo de los desamparados
Who placed the chapel's cornerstone?	Archbishop Pedro de Urbina
What was the archiepiscopal palace during the Moorish period?	a grain market
Who insisted on building the new chapel?	Conde de Oropesa
When did Valencia C.F. win the UEFA Cup?	2004
How many times did Valencia C.F. win the Spanish league?	six
What is Levante UD's stadium?	Estadi Ciutat de València
In which division does Huracan Valencia play?	Segunda División B
Where does Huracan Valencia play?	Municipal de Manises
When was Valencia's founding?	138 BC
On what river is Valencia located?	Turia
How big is Valencia's historic centre?	169 hectares
What Valencian museum has a photography collection?	Institut Valencià d'Art Modern
What Valencian museum contains pieces by Velazquez and other famous artists?	Museu de Belles Arts de València
How far from Valencia is the Albufera?	11 km
In what park is the Albufera located?	Parc Natural de l'Albufera
How far from the sea was Valencia when it was founded?	6.4 km
Who founded Valencia?	Romans
From what entity was the Albufera bought?	Crown of Spain
How many inhabitants live within Valencia's limits?	809,267
How much did Valencia's foreign population rise from 2007 to 2008?	14%
Where does Valencia's population rank among EU municipalities?	24th
How much land is within Valencia's limits?	134.6 km2
From which countries does the biggest rise in Valencia's foreign population come?	Bolivia, Romania and Italy
Who was the ruler of Valencia in 138 BC?	Decimus Junius Brutus Galaico
How many Romans lived in Valencia in 138 BC?	two thousand
What road crossed Valencia's island in Roman times?	Via Augusta
What is now located at the former centre of Valencia?	Plaza de la Virgen
In Roman times, what two roads met at Valencia's centre?	Cardo Maximus and the Decumanus Maximus
What was El Cid's real name?	Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar
When did El Cid die?	July 1099
Who took El Cid's position after his death?	Ximena Díaz
When did El Cid rule?	15 June 1094 to July 1099
Who was the ruler when the new city wall was constructed?	Abd al-Aziz
When did Valencia suffer from the Black Death?	1348
Which three religious groups lived in Valencia?	Christian, Jewish and Muslim
The Muslims lived near what current market?	Mosen Sorel
When was the Jewish section attacked?	1391
When was the Muslim section attacked?	1456
Whose government did the guilds rebel against?	Charles I
When did the guilds' rebellion take place?	1519–1523
What caused the nobility to leave Valencia?	plague
From where did the anti-monarchists get inspiration?	Italian republics
What were the artisan guilds called?	the Germanies
What type of people often held Valencia's offices?	foreign aristocrats
From where were Valencia's officials chosen?	Madrid
What convent was close to the area where troops lived?	Santo Domingo
Until when was the Lonja used to quarter troops?	1762
Where did Ferdinand go rather than Madrid?	Valencia
How long did absolutist rule last?	six years
When was the Trieno Liberal?	1820–1823
When was the Constitution abolished?	1812
Who offered troops to the King?	General Elio
When were plans for city expansion drawn?	1858
What was finished in 1850?	public water supply network
When did Valencia get electricity?	1882
What was knocked down in 1866?	city walls
What was Valencia's population in 1860?	140,416
When democracy began in Spain, what did the kingdom of Valencia become?	the Valencian Community
Who led a coup in Valencia?	Jaime Milans del Bosch
Whose message convinced much of the military to stay loyal?	King Juan Carlos I
When did Milans del Bosch surrender?	24 February
What law made Valencia the capital of its region?	Statute of Autonomy
Where is Valencia's City Hall located?	Plaza del Ayuntamiento
What is on the eastern side of Valencia's largest plaza?	the central post office
What shape is the Plaza del Ayuntamiento?	triangular
What is in the north part of the plaza?	a large fountain
When are firewords heard every day?	during the Les Falles
What was the Valencia Cathedral called from 1866?	Basilica Metropolitana
What pagan deity may have had a temple where the Valencia Cathedral is now?	Diana
How tall is the cathedral's tower?	58 m
What is the tower called?	El Miguelete
What was the Cathedral's name from early in the Reconquista?	Iglesia Mayor
Who won the last race of the European Grand Prix in 2012?	Fernando Alonso
What motorcycle event is held in Valencia?	Valencian Community motorcycle Grand Prix
In which years was the European Formula One Grand Prix in Valencia?	2008–2012
What is another name for the Circuit Recardo Tormo?	Circuit de Valencia
During which decade did GE start manufacuring computers?	1950s
What was the name of GE's major appliance manufacturing plant?	Appliance Park
In what year did GE sell its computer division to Honeywell?	1970
What division of GE provides computer timesharing services?	GXS
What was the name of first business in the world to own a computer?	GE
What was the name of the lamp manufacturer in East Newark which Thomas Edison an interest in?	Edison Lamp Company
Where was Edison Machine Works located?	Schenectady, New York
Who provided financial backing for the Edison Lighting Company?	J.P. Morgan and the Vanderbilt family
In what year did Drexel, Morgan & Co. begin to finance Edison's research and form Edison General Electric Company?	1889
What was the name of the company that held the patents from Edison's research?	Edison Electric Light Company
What is the business source of the majority of GE's revenues?	financial services
Besides ITT Corporation, which two companies tried to emulate GE, but failed by the mid-1980's?	Ling-Temco-Vought, Tenneco
How much of GE's revenues is derived from the financial services it provides?	over half
In what other country besides the US does GE provide lending services?	Japan
Who composed GE's slogan "Imagination at work?"?	David Lucas
What was GE's slogan prior to "Imagination at work?"	We Bring Good Things to Life
In what year was the slogan "We Bring Good Things to Life" first used?	1979
Which company designed the standard format for GE's marketing literature and website?	Wolff Olins
What is the name of the typeface family created for GE in 2014?	GE Sans and Serif by Bold Monday
Based on year 2000 data, where is GE ranked among the largest corporate producers of air pollution in the US?	fourth-largest
How many tons of toxic chemicals does GE release into the atmosphere each year?	2,000
According to which government agency is GE a leading producer of Superfund toxic waste sites?	EPA
Which two commercial businesses produce more Superfund toxic waste sites than GE?	Honeywell, and Chevron Corporation
Which organization identified GE as the fourth largest corporate producer of air pollution in the US?	Political Economy Research Institute
In what year was General Electric formed?	1892
In which US state was GE incorporated?	New York
Which city was the home of GE's first headquarters?	Schenectady
Who led the Thomson-Houston Electric Company when GE was formed?	Charles Coffin
Where was the Thomson-Houston Electric Company based?	Lynn, Massachusetts
Which river did GE pollute with PCBs from its plant in Pittsfield, MA?	Housatonic River
How many pounds of PCBs are estimated to be retained in the sediment behind Woods Pond dam?	11,000
How high have the levels of PCBs in the sediments behind Woods Pond dam been measured at?	110 mg/kg
What were the primary contaminants contained in the pollution discharged into the Housatonic River?	Aroclor 1254 and Aroclor 1260
Which company produced the Aroctor 1254 and Aroctor 1260?	Monsanto
In what year did GE enter the renewable energy industry?	2002
How much money has GE invested in renewable energy commercialization?	more than $850 million
In what year did GE acquire Kelman Ltd.?	2008
As of 2009, how many people did GE employ in its renewable energy initiatives?	more than 4,900
When did GE announce an expansion of its business in Northern Ireland?	May 2010
When did GE announce its Ecoimagination program?	May 2005
Who was the CEO of GE when it announced its Ecoimagination program?	Jeff Immelt
What type of technology related to water was to be developed under the Ecoimagination program?	water purification technology
Which newspaper printed an op-ed piece that questioned Immelt's credibility as a spokesman on environmental policy?	The New York Times
What type of locomotive technology was to be developed by GE under its Ecoimagination program?	hybrid
Who led GE's effort to build the first turbosupercharges during World War I?	Sanford Alexander Moss
Which jet engine did GE introduce in 1941?	Whittle W.1
What was GE's rank among US corporations in the value of wartime production contracts during World War II?	ninth
To which company did GE hand off their work on Whittle's jet engines?	Allison Engine Company
Which company is ranked as the largest engine manufacturer in the world?	Rolls-Royce plc
In what time period did GE pollute the Hudson River with PCBs?	1947-77
Who founded the Hudson River Sloop Clearwater and the Clearwater Festival to bring attention to the pollution caused by GE?	Pete Seeger
What does PCB stand for?	polychlorinated biphenyls
What designation did the EPA give to the site of GE's Hudson River pollution	superfund
What other types of pollution have contaminated the Hudson River watershed?	mercury contamination and sewage dumping
How much money has GE said it will invest in 2008 for clean technology R&D?	$1.4 billion
How many green products did GE bring to market via its Ecoimagination program as of October 2008?	70
What type of engine did GE bring to market as part of its Ecoimagination project?	biogas
What type of lamp was introduced by GE as part of its Ecoimagination initiative?	halogen
What was GE's new revenue target for its Ecoimagination program in 2010?	$25 billion
What was the name of the project introduced by GE at the 2011 Toronto International Fils Festival?	Short Films, Big Ideas
Which company was GE's partner in the Short Fils, Big Ideas project?	cinelan
What type of system is Sligshot?	water vapor distillation
What prize was awarded to the winning amateur dirctor film at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival?	US$100,000
How many online views did the Short Films, Big Ideas campaign generate?	14 million
When did GE announce it was in talks to acquire the French engineering group Alstom?	April 2014
What was the final acquisition price paid by GE for Alstom?	$17 billion
How big was the stake in Alstom taken by the French government as part of the acquisition deal?	20%
When was GE's acquisition of Alstom agreed to by Alstom's board?	June 2014
From which company did the Alstom board reject a rival acquisition proposal?	Siemens-Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
Where is GE's headquarters located?	Fairfield, Connecticut
On what street in New York was GE headquartered before moving to Fairfield?	Lexington Avenue
In what year did GE move its headquarters to Fairfield?	1974
Which television broadcast company is located in the same building as GE's main offices in New York City?	NBC
What was the former name of the Comcast Building, location of GE's main offices?	30 Rockefeller Plaza at Rockefeller Center
Which New York State Attorney General filed suit in US District Court to force GE to pay for the cleanup of chemicals dumped by their plant in Waterford, NY?	Robert Abrams
How much did GE agree to pay in claims for the pollution it caused in the Housatonic River and other sites?	$250 million
How many tons of PCBs were claimed to have been dumped by GE's Waterford Plant in the 1983 lawsuit?	more than 100,000
In which year was a settlement reached regarding GE's pollution of the Housatonic River?	1999
What was the location of the pollution caused by GE in the Housatonic River?	Pittsfield, Massachusetts
When was the Continental Army created?	14 June 1775
Who was the commander of the Continental Army?	George Washington
From what country did Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben come from?	Europe
What did Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben teach the Continental Army?	Prussian tactics and organizational skills
What year did American forces start being stationed in Vietnam?	1959
What caused American forces to deploy in large number in 1965?	Gulf of Tonkin Incident
What political structure did Vietnam have?	communist
What was organized to replace the concept of U.S. Volunteers?	the "National Army"
When was the National Army demobilized?	end of World War I
Who filled vacancies in the Regular Army?	"Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps"
Who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army?	The Chief of Staff
Who does the Chief of Staff serve as the principal military adviser to?	Secretary of the Army
How many military services beling to the Department of Defense?	four
In what year did the Goldwater-Nichols act take place?	1986
What branch of the USA Armed Forces is the largest?	The United States Army
How many uniformed services are there in the US?	seven
What years did the American Revolutionary War span?	1775–83
What date was the U.S. Army created?	3 June 1784
What did the U.S Army replace?	Continental Army
The War of 1812 consisted of the U.S against whom?	United Kingdom
In what year did the U.S. take control of Lake Eerie?	1813
Who did the U.S. defeat to collapse the Indian Confederacy?	Tecumseh
In the Battle of New Orleans, who defeated the British?	Andrew Jackson
What political party did not have trust in standing armies?	republican
Who was defeated at the Battle of the Wabash?	General St. Clair
Who did the state militias have ongoing conflict with?	Native Americans
In what year was the Legion of the United States established?	1791
In what year was the Legion of the United States renamed to the United States Army?	1796
Where is the National Training Center located?	Fort Irwin, California
Where is the Joint Readiness Training Center located?	Fort Polk, Louisiana
Where is the Joint Multinational Training Center located?	Hohenfels, Germany
In what year was ARFORGEN approved?	2006
In what states is Fort Bliss located?	New Mexico and Texas
In what year did the Union Forces capture New Orleans?	1862
Who took control of the Mississippi River in 1862-63?	Ulysses Grant
Who captured Atlanta?	William T. Sherman
Where did Lee surrender his army?	Appomattox Court House
What war occurred after the end of World War II?	Cold War
In what year were corps V and corps VII reactivated?	1950
How many divisions of the U.S. Army were in Europe?	four
What month and year did the U.S. join World War II?	December 1941
Which military force attacked Pearl Harbor?	Japanese
What is the month, day and year of "D-Day"?	June 6, 1944
What war lead to the capture of the Pacific Islands by the U.S.?	Pacific War
Who was responsible for the desegregation of the army?	Harry S. Truman
Who adopted the Total Force Policy?	General Creighton Abrams
What war was responsible for the creation of the Total Force Policy?	Vietnam War
How many army components were affected by the Total Force Policy?	three
Which country was invaded by the U.S. in October 2001?	Afghanistan
The U.S. Army invaded Iraq in what year?	2003
About how many U.S. soldiers died as of March 2008 due to counterinsurgency?	more than 4,000
How many Iraqi insurgents were killed from 2003-2011?	23,813
What were National Guard members considered before 1903?	state soldiers
In what year did the Milita Act take place?	1903
The Air Defense Artillery is a branch of what?	the Army
National Guardsmen are under the authority of who?	the governor
How many divisions are there in the U.S. Army?	10
How many brigade teams did the Army downsize to by 2015?	32
Who is the Army Chief of Staff?	Raymond Odierno
By 2018, how many active Army members will there be?	450,000
How many Army Reserve members will there be by 2018?	195,000
What categories are U.S. Army training divided into?	individual and collective
How long does basic training last?	10 weeks
How long does military occupation specialties training last?	14–20 weeks
What does OSUT stand for?	One Station Unit Training
Where are the Armor School and the Infantry School both located?	Fort Benning, Georgia
What does the SAW in M249 SAW stand for?	Squad Automatic Weapon
What kind of gunfire is the M249 SAW generally used for?	suppressive fire
What is the Mossberg 590 used for?	door breaching and close-quarters combat
What gun do designated marksmen use?	M14EBR
What semi-automatic sniper do Snipers use?	M110
How many MRAP vehicles has the Pentagon bought since 2007?	25,000
How many of the vehicles will be used for training?	1,073
How many of the 25,000 vehicles do they plan on getting rid of?	7,456
The Army will be keeping 5,681 of what vehicle?	Oshkosh M-ATV
What type of ambulance will the Army have 301 of?	Maxxpro
What piece of the uniform has been replaced by the patrol cap?	black beret
Who was the Army Chief of Staff at this time?	General Martin Dempsey
What month and year was the black beret replaced?	June 2011
If a soldier is in a unit in jump status, what color beret do they wear?	maroon
The rifle green beret is worn by whom?	Special Forces
How many military departments does the Department of Defense have?	three
What does SECARMY stand for?	Secretary of the Army
What does CSA stand for?	Chief of Staff of the Army
At the end of 2016, how many soldiers were in the Regular Army?	475,000
How many soldiers were there in the entire U.S. Army at the end of 2016?	1,015,000
What Indian tribe was the Army's major campaign against?	Seminoles
During what years did the wars between the Army and the Seminoles take place?	1818–58
What state were the Seminoles moved to?	Oklahoma
What did the Army traditionally take control of to defeat the Indians?	winter food supply
During what century did the Seminoles enter Florida?	eighteenth
What year did the Korean War start?	1950
Who walked out of the U.N. security meeting?	the Soviets
In what two countries did the American troops fight Communist forces?	Korea and Vietnam
In what year did the Korean war end?	1953
In 1989, what did the Pentagon plan to reduce the army end strength to?	580,000
Which country did Iraq invade in 1990?	Kuwait
What operation began in January 1991?	Desert Storm
How many troops were involved in Operation Desert Storm?	500,000
How long did Operation Desert Storm last?	one hundred hours
What year was the U.S. army organized?	1775
What group combined with the U.S. Army?	United States Volunteers
Who raised the United States Volunteers?	various state governments
What is the active component of the U.S. Army?	Regular Army
What are the two reserve components of the U.S. Army?	Army National Guard and the Army Reserve
What are UTAs?	unit training assemblies
The U.S. Army is organized under what title of the United States Code?	10
Who does the D.C. National Guard report to?	the U.S. President
What does ASI stand for?	additional skill identifier
What is are combat medics duties?	provide pre-hospital emergency treatment
Where do the officers go to complete their branch specific training?	Basic Officer Leaders Course
If the officers want to advance their careers even further, where is that available?	Army Correspondence Course Program
What does the army use for facilities while they are deployed?	tents
What is the abbreviation for a tactical operations center?	TOC
What does FOB stand for?	forward operating bases
Where are the dining facilities called?	DFAC buildings
What are the barracks used for?	sleeping quarters
Which war had the most U.S. casualties associated with it?	The American Civil War
What were the U.S. forces referred to as?	the "Union" or "the North"
What state did not contribute any troops to the Union Army?	South Carolina
In what year did the army start using fixed-wing aircraft?	1910
Who attacked New Mexico in 1916?	Pancho Villa
What year did the U.S. join World War I?	1917
What date did the U.S. intervention in New Mexico end?	7 February 1917
Who was the Secretary of Defense in 1967?	Robert McNamara
How many divisions did the Secretary of Defense cut the original 15 down to?	8
How many brigades did the Secretary of Defense increase the number to?	18
How many victims were killed in the attack on the Pentagon?	125
What aircraft was hijacked?	American Airlines Flight 77
Did they crash into the eastern or wester part of the Pentagon.	west
Who was the highest ranking official killed in the attack?	Lieutenant General Timothy Maude
What is the army replacing divisions with?	brigades
How will the brigades be structured?	modular
Who can command any brigade?	divisional headquarters
What is the primary sidearm used by the U.S. Army?	9 mm M9 pistol
What type of frag grenade is used by the U.S. Army?	M67
The M18 is a type of what kind of grenade?	smoke
Through what system are handguns being replacedby the U.S. Army?	Modular Handgun System
What does HMMWV stand for?	High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle
What is the HMMWV also known as?	Humvee
The M1A2 Abrams is an example of what?	battle tank
What does MRAP stand for?	Mine Resistant Ambush Protected
Under what Prussian king did the German empire unite as a nation-state?	Wilhelm I
What was the date of the Treaty of Frankfurt?	10 May 1871
The Treaty of Frankfurt gave Germany which Imperial territory?	Alsace-Lorraine
Following the unification of Germany, who maintained great authority in international affairs for two decades?	Otto von Bismarck
Which specific fear was a factor in causing World War I?	another Franco-German war
What telegram had the intended effect on French public opinion?	Ems telegram
Following the Ems telegram, what reaction did the French foreign minister report that he felt?	he felt "he had just received a slap"
In Parliament, who was the leader of the monarchists?	Adolphe Thiers
Which French prime minister believed he had done all that he could to prevent a war?	Emile Ollivier
On which date did France issue a declaration of war to the Prussian government?	19 July 1870
In which battle did the Dreyse needle gun gain its fame?	Battle of Königgrätz
At the start of the Franco-Prussian War, what was the age of the Dreyse gun's design?	25-year-old design
What was the Dreyse rifle's tactical range?	600 m (2,000 ft)
What was the name of the famous cannon issued to Prussian soldiers at the time?	Krupp
What type of shell did the Krupp weapon fire?	a contact-detonated shell
What was the date of the first action of the Franco-Prussian War?	4 August 1870
On that date, which elements were assisted by Prussian artillery forces?	Bavarian and two Prussian corps
Who initially held a strong position during the battle at the border?	General Douay of I Corps
Douay's initial success was credited by what?	long-range fire of the Chassepots
What threatened the French avenue of retreat?	the encirclement of the town by the Prussians
What factor were the French unaware of at the start of the battle?	German numerical superiority
Which French commander miscalculated the severity of the battle?	Frossard
What was a key factor in Frossard's disasterous retreat to the south?	Seriously flawed communications
What factor was credited to the large number of German casualties?	effectiveness of the chassepot rifle
What outcome surprised the Germans the following day?	Frossard had abandoned his position
On which date was the Battle of Gravelotte?	18 August
Which battle was considered the biggest in the war?	The Battle of Gravelotte
Where was the location of the Battle of Gravelotte?	6 miles (9.7 km) west of Metz
Under which Field Marshall were the combined German forces commanded?	Count Helmuth von Moltke
Who commanded the French Army of the Rhine?	Marshal François-Achille Bazaine
What factor forced the French to retreat to Metz?	the defeat of Marshal Bazaine's Army
At Metz, what was the approximate number of Prussian troops?	over 150,000
Who formed the new French Army of Chalons?	Napoleon III and MacMahon
Along with the Army of the Meuse, what other army did Moltke march north with?	the Prussian Third Army
How many casualties did Moltke suffer at Beaumont?	5,000 men
At the start of the war, which country did European public opinion champion?	the Germans
In which city did many Italians attempt to proffer their services to the Prussian embassy?	Florence
What caused a dramatic shift in Italian sentiment toward the war?	Bismarck's demand for the return of Alsace
To whom is the quote, "Rescue the French Republic by every means" attributed?	Garibaldi
What army did Garibaldi gain command of in France?	the Army of the Vosges
On which date did hostilities between the German and French troops begin near Orleans?	10 October
Which side was initially successful at the Battle of Coulmiers?	the Germans
On which date did the French triump over the Germans at the Battle of Coulmiers?	9 November
On which date were the French forced to abandon Orleans?	4 December
Of the three battles that occured north of Paris, which was the first that forced the French army to retreat?	Battle of Amiens
What was public opinion in Paris strongly opposed to?	any form of surrender
On what date did president Trochu resign?	25 January
Who replaced President Trochu?	Favre
In which French city was the surrender made official?	Versailles
Who disregarded the surrender and launched a failed attack on the Germans?	Gambetta
What stunned neutral observers about the end of the war?	The quick German victory
What outcome had most people expected from the war?	French victory
Whose strategic advantages were not appreciated until after the war over?	the Germans
What German advantages were discerned by other countries in the aftermath?	their military system
What is at least one German innovation that other countries would later adopt in other wars?	highly detailed mobilization systems
The effect of German victory and ensuing influence stems back to what factor?	pre-war preparations
What was the Prussian General staff quick to utilize at the onset of the war?	detailed mobilization plans using the railway system
What was one factor behind the inefficiency of the French railway system?	multiple competing companies
What factor especially affected travel to the front in Alsace and Lorraine?	frequent changes between trains
Who was responsible for dealing with chaotic train yards and unloaded wagons?	nobody
Who commanded the Prussian 12 Cavalry Brigade?	General Adalbert von Bredow
What did General von Bredow lead a charge against at the Battle of Mars-la-Tour?	a French artillery battery
What did von Bredow's Pyrrhic victory become known as?	von Bredow's Death Ride
What military tactic proved to be unsuccessful on the 1914 battlefields?	Use of traditional cavalry
What was one of two factors that led von Bredow's narrow success on the battlefield?	favorable terrain that masked his approach
In which Prussian province did a large Polish population reside?	Posen
What was there strong support of in Posen?	the French
What calls were made for the Polish recruits?	to desert from the Prussian Army
On what date did Bismarkck receive the disturbing report on the Posen situation?	16 August 1870
What significant consequence was a result of German-Polish relations?	prolonged period of repressive measures
What are the causes of the Franco-Prussian War deeply rooted in?	the unification of Germany
In the aftermath of the Austro-Prussian war, formed what group?	North German Confederation
What was the effect of that new group on the European balance of power?	new power destabilized
What established the European balance of power in 1815?	the Congress of Vienna
As Prussia sought to incorporated several German kingdoms, what stance did France assume?	strongly opposed to any further alliance of German states
In peacetime, what the approximate number of French soldiers?	400,000
Veterans of the French Army had prviously fought in which war in Italy?	the Franco-Austrian War
The "Seven Weeks War" was between which two countries?	Prussia and Austria
Who reformed the low numbers of troops by implementing universal conscription?	Marshal Adolphe Niel
If a citizen was for some reason not conscripted, in what militia were they were registered?	the Garde Mobile
What entity controlled the Prussian army?	the General Staff
Who commanded the General Staff?	Field Marshal Helmuth von Moltke
What was the unique purpose of the Prussian Army during peacetime?	to prepare the overall war strategy
The officers of the General Staff were hand-selected from which place?	Prussian Kriegsakademie (War Academy)
What new technologies in particular were courted by Moltke?	the railroad and telegraph
On which date did Frossard's and Bazaines's troops cross the German border?	2 August
What proved its worth against the Dreyse rifle?	The Chassepot rifle
Which regiment did their respective corps force from the town of Saarbrucken?	the Prussian 40th Regiment of the 16th Infantry Division
How many casualties did the French suffer at Saarbrucken?	86 casualties
How many casualties did the Prussians suffer at Saarbrucken?	83 casualties
A dispatch was edited about a meeting between the French ambassador and what Prussian king?	King William
What was the purpose of editing the dispatch?	to make it appear that the French had been insulted
On which date did the French parliament vote to declare war on Prussia?	16 July 1870
What diplomatic crisis was Bismarck credited with skillfully creating?	succession to the Spanish throne
Where did the quickly mobilised troops first invade in France?	northeastern France
Which town's people surrendered to the Germans?	Wissembourg
In which direction did the French troops who did not surrender head?	westward
How many dead troops leave behind?	1,000 dead
How many prisoners did the French leave behind?	1,000 prisoners
What weapon once again increased the effectiveness of the infantry attacks?	French Chassepot
What is the Franco-Prussian War also known as?	Franco-German War
What was the war often referred to in France as?	the War of 1870
In the conflict, who lead the German states of the North German Confederation?	the Kingdom of Prussia
Whose ambitions are credited with causing the conflict?	Prussian ambitions
Which Prussian chancellor's motives in the conflict are still disputed?	Otto von Bismarck
In whose cadidacy did the immediate cause of war reside?	Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen
What did France fear by an alliance between Prussia and Spain?	encirclement
Who goaded the French into war by editing a telegram sent by William I?	Otto von Bismarck
What was the name of the famous telelgram?	Ems Dispatch
What was the reaction of the French people to the deceptively crafted offense in the Ems Dispatch?	inflamed public opinion
What battle began when two armies collided in the town of Froschwiller?	The Battle of Wörth
On what date did the Battle of Worth begin?	6 August
What was the estimated number of troops in Prussia's 3rd Army?	140,000 troops
What number of troops did France have to contend with?	35,000
Instead of pursuing the French as they retreated, the Germans decided to remain where?	Alsace
In which country was a war against France condsidered desirable?	Prussia
What was the overarching Prussian motive in starting a war with France?	unification of a great German empire
Who had no doubts that a Franco-German war was totally necessary?	Chancellor Otto von Bismarck
Who did Bismarck feel needed to be viewed as the aggressor in the conflict?	France
In bringing the southern German states to align with Prussia, what tactical outcome was achieved?	Germans numerical superiority
On what date did the battle begin?	18 August
Who order the First and Second armies to advance against the French?	Moltke
Which general opened the battle with artillery from the 25th Infantry Division?	General Manstein
Who did the battle first appear to favor?	the French
Who was the commander of the First Army?	General Steinmetz
What modern, mass-produced weapon were the French infantry provided?	Chassepot rifle
What was the maximum effective range of the Chassepot rifle?	1,500 metres (4,900 ft)
In which type of warfare did the French best utilize the Chassepot?	trench-warfare
What precedent of the machine gun did the French troops also possess?	the mitrailleuse
On what was the mitrailleuse mounted?	on an artillery gun carriage
On which date did the battle begin with the Army of Chalons attacking various Prussian divisions?	1 September 1870
Who commanded the French V Corps in reserve?	General De Wimpffen
As the French were hard-hit by the Prussian artillery, what continued to show up to the battlefield?	more Prussian troops
Which commander of the French calvary led three desperate attacks on Floing?	General Marguerite
How many casualties did the French suffer?	over 17,000 men
Pre-war, who planned for a strong French offensive?	Marshal Niel
From Thionville towards Trier, what was the final destination of the offensive?	the Prussian Rhineland
Niel's plan was cast aside in favour of a plan by General Frossard and what other general??	Bartélemy Lebrun
The new plan called for which army to remain in a defensive grouping at the German border?	Army of the Rhine
Which disaster made French planning supremely essential?	the disaster at Wissembourg
Which general was determined to go on the attack over Saar?	General Le Bœuf
Planning for the next battle was less based on emotion and more focused on what?	the reality of unfolding events
Who told LeBoeuf that supply beyond the Saar would be impossible?	General Wolff
What did the French armies decide on to protect against every possible attack point?	a defensive position
What army's defeats turned Gambetta to the Army of the North?	Army of the Loire's
Who led the Army of the North?	General Faidherbe
Several smaller victories were acheived by the protection of what?	belt of fortresses
The belt of fortresses were in what area of France?	northern France
This position in the north allowed whose men to launch fast attacks against Prussian units?	Faidherbe's
What odds were at stake for the attack launched by the III Corps?	four to one
What town were the III Corps able to capture?	Vionville
In capturing Vionville, what was further blocked in the west?	escape attempts
With battle at Metz, what factor shattered the efforts of III Corps?	incessant cavalry charges
The Germans recorded how many causualties in the battle?	15,780
Which prince ordered an artillery attack against Canrobert?	Prince Frederick Charles
Which army's defeat compelled Prince Charles to attack?	defeat of the First Army,
As the Second Army pushed into Ravine, the XII Corps cleared out which adjacent town?	Roncourt
The surving soldiers of the 1st Guards Infantry Division launched a new attack against what?	ruins of St. Privat
Which army was forced to retreat to Metz and surrender two months later?	French Army of the Rhine
A blockade of what coastline was ordered by the French government at the start of the war?	North German coasts
The small North German navy had how many ironclads at their disposal?	only five
What was the name of the only turret ship that was able to conduct operations?	SMS Arminius
How many ships was the French navy able to dispatch to sea?	470
In pursuing Prussian ships, what resource was quickly depleted?	coal reserves
Which battle was the second of three key French losses?	Battle of Spicheren
On what date did the battle of Spicheren take place?	5 August
Moltke had originally planned to kee Bazaine's army on what river?	the Saar River
Which general's zeal and lack of planning led to cutting off Prince Charles from his calvary?	General von Steinmetz
Which town was the site of General von Steinmetz's grave error?	Spicheren
The General Staff developed by Moltke proved to be what?	extremely effective
What was key factor did the Prussian General Staff study?	previous Prussian operations
What was the goal in the General Staff studying past operations?	learn to avoid mistakes
The structure also reinforced Moltke's ability control large formations spread out over what?	significant distances
Who is essentially considered the commander in chief of the Prussian army?	The Chief of the General Staff
What did the Germans expect to negotiate?	an end to the war
On what date was the encirclement of Paris complete?	20 September
Bismarck and Favre met on what date?	18 September
What was the location of Bismarck and Favre's meeting?	the Château de Ferrières
Bismarck demanded the surrender of Strasbourg and what fortress city?	Toul
By late afternoon, what were the Prussian southern attacks at risk of?	breaking up
Which Prussian general commanded the attack against the French at St. Privat?	General Canrobert
What factor immobilised the Prussian Guard?	lethal French gunfire
By nightfall a major component of the VII and VII Corps withdrew towards what Prussian position?	Rezonville
What did the Prussian Army hold in Paris on 17 February?	a brief victory parade
Under what provision was the Prussian Army permitted to have a victory parade?	the terms of the armistice
To hounour the armistice, Bismarck allowed train loads of what into Paris?	food
France had to consent to pay how much in war indemnity?	five billion franc
An ensuing mass exodus from Paris saw how many people head for the countryside?	200,000
Whose surrender hit Paris as big news?	Napoleon III
Which empire was overthrown by a popular uprising in Paris?	the Second Empire
The uprising forced a proclamation of what?	Provisional Government and a Third Republic
How did the new government refer to itself?	Government of National Defence
Bismarck desired an early piece but lacked what in the negotiation process?	a legitimate French authority
A series of Prussian and German victories took place in what part of France?	eastern France
What seige did these victories lead to?	Siege of Metz
What battle was a result of the Prussian and German victories in eastern France?	Battle of Sedan
Which army definitively defeated Napolean III?	the army of the Second Empire
On what date did the Government of National Defence declare the the Third Republic in Paris?	4 September
Some historians counter that Napolean III sought what?	war
Napoleon III belived he would win the Astro-Prussian war and win a conflict with what country?	Prussia
It is also argued that Napoleon III thought a war would resolve the growing issue of what?	domestic political problems
Before the war, French voters overwhelming supported what program of Napoleon III?	a national plebiscite
Who proposed that Emperor needed no war to increase his public appeal?	Milza
What did Napoleon III plan to relieve pressure from an expected German attack?	invasion of northern Germany
What country were the French hoping to be allied with?	Denmark
What military strength could Denmark to France in a war?	the Royal Danish Navy
What had Prussia been discovered building around big north German ports?	defences
What did the French navy lack in engaging coastal defenses?	heavy guns
What was the Prussian Army composed of, instead of regulars?	conscripts
Service was mandatory for all men sharing which feature?	of military age
Together, Prussia and Germany expected to amass how many soldiers?	1,000,000
What is an example of a German encirclement battle?	Cannae
German tactics relied on what type of battle strategy?	encirclement battles
What Prussian system was superior to the French example?	military education
Prussian military officers were trained to exude what type thinking?	independent thinking
What commander of the General Staff held the expectaion of independent thinking in his officers?	Moltke
What did the French dearth of an education and promotion system stifle?	intellectual development
Which military historian criticized the French system as being defective?	Dallas Irvine
What aspect of the Chassepot was superior to the German needle gun?	longer range
What French weapon was considered a rough prototype of the first machine gun?	the mitrailleuse
How many barrels did the mitrailleuse feature?	thirty-seven barrels
What was the range of the mitrailleuse?	1,200 yd (1,100 m)
Treating the mitrailleuse like what rendered it far less effective	artillery
The French Marines and naval infantry were dispatched to reinforce what?	French Army of Châlons
The French navy fell captive where?	at Sedan
Who also was captured at Sedan?	Napoleon III
The autumn storms of what sea forced the return of yet more French ships?	the North Sea
On which rough date did the French navy abandon their blockade?	September 1870
Which marshal was closest to Wissembourg?	Marshal MacMahon
How many divisions did MacMahon command?	four divisions
Over how many miles did MacMahon's divisions cover?	20 miles
Whose conduct made a bad situation worse?	General Auguste-Alexandre Ducrot
What group did General Ducrot command?	the 1st Division
What became highly politicised during the war?	Paris National Guard
In what type of neighborhoods did the occur especially?	working-class neighbourhoods
What did the National Guard refuse to wear?	uniforms
What did the National Guard refuse to obey?	commands from the national government
On which dates did La Semaine Sanglante occur in Paris?	21–28 May
Who commanded the French army at the battle of Worth?	General MacMahon
Which German divisison did MacMahon engage?	German 3rd Army
Who commanded the German 1st Army?	Steinmetz
What did a German patrol spot that led them to believe that Frossard had retreated?	decoy fires
Whose plan did German armies ignore in attacking Frossard?	Moltke's
Who were the casualties especially terrible for?	the attacking Prussian forces
What was the grand total of German casualties and those missing in action?	20,163
What were the number of French killed and wounded?	7,855
What was the number of French prisoners?	4,420
What did most Prussians fall under?	French Chassepot rifles
What was the republican government amenable to?	war reparations
Who declared that France would not yield "an inch of its territory?"	Favre
Who was Favre speaking on behalf of?	Government of National Defense
When did Favre make the declaration concerning colonial territories?	6 September
What did this cause the Republic to renew?	declaration of war
Who was the Prussian Minister of War?	Albrecht von Roon
What was the time span that von Roon acted as minister?	1859 to 1873
He instituted a series of what regarding the Prussian military?	reforms
What was the first step in the reforms?	a reorganization of the army
What was the second reform?	the conscription of every male
What type of artillery were the French equipped with?	bronze, rifled muzzle-loading
What newer artillery were Prussians using?	steel breech-loading guns
What did the French believe was overly wasted in artillery with a higher rate of fire?	ammunition
The Prussian artillery batteries had what percentage more of guns than the French?	30% more
What was the typical range that Prussian guns could fire?	2–3 kilometres
On what date did the Government of National Defence negotiate an armistice?	28 January 1871
With whom did the French government negotiate?	the Prussians
What consequence of war were Parisians suffering?	starving
Which French minister traveled to Versailles to discuss peace?	Favre
What was the date on which jFarve and Bismarck met?	24 January
How many were killed by the Communards?	500 people
Which religious official was also killed during the fighting?	Archbishop of Paris
What type of buildings were especially targeted to be burned down?	government buildings
What famous palace was also burned down?	Tuileries Palace
What is the rough estimate of the number of people killed?	between 6,000 and 10,000
At the start of the war, how many German troops were focused on the French frontier?	462,000
How many French troops were available to stand again the Germans?	270,000
What is the literal meaning of the Prussian word "Kreis?"	literally "circle"
What did the French military numbers suffer from the most?	having lost 100,000 stragglers
The events of the Franco-Prussian War had great influence on what?	military thinking
Lessons garnered from the war included recognizing the need for what kind of system?	general staff system
Who adopted the Prussian artillery tactics in 1914?	European armies
What was the French 75 optimised to directly support?	advancing infantry
Evidence from what war suggested the increased benefits of smokeless poweder rifles?	Russo-Japanese War
A unified German Empire ended the balance of power in which congress?	Congress of Vienna
At the end of the Napoleonic wars, Germany had established itself as what, in continental Europe?	the main power
Who remained the dominant world power at this time?	Great Britain
British involvement in European matters in the late 19th century was considered what?	very limited
The Crown Prince's marriage to whom was considered the most prominent of German-British royal liasons?	the daughter of Queen Victoria
Where in Eritrea did Italian scientists find one of the oldest hominids?	Buya
How old was the hominid that was found in Eritrea?	over 1 million years
What place in Eritrea is believed to have played a major part in human evolution?	section of the Danakil Depression
What possible link is represented by the hominid found in Eritrea?	hominids and the earliest anatomically modern humans
What is the importance pertaining to the age of the hominid that was found in Eritrea?	it is the oldest skeletal find of its kind
Who was James Bruce?	Scottish traveler
In 1770, who reported that Medri Bahri was a distinct political entity from Abyssinia?	James Bruce
How is The Bahre-Nagassi translated?	"Kings of the Sea"
What determined whether The Bahre-Nagassi fought with or against the Abyssinians?	geopolitical circumstances
Which century marked the arrival of the Ottomans?	16th
What subsequently led to the Eritran War of Independence?	annexation
When did Eritrea join a federation with Ethiopia, the Federation of Ethipia and Eritrea?	1947
What persisted and led to the Eritrean-Ethiopian War of 1998-2000?	Hostilities between Eritrea and Ethiopia
What was the result of the War of Independence?	Eritrean independence
What is the result of the incorporation of independent kingdoms and sultanates?	modern-day Eritrea
What did excavations around Agordat yield the remains of?	the Gash Group
What is the Gash Group?	an ancient pre-Aksumite civilization
Where is Agordat located?	central Eritrea
What type of evidence indicated that the C-Group spoke Afroasiatic languages of the Berber branches?	linguistic
When did the C-Group inhabit the Nile Valley?	between 2500–1500 BC
What purpose did stelae serve?	religious
Who erected a number of large stelae in pre-Christian times?	The Aksumites
Which stelae is considered the largest in the world, standing at 90 feet?	the obelisk of Aksum
Where is the Ark of the Covenant believed to be resting?	Aksum
Who eventually adopted Christianity under Ezana?	Aksum
What is the abbreviation for the United Nations' Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions?	ACABQ
What does the acronym INTERPOL stand for?	International Criminal Police Organization
Which league is Eritrea an observing member of?	Arab League
Who ruled Aksum and also governed the port of Adulis?	Zoskales
How did the Aksumite rulers facilitate trade?	by minting their own Aksumite currency
Which kingdoms did Aksum regularly enter the politics of?	on the Arabian peninsula
Who did Aksum conquer in order to extend its rule over the Arabian peninsula?	Himyarite Kingdom
Where was Ivory exported according to the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea?	throughout the ancient world
When was the Eritrean Railway completed in Saati?	1888
When did the Eritrean Railway reach the Asmara highlands?	1911
What was the longest line in the world during its time?	The Asmara–Massawa Cableway
Who dismantled the Asmara-Massawa Cableway?	the British
In what areas of public service were Eritreans particularly employed?	police and public works departments
Who prompted Eritrea to be federated with Ethiopia in 1950?	United States
Which UN Resolution called for Eritrea and Ethiopia to be linked via a loose federal structure under sovereignty of the Emperor?	390A(V)
What would federal government control in Eritrea according to Resolution 390A(V)??	foreign affairs (including commerce), defense, finance, and transportation
Which Eritrean wishes did Resolution 390A(V) ignore?	independence
What did Resolution 390A(V) guarantee the population of Eritrea?	democratic rights and a measure of autonomy
What did the Eritrea administration open to produce products such as buttons and construction materials?	a number of new factories
How many factories were in Eritrea by 1939?	around 2,198
Who were the main employees in the factories of Eritrea?	Eritrean citizens
Besides Eritreans, which other nationality increased its city population because of new industries?	Italians
How much did the number of Italians residing in Eritrea increase in 5 years due to factories being built?	from 4,600 to 75,000
What big cat is said to inhabit the mountains of the Gash-Barka Region?	Lions
In December 2001, how many elephants were seen in the vicinity of the Gash River?	about 30
What species did the elephants at the Gash River seem to form a symbiotic relationship with?	olive baboons
Which animal herds were thought to have fallen victim to the war of independence?	elephant
How many ecoregions make up Eritrea?	three
What is the highest point in Eritrea?	Emba Soira
Where is Emba Soira located?	in the center of Eritrea
How high is Emba Soira?	3,018 meters (9,902 ft) above sea level
What is the probably location in Eritrea where three tectonic plates are pulling away from each other?	The Afar Triangle or Danakil Depression
How many elephants are believed to be left in Eritrea?	around 100
What type of snakes are common in Gash Barka?	deadly
Where in Eritrea can puff adder and red spitting cobra be found?	widespread
Where in Eritrea are marine species such as dolphin, turtles and manta ray found?	coastal areas
Which dog, previously found in Eritrea, is now considered extirpated from the entire country?	African wild dog (Lycaon pictus)
According to Human Rights Watch, how do the human rights in Eritrea compare to the rest of the world?	among the worst
According to a 500-page UN Human Rights Council report, what was widespread behavior by state officials in Eritrea?	sexual harassment, rape and sexual servitude
What type of state government exists in Eritrea?	a one-party state
According to many western countries, why have Eritrean authorities detained an unknown number of people?	for their political activism
In what year was the United Nations Human Rights Council report written?	2015
Why have Eritrean government officials participated in numerous meetings with NGO representatives?	In an attempt at reform
What did the Eritrean government ban in 2007?	female genital mutilation
What new movement is aimed at opening dialogue between the government and opposition?	Citizens for Democratic Rights in Eritrea
Who, along with ordinary citizens, makes up the Citizens for Democratic Rights in Eritrea?	some people close to the government
What are the main concerns Eritreans speak about in terms of female circumcision?	health concerns and individual freedom
In the 2014 Press Freedom Index, what organization ranked the media environment in Eritrea as the worse of 178 countries?	Reporters Without Borders
How did Reporters Without Borders rank the media environment of Eritrea compared to totalitarian North Korea?	just below
What type of media has been banned from Eritrea since 2001?	Independent
According to the BBC, which African country is the only one that has no privately owned news media?	Eritrea
According to Reporters Without Borders, where doesn't a single foreign news correspondent live?	Asmara
Under which program did Eritrea develp and repair its transportation infrastructure during the war?	Warsay Yika'alo
How long was the coastal highway between Massawa and Asseb?	more than 500 km
What type of locomotives are sometimes used on the Eritrean Railway to cater to groups of enthusiasts?	Steam
What is the capital of Eritrea?	Asmara
Which railway was rehabilitated under the Warsay Yika'alo Program?	Eritrean
What is the official language of Eritrea?	The nation has no official language
What was the most widely spoken language in Eritrea in 2006?	Tigrinya
What does the Constitution establish of all Eritrean languages?	equality
What languages serve as de facto working languages in Eritrea?	Modern Standard Arabic and English
What language is used in Eritrean university education and many technical fields?	English
Which part of Eritrea's health care goals have they been most successful in?	child health
What was the Eritrean life expectancy at birth in 1960?	39.1
What was the Eritrean life expectancy st birth in 2008?	59.5
Which practice was banned by the Eritrean government with claimes it is painful and has life-threatening health problems for women?	female genital mutilation
How much did the National Malaria Protection Unit reduce malarial mortality by from 1998 - 2006?	85%
Where does the Italian influences on Eritrean cuisine come from?	its colonial history
What is Eritrea's popular alcoholic beverage Mies made out of?	honey
What food item did Italians bring to Eritrea during colonial times?	pasta
How does 'Pasta al Sugo e Berbere' translate in English?	"Pasta with tomato sauce and berbere" (spice)
What is the main food, influenced by Italy, eaten in Eritrea's capital today?	pasta
What geographical location in Eritrea has largely shaped the culture of Eritrea?	Red Sea coast
How many rounds is coffee served in during a coffee ceremony?	three
What is one of the most recognizable parts of Eritran culture that can be offered when visiting friends as well as being a daily staple of life?	the coffee ceremony
What do Eritrean's offer a person who declines coffee?	most likely tea
What is the first round of the coffee ceremony called?	awel
What country borders Eritrea in the west?	Sudan
What country borders Eritrea in the south?	Ethiopia
What country borders Eritrea in the southeast?	Djibouti
What extensive coastline makes up a portion of Eritrea's East border?	Red Sea
What is the total area of the nation of Eritrea?	117,600 km2 (45,406 sq mi)
What is the best know musical genre amongst the Tigrinya?	guaila
What is the Eritrean traditional instrument, the wata?	a distant/rudimentary cousin of the violin
Who is the most popular Eritrean singing artist?	Helen Meles
What is Helen Meles noted for?	her powerful voice and wide singing range
Who, in Eritrea, have their own styles of music and  accompanying dance?	ethnic groups
What was the Eritrean region known as during the Middle Ages?	Medri Bahri
What is the English translation of Medri Bahri?	sea-land
When was Eritrea annexed by Ethiopia?	1953
When did the Eritrean Liberation Front form?	1960
When did Eritrea gain independence?	following the 1993 referendum
In 2010, what was conducted on mummified remains of baboons?	genetic
Who was determined to be the closest match for the baboon mummies?	modern baboon specimens in Eritrea and Ethiopia
What type of analysis did the scientists use to examine hairs from the 2 baboon mummies formerly preserved in the British Museum?	oxygen isotope analysis
Where did the 2 baboons' mummified remains originate?	Punt
Where did researchers suggest that Punt was located?	region that included eastern Ethiopia and all of Eritrea
What  domain were the Eritrean highlands under after the decline of Aksum?	Bahr Negash ruled by the Bahr Negus
What was the area in the Eritrean highlands named under Emperor Zaro Yaqob?	Medri Bahri
What was the capitol of Medri Bahri?	Debarwa
What were the main provinces of Medri Bahri?	Hamasien, Serae and Akele Guzai
What is the English translation of Medri Bahri?	Sea land
Whose rise to power in 1922 brought profounc change to the government in Italian Eritrea?	Benito Mussolini's
When was Italian Eritrea significantly enlarged?	After il Duce declared the birth of the Italian Empire
When was the birth of the Italian Empire declared?	May 1936
What was Eritrea chosen to be by the Italian government during the Italian Empire?	industrial center of Italian East Africa
What does Africa Orientale Italiana mean?	Italian East Africa
Who dissolved the Eritrean parliament in 1962?	Emperor Haile Selassie
Who waged an armed struggle for independence in 1962 after Eritrea was annexed?	ELF
What does the acroynm ELF stand for?	Eritrean Liberation Front
How long did the Eritrean War for Independence last?	30 years
What is the acronym for Eritrean People's Liberation Front?	EPLF
What did disagreements following the Eritrean War result in?	stalemate
What did the stalemate lead the President of Eritrea to urge the UN to do?	take action on Ethiopia
Who accused Eritrea of planting bombs at an African Union summit?	Ethiopia
What supported the accusation that Eritrea planted bombs at the African Union summit?	a UN report
What did Eritrea do when it was accused of planting bombs at the African Union summit?	denied the claims
In 2004, how many physicians did Eritrea have per 1000 people?	0.5
How prevalent is HIV among the 15-49 age group in Eritrea?	exceeds 2%
What is the fertility rate in Eriterea?	5 births per woman
As of 2002, how many births were attended by skilled health personnel in Eriterea?	28.3%
What is a major cause of death in neonates in Eriterea?	severe infection
How do most people dress in the larger cities of Eritrea?	Western casual
How do both men and women often dress in offices in Eritrea?	suits
What are zurias, the traditional clothes still worn by Christian highlander women in Eritrea?	bright white gowns
How do women in the Muslim communities of the Eritrean lowland dress?	in brightly colored clothes
Who are the only women who follow the tradition of covering half of their faces, though not their hair?	Rashaida women
What are the most popular sports in Eritrea?	Football and cycling
What world record is held by Eritrean athlete Zersenay Tadese?	half marathon distance running
What is the name of the multi-stage international cycling event held throughout Eritrea?	Tour of Eritrea
Who became the first black African riders to compete in the Tour de France?	Teklehaimanot and fellow Eritrean Merhawi Kudus
Who became the first Eritrean to ride the Vuelta a Espana in 2012?	Daniel Teklehaimanot
Who occupied the Red Sea coast during the last interglacial period?	early anatomically modern humans
How old were the obsidian tools that were discovered by the Eritrean Research Project Team?	over 125,000 years old
Where did the Research Project Team find the obsidian tools?	near the Bay of Zula
What Team was composed of Eritrean, Canadian, American, Dutch and French scientists?	Eritrean Research Project Team
What were the tools believed to have been used for by early humans?	to harvest marine resources like clams and oysters
When was the Aussa Sultanate established?	end of the 16th century
Where was the Aussa Sultanate established?	Denkel lowlands of Eritrea
Who was the leader of Afar in 1734?	Kedafu, head of the Mudaito clan
What did Kedafu establish in 1734?	Mudaito Dynasty
What marked the start of a new and sophisticated polity that would last into the colonial period?	Mudaito Dynasty
When did Emperor Yohannes II die?	1889
What was the new colony of Italia Eritrea a colony of?	the Kingdom of Italy
What did Gen. Oreste Baratieri proclaim in the highlands along the Eritrean coast?	the new colony of Italian Eritrea
When was the Treaty of Wuchale signed?	1889
What years was the Treaty of Wuchale formally binding?	1889–1913
What did Emperor Haile Selassie seek to annex in the 1950's?	Eritrea and Italian Somaliland
Why did the British and Americans want to cede most of Eritrea to the Ethiopians?	as a reward for their support during World War II
Who laid claim to Eritrea and Italian Somaliland in a letter to Franklin D. Roosevelt?	Emperor Haile Selassie
Who consistently requested that a referendum be held immediately to settle the question of Eritrean sovereignty?	The Independence Bloc of Eritrean parties
Who did Ethiopians support in World War II?	The British and Americans
How is the Eritrean highway system named?	according to the road classification
What are T roads, the lowest level that typically serves local interests?	improved earth roads which are occasionally paved
What are the three levels of road classification in Eritrea?	primary (P), secondary (S), and tertiary (T)
What are S roads, the mid-level that connects district capitals to regional capitals?	single-layered asphalt road
What are P roads, those that carry traffic between all major towns in Eritrea?	fully asphalted (throughout their entire length)
What percentage of Eritrea is estimated to adhere to Christianity?	50%
What percentage of Eritrea is estimated to adhere to Islam?	48%
What do unrecognized faiths and denominations in Eritrea have to undergo?	a registration process
When did the Eritrean government begin to officially recognize certain churches?	May 2002
What does the government's registration system require religious groups to submit about their membership?	personal information
What ages are officially compulsary for education in Eritrea?	between seven and 13 years of age
What percentage of school-aged children are estimated to attend primary school?	70%
What percentage of school-aged children are estimated to attend secondary school?	61%
What is the student-teacher ratio in elementary schools?	45 to 1
What is the student-teacher ratio in secondary schools?	54 to 1
What meat does a traditional Eritrean stew consist of?	beef, kid, lamb or fish
Which neighbor does Eritrean cuisine strongly resemble?	Ethiopia
Why does Eritrean cooking tend to feature more seafood than Ethiopian cuisine?	their coastal location
How does the texture of Eritrean dishes compare to Ethiopian meals?	lighter
What ingredients fo Eritreans tend to use less of than Ethiopians?	seasoned butter and spices
What kind of uranium is sometimes used to shield radioactive materials in containers?	Depleted
What is a strong source of radiation that is blocked by depleted uranium?	radium
How is depleted uranium used in missile re-entry vehicles?	ballast
What trait causes depleted uranium to be used in gyroscopic compasses?	high density
What type of alpha emitter is uranium?	weak
What is another term for uranium ore?	pitchblende
Who isolated radium in uranium ore?	Marie Curie
In what types of paints was radium first used?	glow-in-the-dark
What devices were painted with radium paint?	clock and aircraft dials
Along with red, blue, black, yellow and green, what was a notable color of uranium tile glaze?	mauve
What was the world's first artificial nuclear reactor?	Enrico Fermi's Chicago Pile
In what state is the X-10 Graphite Reactor located?	Tennessee
Along with the X-10 Pile, what was the X-10 Graphite Reactor previously known as?	the Clinton Pile
In what state is Argonne National Laboratory's Experimental Breeder Reactor I located?	Idaho
On what date did Breeder Reactor I first make electricity?	20 December 1951
Where does uranium rank among elements in terms of its abundance in the Earth's crust?	51st
Where is uranium naturally formed?	in supernovae
Along with potassium-40 and uranium, the decay of what element is a primary heat source driving plate tectonics?	thorium
In what state is the Earth's outer core?	liquid
What isotope of uranium was the first to be found fissile?	235
When a nuclear chain reaction in uranium-235 doesn't result in a burst of heat, what does it result in?	an explosion
How many nuclei does uranium-235 usually divide into when bombarded with slow neutrons?	two
What is used to slow a chain reaction in a nuclear reactor?	neutron poison
What does a neutron poison absorb?	free neutrons
What type of complexes does uranium(VI) form in nature?	carbonate
The presence of what substance at alkaline pH makes it difficult to precipitate uranium as phosphate?	carbonate
What is BSAR-1 a strain of?	Sphingomonas sp.
How much economically viable uranium is there in ore reserves, in millions of tonnes?	5.5
How many millions of tonnes are uranium are regarded as mineral resources?	35
What was the price of uranium per pound as of May 2003?	$10
In 2005, how much money was spent on uranium exploration?	US$200 million
How much money was spent to explore for uranium in 2006?	$774 million
When was it observed that bombarding uranium with neutrons results in beta ray emission?	1934
Who led the team that discovered that bombarding uranium with neutrons created beta ray emissions?	Enrico Fermi
What was the name given by Corbino to the incorrectly designated atomic number 94?	hesperium
What was the job title of Orso Mario Corbino?	Dean of the Faculty of Rome
Who was the aunt of Otto Robert Frisch?	Lise Meitner
In what medium does the Pourbaix diagram change when carbonate anions interact with uranium(VI)?	carbonate containing solution
What notable carbonates are often water soluble?	uranium
What does a uranium(VI) cation form when it binds to two terminal oxides and three or more carbonates?	anionic complexes
Along with arsenic, what metal is roughly as abundant as uranium?	molybdenum
Along with silver, mercury, tin and cadmium, what metal is uranium more plentiful than?	antimony
What is the most prevalent uranium ore?	uraninite
What mineral sometimes contains uranium?	lignite
What types of rocks sometimes contain uranium?	phosphate
What is the least prevalent major isotope of natural uranium?	uranium-234
What is the natural abundance of uranium-235?	0.71%
What isotope of uranium is formed when 238U experiences spontaneous fission?	uranium-239
When uranium isotope is formed from the decay of neptunium-237?	uranium-233
What isotope is it theorized will form uranium-2343 after double beta decay?	thorium-232
About how many tonnes of uranium is theorized to be present in the sea?	4.6 billion
What did ORNL call their material that performs surface retention on solid molecules?	HiCap
The presence of what substance in sea water has resulted in low yields when attempting to extract uranium?	carbonate
Where were ORNL's results verified?	Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
When was HiCap announced?	2012
What is the sole fissile isotope that occurs in nature?	Uranium-235
What can be turned into plutonium-239 in a nuclear reactor?	Uranium-238
What uranium isotope is produced from thorium?	uranium-233
Along with uranium-235, what isotope is noted for having a high fission cross-section for slow neutrons?	uranium-233
What is 238U?	Depleted uranium
What is OSHA?	Occupational Safety and Health Administration
What is the OSHA uranium exposure limit for an 8-hour workday?	0.25 mg/m3
What does REL stand for?	recommended exposure limit
What is the NIOSH uranium exposure standard over an 8-hour workday?	0.2 mg/m3
At what level of exposure does uranium become imminently dangerous to health?	10 mg/m3
Along with UO2, what is the commonest form of uranium oxide?	triuranium octoxide
What is the stablest uranium compound?	Triuranium octoxide
In what form is uranium most often used as fuel for nuclear reactors?	Uranium dioxide
What was the earliest year in recorded history that uranium oxide was used?	79 CE
In what county was glass with uranium oxide content found?	Italy
What color of ceramic glaze was extracted from uranium oxide?	yellow
In what year was yellow uranium oxide glass discovered?	1912
What institution did R.T. Gunther belong to?	the University of Oxford
What was the first self-sustained nuclear chain reaction created by human beings called?	Chicago Pile-1
On what date was the first self-sustained nuclear chain reaction created artificially?	2 December 1942
What project was Fermi working for?	Manhattan
On the campus of what educational institution was Chicago Pile-1 created?	University of Chicago
How many metric tons of uranium oxide was used in Chicago Pile-1?	53
Along with lemon yellow, what color is produced in uranium glass?	orange-red
Who discovered uranium in pitchblende?	Martin Heinrich Klaproth
Who was responsible for first isolating uranium?	Eugène-Melchior Péligot
Who discovered that uranium was radioactive?	Henri Becquerel
What was the first nuclear weapon used in a war called?	Little Boy
What percentage of uranium in nature is uranium-235?	0.7204%
What is the term for the amount of uranium-235 needed to sustain a nuclear chain reaction?	critical mass
What is the most prevalent natural isotope of uranium?	uranium-238
What percentage of natural uranium is isotope 238?	99.2742%
Along with gas cooled reactors, what type of reactor doesn't use uranium-235?	pressurised heavy water
What is uranium used for most often in the military?	high-density penetrators
Along with titanium, what element often makes up the portion of high-density penetrators not made of depleted uranium?	molybdenum
What percentage of high-density penetrators is not made up of depleted uranium?	1–2%
Along with the Balkans, in what geographical location did a war take place where the UK used depleted uranium munitions?	Persian Gulf
What illness is possibly tied to the use of depleted uranium munitions?	Gulf War Syndrome
Who discovered uranium?	Martin Heinrich Klaproth
In what year did the discovery of uranium occur?	1789
In what city was uranium discovered?	Berlin
What did Klaproth probably create when he dissolved pitchblende in nitric acid?	sodium diuranate
Who discovered the planet Uranus?	William Herschel
What percentage range of uranium oxide is usually contained in low-grade uranium ore?	0.01 to 0.25%
Along with underground, open pit and in-situ leaching, what sort of mining is used to mine uranium?	borehole
In what country are high-grade uranium ores notably found?	Canada
In what province of Canada is the Athabasca Basin?	Saskatchewan
What is the average percentage of uranium oxide contained in the ores mined in the Athabasca Basin?	23%
What was the uranium-based bomb made by the US in World War II called?	Little Boy
What was the codename of the plutonium-based bomb created in the Second World War?	Fat Man
On what date was Little Boy detonated?	6 August 1945
What was the equivalent yield in TNT of the Little Boy bomb, in tonnes?	12,500
Over what city was Little Boy detonated?	Hiroshima
As of 2005, what country was the largest producer of uranium oxides?	Canada
What percentage of world uranium oxide production is produced by Argentina?	2.1%
What country produced 5.5% of the world's concentrated uranium oxide in 2005?	Uzbekistan
How many countries produced concentrated uranium oxides in 2005?	seventeen
How many tonnes of uranium was Australia expected to produce in 2009?	9,430
Who was the Soviet Union's opponent in the Cold War?	United States
How many nuclear warheads can be made with 540 metric tons of highly enriched weapons grade uranium?	40,000
What was the expenditure of the Material Protection, Control, and Accounting Program between 1993 and 2005?	US $550 million
What is another term for uranium that is enriched?	weapons grade
Approximately how many times did police capture shipments of bomb-grade plutonium or uranium between 1993 and 2005?	16
What is the color of U4+?	green
What state is represented by the UO2+ 2 ion?	uranium(VI)
Along with uranyl sulfate and uranyl chloride, what compound is formed by the UO2+ 2 ion?	uranyl carbonate
What common complex is formed by the UO2+ 2 ion with organic chelating agents?	uranyl acetate
What microorganism can notably absorb a very high concentrate of uranium?	Citrobacter
What is given to Citrobacter to cause it to absorb uranyl ions?	glycerol phosphate
What lichen is known to absorb a uranium concentration nearly 300 times higher than the amount in the environment?	Trapelia involuta
What protobacterium notably bioremediates ground water uranium?	Geobacter
What fungus is known to cause uranium content in its symbiotic plant roots to increase?	Glomus intraradices
At what temperature range in degrees Fahrenheit will uranium metal form uranium hydride?	482 to 572
What does uranium metal react with to create uranium hydride?	hydrogen
Above what temperature is the β form of uranium hydride created?	250 °C
Along with uranium carbide and halide, what type of compound is often created with uranium hydride?	nitride
How many crystal modifications of uranium hydride are extant?	Two
Along with uranium monocarbide and uranium dicarbide, what is a notable carbide of uranium?	diuranium tricarbide
Below what temperature is U2C3 stable?	1800 °C
Between what percent fraction range of uranium-235 is uranium regarded as enriched?	3% and 5%
In what year did the cost of uranium notably begin to increase?	2001
What is the maximum uranium-235 isotope concentration for uranium to be considered depleted?	0.3%
What was the price of a kilogram of depleted uranium hexafluoride in 2001?	$5
How much did a kilogram of depleted uranium hexafluoride cost as of July 2007?	$130
Along with the heart, brain and liver, what system is notably affected by exposure to uranium?	kidney
What is the main form of 238U decay?	alpha radiation
What type of uranium compounds are uranium trioxide and uranyl nitrate?	hexavalent
At what temperature will grains of uranium metal spontaneously ignite in air?	room
What is the name of the most widely used enrichment process?	gas centrifuge
What compound is UF6?	uranium hexafluoride
What enrichment process was used by the Manhattan Project?	gaseous diffusion
In the gaseous diffusion process, what is diffused through a silver-zinc membrane?	uranium hexafluoride
How does the weight of uranium-238 compare to that of uranium-235?	heavier
What is uranium's symbol on the Periodic Table of Elements?	U
What is the atomic number of uranium?	92
What color is uranium?	silvery-white
How many valence electrons are contained in an atom of uranium?	6
Of what series in the Periodic Table of Elements is uranium a part?	actinide
What non-metal elements does uranium notably not react to?	noble gases
What coats uranium metal in air?	uranium oxide
Along with nitric acids, what acids dissolve uranium?	Hydrochloric
What is a notable form uranium ore is converted into after extraction?	uranium dioxide
What reacts with finely divided uranium?	cold water
During what war was uranium-235 first used to create nuclear weapons?	World War II
From what isotope of uranium is plutonium-239 derived?	238
What is mixed with tritium and experiences nuclear fusion in a fission/fusion bomb?	deuterium
What is another name for a fission/fusion bomb?	thermonuclear weapon
What does non-fissile mean?	unenriched
What product of uranium was used as toner?	nitrate
Along with uranyl formate, what product of uranium is used in transmission electron microscopy?	Uranyl acetate
What light bulbs use lamp filaments containing uranium?	stage
Along with leather, what industry uses uranium in dyes and stains?	wood
In addition to wool, what is uranium salt a mordant of?	silk
Of what nationality was Perrin?	French
In what county was the Oklo mine located?	Gabon
How old are the ore deposits in the Oklo mine?	1.7 billion years
When the Oklo mine ore deposits came into being, what percentage of uranium on Earth consisted of uranium-235?	3%
Where in the United States is there a nuclear waste repository?	Yucca Mountain
How many times more abundant than silver is uranium in the Earth's crust?	40
How many kilograms of uranium may be contained in the oceans?	1013
Why is the concentrate of uranium in farmland so high?	phosphate fertilizers
What is the concentration of uranium in sea water?	3 parts per billion
What isotope of uranium has the most stability?	Uranium-238
About how old is the Earth?	4.468×109 years
What is the half-life of uranium-234?	2.48×105 years
What fraction of the Earth's uranium was uranium-235 during the Earth's youth?	one-fifth
What percentage of the alpha rays of natural uranium are emitted by 234U?	49%
What happens to a majority of ingested uranium?	excreted
Up to what percentage of uranyl ion can be absorbed when ingested?	5%
About what percentage of uranium oxide is absorbed when ingested?	0.5%
What does uranium have an affinity for?	phosphates
Where does uranium accumulate in the body?	bone tissue
How were the appointments to the Order of the British Empire made?	nomination of the self-governing Dominions of the Empire, the Viceroy of India, and the colonial governors
What remained the head of state of the British Empire?	the monarch
What evolved as the Commonwealth nominations continued?	Empire
Why did the oversea nominations discontinue?	established their own Orders
What countries established new orders?	Order of Australia, the Order of Canada, and the New Zealand Order of Merit
Who could wear a emblem of two crossed silver oak leaves?	Any individual made a member of the Order for gallantry
What year was it replaced?	1974
What was the emblem?	two crossed silver oak leaves on the same riband, ribbon or bow as the badge
What kind of medal was replaced in 1974?	Queen's Gallantry Medal
They continued to wear what the insignia of what?	lower grade with the oak leaves
Who are appointed to citizens of nations?	Honorary knighthoods
Where was Queen Elizabeth ll not Head of State?	citizens of nations
What is honorary appointees are incorrectly referred to?	Sir or Dame
Who are examples of Sir of Dame?	Bill Gates or Bob Geldof
What is an example of irish broadcaster?	Terry Wogan
Who are the six officials of The Order?	Prelate; the Dean; the Secretary; the Registrar; the King of Arms; and the Usher
Who was The Dean of St. Paul?	ex officio the Dean of the Order
Who serves as the Order's Prelate?	The Bishop of London, a senior bishop in the Church of England
Who is not a member of the College of Arms?	The Order's King of Arms
What is the Usher of the Order?	Gentleman Usher of the Purple Rod
Who was discontinued in the Commonwealth realms?	Appointments to the Order of the British Empire
Who established a national system of honours and awards?	Order of Australia, the Order of Canada, and the New Zealand Order of Merit
How were the different levels of award and honour reflected the imperial system?	Canada, Australia, and New Zealand
What were the highest class?	Knights and Dames
Who were MBE'S?	The members of The Beatles
In what year was the Beatles made MBE's?	1965
Who compared military membership in the Order?	John Lennon
Who said "lots of people who complained about us receiving the MBE received thris for heroism in the war.	John Lennon
When did John Lennon return his MBE insignia?	25 November 1969
Who was the most excellent Order of the British Empire?	order of chivalry of British constitutional monarchy
When was the order of chivalry of British constitutional monarchy established?	4 June 1917
Who rewarded contributions to the arts and sciences?	"order of chivalry of British constitutional monarchy
Who established the chivalry of british constiutional monarchy?	King George V
Who is the recipient?	knight if male, or dame if female
What was instituted to serve as a lower award granting recipients affiliation?	Medal of the Order of the British Empire
What was the medal renamed as?	British Empire Medal
In what year was the Medal of the Order of the British Empire established?	1922
When was it stopped being rewarded?	1993
How many BEM's were awarded for the Queen's Diamond Jubilee?	293
From what year could the Sovereign appoint a person as Commander, Officer or Member of the Order of the British Empire?	1940
Of what acts did the Members of the Order of the British Empire appoint?	below the level required for the George Medal
When was the awards designated the Order of the British Empire for Gallantry?	14 January 1958
What grade was determined?	same criteria as usual, and not by the level of gallantry
Who would prefix Sir, and Dames Grand Cross?	Knights Grand Cross and Knights Commander
Who would prefix Dame, to their forenames?	Dames Grand Cross
Who would prefix Lady to their surnames?	Wives of Knights
Such forms are not used by whom?	peers and princes
Who wouldn't use the title Sir of Dame?	Clergy of the Church of England or the Church of Scotland
Who has set honours awarded by the President of India?	India
What is referred to as the Padma Awards?	President of India who holds a republican position some consider similar to that of the monarch in Britain
Who holds a republican position some consider to monarch of Britain?	President of India
What does the Padma Awards consist of?	Padma Vibhushan, Padma Bhushan and Padma Shri
What does not carry any decoration or insignia that can be worn on the person?	Padma Vibhushan, Padma Bhushan and Padma Shri
How many Knights are in The Order?	300 Knights and Dames Grand Cross
How many commanders are in The Order?	8,960
How many Knights and Dames Commander?	845
How many officers and members maybe be appointed per year?	858 Officers and 1,464 Members
Who has the highest numbers of the British Orders of Chivalry?	Order of the British Empire
What are the Members of classes of the Order assigned to?	positions in the order of precedence
Who of the male members feature on the order?	Wives of male members of all classes also feature on the order of precedence, as do sons, daughters and daughters-in-law
Who are not assigned any special precedence?	relatives of Ladies of the Order
Who can individuals derive precedence from?	fathers or husbands
Who can individuals can not derive precedence from?	mothers or wives
What year did the Enlightenment begin according to French historians?	1715
Recent historians begin the period of Enlightenment in the 1620's which was also the start of what revolution?	scientific revolution
A variety of movements such as liberalism and neoclassicism's intellectual heritage can be traced back to what period of time?	the Enlightenment.
What was the French term for philosophers in the period of Enlightenment?	The Philosophes
In what year did Louis XIV die?	1715
In what year did the French Revolution begin?	1789
In what decade did the scientific revolution begin?	1620s
Who said that virtue provides "the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers"?	Francis Hutcheson
Who was a major figure in the skeptical philosophical and empiricist traditions of philosophy?	David Hume
Much of what is incorporated in the scientific method and some modern attitudes towards the relationship between science and religion were developed by David Hume and what other philosopher?	Adam Smith
Which moral philosopher said "the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers"?	Francis Hutcheson
Which two men were Francis Hutecheson's proteges?	David Hume and Adam Smith
The nature of knowledge, evidence, experience, and causation together are called what?	the scientific method
What type of philosopher was Francis Hutcheson?	moral
In what areas of philosophy did Hume become a major figure?	skeptical philosophical and empiricist traditions
What kind of topics began appearing more commonly in poetry and literature during the Enlightenment?	scientific topics
Who penned a poem called "Poem to the Memory of Newton" to mourn the loss and praise the legacy of Newton?	James Thomson
Sir Richard Blackmore committed what system to verse in Creation?	Newtonian system
What year was Newton's death?	1727
Who wrote "Poem to the Memory of Newton?"	James Thomson
In what year did Newton die?	1727
Whose death in 1727 prompted poems to be written in his honour for decades?	Newton
Who wrote Creation, a Philosophical Poem in Seven Books?	Sir Richard Blackmore
In what year was Creation, a Philosophical Poem in Seven Books written?	1712
Who developed some of the fundamentals of European liberal thought?	Thomas Hobbes
Thomas Hobbes ushered in the new debate of social contract theory through which work of his?	Leviathan
What did John Locke base his governance philosophy on?	social contract theory
What did John Locke base his governance philosphy in?	social contract theory
Which English philosopher wrote Leviathan in 1651?	Thomas Hobbes
Who developed the view that all legitimate political power must be "representative?"	Thomas Hobbes
Which of Hobbes' ideas led to the distinction between civil society and the state?	the artificial character of the political order
How does John Locke define mutual security?	the idea that one cannot infringe on another's natural rights
What do Locke's idea of natural rights include?	perfect equality and freedom, and the right to preserve life and property
Why did John Locke believe that one person cannot enslave another?	because it is morally reprehensible
What was John Locke's one exception to denouncing slavery?	enslavement of a lawful captive in time of war would not go against one's natural rights
In which of John Locke's works are natural rights most famously defined and discussed?	Second Treatise
Who dropped any passages dealing with miracles or visitations of angels from his work the Jefferson Bible?	Thomas Jefferson
The Enlightenment era religious commentary was, in part, a response to which war?	Thirty Years' War
What did the Enlightenment mean for moderate Christians?	a return to simple Scripture
Did John Locke want to foster or avoid increased detailed debate on the essence of Christianity?	avoid
In which country did the Enlightenment become associated with anti-government and anti-Church radicalism?	France
Which of the Enlightenment's leaders did the British government give a knighthood and lucrative government office?	Isaac Newton
In which country did the government respond with hostility to the Enlightenment, even imprisoning philosophes?	France
Was government response to the Enlightenment uniformly positive or widely varied?	varied
In which class did the Enlightenment reach deepest, expressing a nationalistic tone?	middle
By 1794, what did those against the Enlightenment point to as confirmation of their predictions?	Terror during the French Revolution
Which type of philosophers argued that excessive dependence on reason was a mistake perpetuated by the Enlightenment?	Romantic
What two ideas did conservative and clerical defenders of traditional religion attack as evil forces that encouraged immorality?	materialism and skepticism
Most scholars use the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars or which other battle as a convenient date to end the Enlightenment?	French Revolution
French historians generally use the beginning of which King's reign to date the start of the Enlightenment?	Louis XV
What do French historians commonly call the Age of Enlightenment?	Siècle des Lumières (Century of Enlightenments)
In what year was Descartes' Discourse on Method published?	1637
In what year was Issaac Newton's Principia Mathematica published?	1687
The creation of the public sphere is associated with the rise of capitalism and which other historical trend?	rise of the modern nation state
What increased society's autonomy, self-awareness, and need for exchange of information?	Capitalism
In what year did the aristocracy move from the King's palace at Versailles to Paris?	1720
The desire to explore, record and systematize knowledge had a meaningful impact on what other form of publication?	music
What publication of Jean-Jacques Rousseau was a leading text in the late 18th century and was published 1767 in Geneva and 1768 in Paris?	Dictionnaire de musique
In what year was Charles Burney's A General History of Music: From the Earliest Ages to the Present Period published?	1776
What Mozart piece did Rose Rosengard Subotnik conclude is "an ideal musical representation of the Enlightenment"?	Die Zauberflöte (1791)
Which two perspectives did Rose Rosengard Subotnik use to compare Mozart's Die Cauberflote?	Enlightenment and Romantic
What was the principal social institution of the republic during the French Enlightenment?	salon
Was French society open or fearful of female participation in the literary sphere during the Enlightenment?	open
What female occupation allowed women to play an essential part in the French Enlightenment?	salonnières
Which event destroyed the former patronage and corporatism of France and allowed women to participate in society?	French Revolution
Where was Bibliotheque Bleue located?	Troyes, France
For what audience were the books of the Bibliotheque Bleue written?	largely rural and semi-literate
Which two influential periodicals  were closely associated with London coffee house culture and were sold from 1909 to 1714?	The Tatler and The Spectator
What collection of cheaply produced books represents the lower class' desire to participate in the Enlightenment?	Bibliothèque Bleue
Who was the target audience of natural history?	French polite society
Many texts had explicit instructive purposes as Naturalists catered to polite society's desire for what?	erudition
The idea of what quality was a social indicator that provided a new source of legitimacy for the dominant class?	taste (le goût)
Was the target audience of natural history evidenced more by the price of publications or its specific discourse of the genre?	specific discourse of the genre
Who drafted the first technical dictionary?	John Harris
What was the first technical dictionary drafted by John Harris titled?	Lexicon Technicum: Or, An Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences
Did the Lexicon Technicum focus on theological and biographical entries or science and technology?	science and technology
What year was the Lexicon Technicum published?	1704
In what language was the Lexicon Technicum written?	English
What book was published in 1686 specifically for women with an interest in scientific writing?	Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds
Who was the author of Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds (1686)?	Bernard de Fontenelle
Who wrote a successful natural history textbook for children titled The Easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature (1782)?	Sarah Trimmer
How many editions were published of Sarah Trimmer's history textbook for children?	eleven
Emilie du Chatelet's translation of what Newton work was published after her death in 1756?	Principia
The practice of contests dates back to what time period?	Middle Ages
Previous to 1725, what subject matter was focused on by the concours academiques?	generally religious and/or monarchical
Which topics of public controversy became more widely discussed around 1725?	theories of Newton and Descartes, the slave trade, women's education, and justice
Were the concours academiques public or private matters?	public
Where did the first English coffeehouse open in 1650?	Oxford
According to Brian Cowan, was learning more or less formal in coffehouses as opposed to private institutions?	less
What term did Brian Cowan give Oxford coffeehouses?	penny universities
Diderot, Voltaire, Mozart, Goethe, and Benjamin Franklin were all members of what secret network?	Freemasonry
To whom was Freemasonry most attractive?	powerful aristocrats and politicians as well as intellectuals, artists and political activists
Freemasonry expanded rapidly to nearly every country in which continent?	Europe
Trying to apply Enlightenment thought on religious and political tolerance became known as what?	enlightened absolutism
Which two Americans travelled to Europe during the Enlightenment and actively contributed to the scienific and political debate?	Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson
The ideals of the Enlightenment were incorporated into which two United States documents?	Declaration of Independence and the Constitution
Did the scientific revolution precede or follow the Age of Enlightenment?	preceded
Kant's work continued to shape German thought and European philosophy well into what century?	20th
In what year was Immanuel Kant born?	1724
For which work is Mary Wollstonecraft best known?	A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1791)
In what year was A Vindication on the Rights of Woman published?	1791
Mary Wollstonecraft argued for a society based on what idea?	reason
The basis of classical liberalism comes from whose philosophical concepts?	Hume
Whose philosophical concepts directly influenceed James Madison and thus the U.S. Constitution?	Hume
Who popularised Hume's philosophical concepts?	Dugald Stewart
What did Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau agree was necessary for a man to live in civil society?	social contract
Who wrote Discourse on Inequality?	Rousseau
Which theorist wrote Two Treatises of Government?	Locke
For what reason did Rousseau feel people joined into civil society?	to achieve unity while preserving individual freedom
From which state does Locke believe it is virtually improssible to break free?	state of war
Leaders of the Enlightenment that helped design laws and programs to reform the court system are called what by historians?	enlightened despots
Which enlightened despot was so over-enthusiastic that revolts broke out and nearly all of his programs were reversed?	Joseph II of Austria
In what country was the model constitution of 1791 in effect for only one year?	Poland
From what country was Enlightenment leader Catherine the Great?	Russia
Did Mendelssohn and Spinoza judge religion on its moral fruits or logic of its theology??	moral fruits
What did Enlightenment scholars seek to curtail and thereby prevent another age of intolerant religious war?	organized religion
Spinoza was determined to remove what from contemporary and historical theology?	politics
Did Moses Mendelssohn advise to follow a specific organized religion, or to whatever one found most convincing?	what they found most convincing
Who did Voltaire say that France looked to for ideas of civilization?	Scotland
What was the profession of James Anderson?	agronomist
Who was the first modern geologist?	James Hutton
William Cullen and Joseph Black shared what two occupations?	physicist and chemist
In what year was the French term Lumieres first used?	1733
What term became the German equivalent to the French term Lumieres?	Aufklärung
In what century did the term Enlightenment emerge in English?	19th
What is the Italian equivalent to the French term Lumieres?	illuminismo
Did the terms, Enlightenment, Lumieres, Aufklarung and illuminismo refer to distinct or overlapping movements?	overlapping
Did rising efficiency in production and communication lower or raise the prices of consumer goods?	lowered
Was the variety of goods available to consumers increased or decreased by the economic and social change of the Industrial Revolution?	increased
The context for the rise of the public sphere was the econoic and social change associated with what revolution?	Industrial Revolution
A the economy and middle class expanded, what artistic profession had an increasing number of members?	musicians
Which economic class expansion led to the emergence of music magazines and reviews?	middle
Women increased their presence in the amateur performers scene with what instrument, especially?	keyboard
Which musican mediums were the majority of amateur music works published for?	keyboard, voice and keyboard, and chamber ensemble
By what century in France had the men of letters fused with the elites?	mid-18th century
What was the term for the oppositional literary sphere of a "multitude of versifiers and would-be-authors"?	Grub Street
Could the London market support the large numbers of writers that were emerging?	not
Were men travelling to London to become authors paid well or poorly by the publishing-bookselling guilds?	very poorly
During which movement were the first scientific and literary journals established?	the Enlightenment
What was the title of the first scientific and literary journal?	the Parisian Journal des Sçavans
In what year did the first scientific and literary journal appear?	1665
Which two languages were the most dominant languages of scientific and literary publications?	French and Latin
Where were the vast majority of French language periodicals produced?	Holland
Which work published in 1712 explained terms that usefully described the trades and scientific and commercial education?	The Marperger Curieuses Natur-, Kunst-, Berg-, Gewerkund Handlungs-Lexicon
In the Jablonski Allgemeines Lexicon (1721) how many colums of text were dedicated to wine?	over five
Was the Jablonski Allgemeines Lexicon (1721) more dedicated to technical subjects or scientific theory?	technical subjects
In what year was the first edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica published?	1771
The Encyclopaedia Britannica was modelled along the same lines as a work from which country?	Germany
What enforced contest rule guaranteed that neither gender nor social rank would determine the judging?	anonymity
Were the vast majority of contest participants from the wealthier strata of society or the popular classes?	wealthier strata of society
Women's education common stressed which literary genre?	poetry
How many prize competitions did women win out of the 2300 in France?	49
What literary genre were the majority of female winning contest entries?	poetry
Where was the Cafe Procope established in 1686?	Paris
By the 1720s. how many cafes were in Paris?	around 400
In which Cafe was the Encyclopedie created?	The Café Procope
Were bruits or newspapers allegedly a better source of information?	bruits
Where did Freemasonry originate?	Scotland
Where did Freemasonry first spread?	England
In what country was Freemaonry particularly prevalent?	France
What was the most popular of all Enlightenment associations?	Freemasonry
Which group was copied from the Freemasons and founded in Bavaria in 1776?	Illuminati
Who is known for his statement that individuals have a right to "Life, Liberty and Property"?	Locke
Locke believed that the natural right to property is derived from what?	labor
Locke's theory of natural rights influenced what French document?	French National Constituent Assembly's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen
Which king of Prussia saw himself as the leader of the Enlightenment?	Frederick the Great
Which Enlightenment theorist was extended an invitation to live at the palace after being iprisoned by the French government?	Voltaire
Who was the king of Prussia from 1740 to 1786?	Frederick the Great,
Which American Enlightenment sympathiser was known for his political activism and advances in physics?	Benjamin Franklin
Did the cultural exchange during the Age of Enlightenment travel exclusively to America or did information travel in both directions, back across the Atlantic to Europe?	both directions
As diests, Americans were influenced by the ideas of which two Enlightenment followers?	John Toland (1670–1722) and Matthew Tindal (1656–1733)
All supernatural aspects were removed from which Thomas Paine work?	The Age of Reason
Attempts to reconcile which two fields resulted in a widespread rejection of prophecy?	science and religion
What term was given to the writers of Grub Street?	the Grub Street Hacks
Libelles were generally written in what form?	pamphlets
Which group inherited the "revolutionary spirit" once displayed by the philosophes, according to Darnton?	the Grub Street hacks
Which works by the Grub Street Hacks "slandered the court, the Church, the aristocracy, the academies, the salons, everything elevated and respectable, including the monarchy itself."?	the libelles
Which venue created a unique environment in which people from many different walks of life could gather and share ideas?	Coffeehouses
Coffehouses were criticized by which group of people, fearing the possiblity of an environmentin which class was disregarded?	nobles
Which societal group believed they held a divine right to rule and resented the idea of their subjects convening to discuss political matters?	Monarchs
What societal group derived much of their power from the disparity between classes of people?	Monarchs
Did natural history in particular become increasingly popular amoung the upper or lower classes?	upper
Which type of history encompassed botany, zoology, meteorolgy, hydrology, and mineralogy?	natural history
Who wrote the Histoire naturelle des insectes?	René-Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur
In what decade did the first Masonic lodges appear on the Continent?	1730s
The Freemason embodiment of what country's values was seen as threatening by Continental authorities?	British
Which lodge that met in the mid 1720s was composed of English Jacobite exiles?	the Parisian lodge
Which lodges assigned themselves the duty to "initate the unenlightened"?	British
What is the masonic term for the deistic divine being who created a scientifically ordered universe?	Grand Architect
Which venue represents a turning point in history during which people discovered that they could have enjoyable social lives within their communities?	Coffeehouses
Coffehouses were essential to what movement by becoming centers of free-thinking and self-discovery?	the Enlightenment
In what year was The Spectator published?	1711
Which literary work used the fictional narrator Mr. Spectator to entertain and provoke discussion regarding serious philosophical matters?	The Spectator
Who was the major opponent to Freemasonry?	Roman Catholic Church
Which countries had a large Catholic element and therefore had confrontation with Freemasons?	France, Italy, Spain, and Mexico
Do American historians downplay or attribute the importance of Freemasonry in causing the American Revolution?	downplay
Who was the political enemy of the Patriots?	the Loyalists
Were the Masons political or non-political in the American Revolution?	non-political
How was the Enlightenment known in French?	Siècle des Lumières
Which movement dominated the world of ideas in Europe in the 18th century?	The Enlightenment
In France, what were the central doctrines of the Lumieres?	individual liberty and religious tolerance
The principle of absolute monarchy of which group was at odds with those following the Enlightenment?	Roman Catholic Church
Which city in the mid-18th century became the center of an explosion of philosophic and scientific activity?	Paris
Who were the two leaders of Paris' philosophic movement?	Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Rousseau argued for a society based on what, rather than faith?	reason
Which philosopher introduced the idea of a separation of powers in government?	Montesquieu
Montesquieu's ideas were enthusiastically adopted by the authors of what American document?	the United States Constitution
What was the most influential publication of the Enlightenment?	the Encyclopédie
The Encyclopedie was comprised of how many volumes?	thirty-five
Voltaire wrote Letters on the English in what year?	1733
When was Rousseau's Discourse on Inequality published?	1754
What year did the French Revolution begin?	1789
What was the name of the conservative group opposing the Enlightenment?	Counter-Enlightenment.
The radical enlightenment was inspired by the philosophy of whom?	Spinoza
Which Enlightenment philosopher advocated democracy, individual liberty, freedom of expression, and eradication of religious authority?	Spinoza
Which Enlightenment philosophers sought accomodatin between reform and the traditional systems of power and faith?	René Descartes, John Locke, Christian Wolff, Isaac Newton and others
Who is credited with the concept of separating church and state?	John Locke
Which term describes John Locke's movement to seperate church and state?	The "Radical Enlightenment"
In what year was John Locke born?	1632
In what realm did John Locke feel the government lacked authority?	the realm of individual conscience
According to Thomas Paine, what is the definition of Deism?	the simple belief in God the Creator, with no reference to the Bible or any other miraculous source
Which philosopher argued that atheists could indeed be moral men?	Pierre Bayle
Which philosopher argued that without belief in a God who punishes evil, the moral order of society was undermined?	Voltaire
Who felt that since atheists gave themselves no Supreme Authority and no law, they were more likely to disrupt society?	Voltaire
Whixh population groups were excluded from most institutions of the public sphere?	women and the lower classes
Which two areas experienced criss-cross influences through noble and lower class participation?	coffeehouses and the Masonic lodges
Marmontel contrasted "the opinion of men of letters" with what?	"the opinion of the multitude,"
d'Alembert contrasted the "truly enlightened public" with whom?	"the blind and noisy multitude"
The increased consumption of what type of material was one of the key features of the "social" Enlightenment?	reading materials
Developments in which revolution allowed consumer goods to be produced in greater quantities at lower prices?	the Industrial Revolution
In additional to rising populations and increased urbanisation, what else did Commercial development increase the need for?	demand for information
In what country did literacy rates double over the course of the 18th century?	France
The number of books about religion in Paris from 1720 to 1780 dropped by what percentage?	just one-tenth of the total
Whose incomes did public concerts help support?	performers' and composers'
Handel gained considerable fame with performances of what two types of artistic work?	operas and oratorios
Which two composers are usually regarded as being the most in line with the Enlightenment ideals?	Haydn and Mozart
What style of music did Haydn and Mozart share?	Viennese Classical
What year was the Academy of Science in France founded?	1635
Members of what group were considered to be the "most useful of all citizens?"	scientists
What percentage of clerics were members of the Academy of Science?	13 percent
The Academy of Science was only open to which societal group?	elite Parisian scholars
How did elite Parisian scholars perceive themselves?	interpreters of the sciences for the people
Where were many of the leading universities associated with Enlightenment progressive principles located?	northern Europe
Which six universities were the most renowned in northern Europe?	Leiden, Göttingen, Halle, Montpellier, Uppsala and Edinburgh
Which university, especially, produced professors whose ideas had a significant impact on the colonies?	Edinburgh
Which of  France's universities was the exception and was hospitable to the Enlightenment?	the medical university at Montpellier
How can associationism be defined?	the notion that the mind associates or dissociates ideas through repeated routines
What was the predominant educational psychology from the 1750s onward?	associationism,
Children were taught to memorize facts through methods that originated during which time period?	the Renaissance
What were the prime examples of reference works that systemasized scientific knowledge in the age oif Enlightenment?	universal encyclopedias
What was the goal of universal encyclopedias?	to record all human knowledge in a comprehensive reference work
Which universal encyclopedia began publication in 1751 and was composed of 35 volumes and over 71,000 seperate entries?	Encyclopédie, ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers
In what work is the goal to record the extent of human knowledge in the arts and sciences outlined?	Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot
Who wrote the Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot?	d'Alembert's
Anatomy, biology, geology, mineralogy, and zoology are all studies of which subject?	natural history
Who criticized the sciences for distancing man from nature and not operating to make people happier?	Rousseau
Who replaced universities as centres of scientific research and development during the Enlightenment?	scientific societies and academies
Which century is considered by some as a "drab" period, however saw significant advancements in the practice of medicine, mathematics, and physics, the development of biological taxonomy, a new understanding of magnetism, and the maturation of chemistry as a discipline?	the 18th century
Voltaire and Emilie du Chatelet populatized which scientific philosophy?	Newtonianism
Many Enlightenment writers and thinkers had backgrounds in the sciences and associated scientific advancement with overthrow of religion and traditional authority in favor of what?	the development of free speech and thought
Who discovered carbon dioxide or fixed air?	chemist Joseph Black
Who created the argument for deep time?	geologist James Hutton
Who invented the steam engine?	James Watt
Who launched the first manned flight in a hot-air balloon in November 1783?	the Montgolfier Brothers
For which masterpiece did Cesare Beccaria become famous?	Crimes and Punishments (1764)
Into how many languages was Cesare Beccaria's Crimes and Punishments (1764) translated?	22
Which work established Francesco Mario Pagano as an international authority on criminal law?	Considerazioni sul processo criminale (Considerations on the criminal trial, 1787)
In what year did Francesco Mario Pagano publish Saggi Politici?	1783
What did contemporary sources claim was the purpose of the universiity in contrast to the societies?	transmission of knowledge
Contemporary sources considered societies functioned for what purpose in contrast to universities?	to create knowledge
By what year were there over seventy official scientific societies?	1789
Who coined the term "the Age of Academies" to describe the 18th century?	Bernard de Fontenelle
The Enlightenment is frequently linked to the French Revolution of what year?	1789
Who delineated the "consent of the governed" in Two Treatises of Government (1689)?	Locke
The "divine right of kings" was in direct conflict with which of Locke's philosophies?	"consent of the governed"
According to Locke, the revolutions of the late 1700s and early 1800s were caused when what could not be resolved peacefully?	governance paradigm shift
In what work did Ferguson explain how humans advanced from a hunting and gathering society to a commercial and civil society without "signing" a social contract?	An Essay on the History of Civil Society
In what year did Ferguson publish An Essay on the History of Civil Society?	1767
How many stages of progress did Ferguson theorize?	four
Who, along with Adam Ferguson, criticized the idea of social contract theorists?	David Hume
What century produced the first Russian univeristy, library, theatre, public museum, and independent press?	18th century
What did the Russian enlightenment focus on instead of societal enlightenment?	the individual
From whom did Catherine the Great receive assistance in her Enlightenment ideals via correspondence?	Voltaire
Which philosopher believed that the Enlightenment was ultimately born out of Protestant reaction against the Catholic counter-reformation?	Bertrand Russell
Where did Betrand Russell believe views such as affinity for democracy against monarachy originated from?	16th-century Protestants
Who does Betrand Russell started the schism that lead to the Enlightenment?	Martin Luther
How did Alexis de Tocqueville describe the French Revolution?	the inevitable result of the radical opposition created in the 18th century between the monarchy and the men of letters of the Enlightenment
Which group was considered "a substitute aristocracy that was both all-powerful and without real power" according to Tocqueville?	men of letters
From where did Tocqueville believe the illusory power of the men of letters came from?	the rise of "public opinion"
Which Jewish philosopher referred to Enlightenment as a process by which man was educated in the use of reason?	Moses Mendelssohn
How did Immanuel Kant describe the Enlightenment?	"man's release from his self-incurred tutelage"
For whom was Enlightenment mankind's final coming of age, the emancipation of the human consciousness from an immature state of ignorance?"	Immanuel Kant
According to historian Roy Porter, what was the Age of Enlightenment trying to capture?	the liberation of the human mind from a dogmatic state of ignorance
John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton where considered the the greatest men who ever lived by which American colonist?	Thomas Jefferson
Religious tolerance and the importance of individual conscience was particularly influential in the drafting of which American document?	the United States Constitution
Whom, along with Francis Bacon and John Locke, did Thomas Jefferson consider to be one of the three greatest men that ever lived?	Isaac Newton
From a historical standpoint, what was one of the most important features of the debating society?	openness to the public
Were debates only open to certain economic classes, or could all attend?	all classes providing they could pay the entrance fee
What were some of the issues discussed in addition to debates on religion?	politics and the role of women
What aspect of the Enlightenment did Robert Darnton and Jurgen Habermas focus on within the Enlightenment?	social conditions
How did Habermas describe the public sphere?	bourgeois, egalitarian, rational, and independent from the state
The new venues and modes of communication allowing for rational exchange were given what term by Habermas in 18th century Europe?	the "bourgeois public sphere"
What do Jonathon Israel claim caused the change that eventually led to the revolutions of the latter half of the 18th centure and early 19th century?	the ideas themselves
What does Israel argue Western civilization was based on until the 1650s?	largely shared core of faith, tradition and authority
Jonathon Israel rejects the notion that the revolutionary ideas were by products of what transformations?	social and economic
What time period does Johnathon Israel focus on?	1650 to the end of the 18th century
How was the public sphere defined?	realm of communication marked by new arenas of debate, more open and accessible forms of urban public space and sociability, and an explosion of print culture
During what centuries was the rise of the public sphere?	late 17th century and 18th century
What term did Habermas give to describe the areas of political/social knowledge and discussion that were previously exlusive territory of the state and religious authorities?	common concern
The argument of the public sphere was founded on what?	reason
The values of the bourgeois public sphere included holding reason to the supreme, considering everything open to criticism, and the opposition of what?	secrecy of all sorts
Book sellers and publishers had to negotiate censorship laws of varying strictness in what country, especially?	France
Which work narrowly escaped seizure and had to be saved by Malesherbes?	The Encyclopédie
Many publishing companies were located outside of which country to avoid overzealous censors?	France
Readers were more interested in sensationalist stories about what topics than they were in political theory itself?	criminals and political corruption
What was the term given to books that did not have a dominant motif and contained something to offend almost everyone in authority?	general works
Who helped The Encyclopedie find its way into print using the French censorship law creatively?	Malesherbes
The King and Clement XII condemned which literary work?	The Encyclopédie
What percentage of books borrowed in England, Germany, and Norath America were novels?	70
What percentage of books borrowed were of a religious nature in England, Germany, and North America?	1
What did the Republic of Letters support?	free public examination of questions regarding religion or legislation
Once everyone was a part of what group did Kant believe all of society would be enlightened?	the "reading public"
Who were two of the figures that participated in the Republic of Letters?	Diderot and Voltaire
What did Immanuel Kant consider essential to his conception of the public sphere?	written communication
Who called the journals the most influential cultural innovation of European intellectual culture?	Jonathan Israel
To what did the journals shift attention of the cultivated public away from and towards novelty and innovation?	established authorities
What enlightened ideas were promoted by the journals?	toleration and intellectual objectivity
The journals were a source of knowledge derived from what topics?	science and reason
How did dictionaries and encyclopedias change in the 18th century?	from simply defining words in a long running list to far more detailed discussions of those words
What movement were dictionaries and encyclopedias trying to promote?	to systematize knowledge and provide education to a wider audience than the elite
How did the content of encyclopedias change in the 18th century?	tended to focus more strongly on secular affairs, particularly science and technology, rather than matters of theology
Encyclopedias in the 18th century tended to focus more strongly on what topics, rather than theology?	secular affairs, particularly science and technology
How was the Encyclopedie arranged?	according to a "tree of knowledge."
The rise of empiricism caused a division between which two subjects?	the arts and sciences
What was considered the trunk of the tree of knowledge?	philosophy
Which editions of the Encyclopedie were less expensive and more accessible to the non-elite?	quarto and octavo
How many copies of the Encyclopedie were estimated to be in circulation throughout France and Europe before the French Revolution?	25 000
Which society in England also played a significant role in the public sphere and spread of Enlightenment ideas?	Royal Society of London
In what year was the Royal Society of London given a royal charter?	1662
Whose method based knowledge on experiementation, which had to be witnessed?	Robert Boyle
Who were considered more reliable witnesses than the Oxfordshire peasants?	Oxford professors
What two factors were taken into account in credibility in the Royal Society?	a witness's knowledge in the area; and a witness's "moral constitution"
Before the Enlightenment, most intellectual debates revoled around what subject?	"confessional"
Catholic, Lutheran, Reformed (Calvinist), or Anglican issues were called what?	"confessional"
During what time period did a "general process of rationalization and secularization set in"?	second half of the 17th century and during the 18th century
The aim of confessional debates was to establish which bloc of faith should have what?	the "monopoly of truth and a God-given title to authority"
According to German historian Reinhart Koselleck, which two social structures left a decisive imprint on the Age of Enlightenment?	the Republic of Letters and the Masonic lodges
Which Scottish professor believes that Masons were not a major radical or reformist network in their own right?	Thomas Munck
Historian Margaret Jacob stresses the importance of the Masons in indirectly inspriting what type of thinking?	political thought
Daniel Roche claims that Masonry promoted what idea by only attracting men of similar social background?	egalitarianism
The presence of whom in the French "lodges of adoption" formed in the 1780s was die to the close ties shared with aristocratic society?	noble women
What ordering scheme did readers prefer?	alphabetical
Who believed the avoidance of thematic and heirarhical systems allowed free interpretation of the works and caused them to beomce an example of eglitarianism?	Charles Porset
Why did Encyclopedias and dictionaries become more popular during the Age of Reason?	the number of educated consumers who could afford such texts began to multiply
How many dictionaries and encyclopedias were published between 1760 and 1769?	63
How many dictionaries and encyclopedias were published in the decade preceding the French Revolution?	148
What caused an increasingly literate population to develop in the Enlightenment era?	a high rise in the availability of food
Instead of paying more for food, on what did people spend their money?	education
Which ideal endeavoured to make information available to the greatest number of people?	Popularization
Who wrote the celebrated Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica?	Sir Isaac Newton
Which work of Isaac Newton was published in Latin and remained inaccessible to readers without education until Enlightenment writers began to translate and analyze it in the vernacular?	Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
For what do Circadian rhythms let an organism prepare?	environmental changes
What can an organism that uses circadian rhythms use to its advantage that others can not?	resources
By better using resources, how does that improve an organism's chances of surviving?	selective advantage
By improving what processes does the use of circadian rhythms serve to benefit the individual?	internal metabolic
What insect has been studied concerning the inheritability of rhythms?	fruit flies
What type of animals have been shown to have circadian rhythms only at certain times?	Arctic animals
What daily feature do animals that show limited circadian rhythms need?	sunrises and sunsets
In a study, when did reindeer at 70 degrees north only show circadian rhythms?	autumn, winter and spring
At what degree north did reindeer show rhythms only in autumn and summer?	78 degrees
What aninmals  do researchers think might also show a variance in circadian rhythms in different seasons?	other Arctic animals
What produces a self-sustaining rhythm?	central oscillator
When do the CCA1  and LHY function?	morning
Which loop that consists of GI and ELF4 functions?	evening
What was the previous belief of feedback in the gene loop?	negative feedback loop
What researcher showed that the gene  feedback loop serves as a repressor?	Andrew Millar
What is the Drosophila gene the cause of?	sleep disorder FASPS
What is the Drosophila gene also known as?	period
What is Familial advanced sleep phase syndrome?	FASPS
What kind of clock have genetic functions?	biological clock
What does the body interpret from the gene feedback loop?	time of the day
Whose work habits and environment prevents them from maintaining a regular sleep pattern?	airline pilots
What can the lack of regular sleep patterns cause?	fatigue
What organizations cites this disruption of sleep patterns as a cause of accidents?	NTSB
What has the NTSB conducted to find the cause of pilot fatigue?	research studies
Of what does the NTSB want to find a means of doing?	combating fatigue
What is the earliest recorded instance of circadian rhythm?	4th century B.C.E
What ship captain described daily leaf movements?	Androsthenes
What tree leaves did Androsthenes describe?	tamarind
What type of Chinese texts mention circadian process in humans?	medical
When did the Chinese use diurnal rhythms to remember Acu-points?	13th century
What is the plant expression of circadian rhythm?	when to flower
What do plants need to attract to their flowering?	pollinators
 With what feature of environment do plants need to be in sync?	light cycle
What does adaptive advantage allow for plants?	Anticipation of changes
Where can an understanding of circadian rhythms of plants be an advantage?	agriculture
What has the simplest known circadian clock?	prokaryotic cyanobacteria
With how many proteins can the circadian clock of Synechococcus elongatus are needed to reproduce its effect?	three proteins
What type of feedback mechanism was previously thought to be needed to sustain the clock?	DNA
How long a rhythm were researchers able to sustain in the in vitro experiment?	22-hour
What were the only proteins necessary to the circadian timekeeper experiment?	KaiA, KaiB, KaiC
To what is the circadian rhythm tied?	light–dark cycle
What conditions will produce a free-running rhythm in humans?	total darkness
What are the environmental factors that can change the rhythm?	zeitgebers
What do blind mole rats have in place of vision?	photoreceptors
What chemical is absent or low during daylight?	Melatonin
When is the melatonin onset?	9 p.m
At its onset, what can be measured in blood or saliva?	Melatonin
The presence of what is a circadian marker?	hormone
What are the more reliable markers in determining sleep timing?	melatonin phase
What physical factor must be continuously monitored during temperature studies>	temperatures
At what time does the average adult human reach his lowest temperature?	05:00
How long before wake time is the lowest temperature reached?	two hours
When does the temperature of morning type young adults reach its lowest?	04:00
What is the time of lowest temperature for evening type young adults?	06:00
Who noticed that sleepiness increases and decreases in a 24 hour period?	Patrick and Gilbert
Who showed the animals could maintain activity in the absence of light and temperature changes?	J.S. Szymanski
What animals rhythmic feeding times were studied in the early 20th century ?	bees
What gene did Konopka and Benzer map in the early 1970 s?	"period"
What mutation did Takahashi discover in 1994?	circadian clock
Inside of what can the molecular circadian clock operate?	single cell
By functioning within a single, what is the system?	cell-autonomous
What section of the brain periodically releases hormones?	endocrine glands
How are sleep and wake cycles as well as body functions coordinated?	biological clock
What do body hormone receptors do with the body's organs?	synchronise
What signals plants to synchronize their internal clocks?	Light
What do plants use to sense light?	photoreceptors
What receptors absorb red and blue light in plants?	phytochromes and cryptochromes
Which phytochrome found in seedlings deteriorates with light and growth?	phyA
What is the main phytochrome found in seedling grown in light?	phyB
What time cycle did studies in 1938 and 1990s use on humans?	28-hour
What conditions were suppressed in the 28 hour wake-sleep cycle studies ?	time cues
How long did the suppression of time clues study last?	month
What is this forced type of study called?	forced desynchrony
When in the cycle do wake-sleep cycles break off from the circadian period?	24.18 hours
What effect does jet-lag and shift-work have on the human body?	profound consequences
Animals that eat during resting periods show what body increase?	body mass
How does irregular eating during shift-work effect insulin?	insulin sensitivity
Besides insulin sensitivity, what other effect does shift-work have on the body?	higher body mass
What type of work can lead to heart, hypertension and inflammation?	Shift-work
What do studies show has a bidirectional relationship with the circadian system?	abusive drugs
What do abusive drugs effect in the circadian system?	circadian pacemaker
What do drug abusers show in their circadian processes?	disrupted rhythms
What can the disrupted circadian system cause?	abuse and relapse
What can disruption to genetics and environment in the sleep cycle cause?	susceptibility to addiction
What is theorized to have evolved with circadian rhythms?	photosensitive proteins
What is thought that circadian rhythm evolved to protect?	replicating DNA
From what did  DNA need to be protected in the earliest cells?	ultraviolet radiation
One possible reason for the development of the circadian system is the need to counteract what ?	redox reactions
What environmental event occurred 2.3 million years ago?	Great Oxidation Event
What is the body clock gene in animals necessary to ensure?	cellular/metabolic events
What do mice without the clock gene become?	hyperphagic and obese
Beside obesity, how else does the lack of a circadian clock effect   the mice?	glucose metabolism
How certain is it that these circadian clock  effects are the same in humans?	not clear
What gene needs to be deleted to cause obesity in mice?	Rev-ErbA alpha clock
Where is the primary circadian gene located in humans?	suprachiasmatic nucleus
Where are these cell groups found in humans?	hypothalamus
What would the loss of the SCN cells cause in the sleep-wake rhythm?	complete absence
What provides information to the SCN?	eyes
What special cells in the eyes communicate directly to the SCN cells?	ganglion
What did early research show people preferred as a day length?	25 hours
What was the fault not considered in the early theories of day length?	artificial light
What did electric lighting in the evening do to the test subjects circadian phase?	delayed
To what is the 24 hours, 11 minutes day outcome of research closest ?	solar day
When did more stringent testing determine that humans preferred a 24 hour day?	1999
Where else beside the SCN cells are independent circadian rhythms also found?	organs and cells
What is the term for the independent clocks?	peripheral oscillators
What is the SCN considered to be in comparison to the peripheral oscillators?	master clock
In what body gland are the peripheral oscillators located?	adrenal gland
To what do oscillators in the skin respond?	light
Who is the world's oldest reigning monarch?	Elizabeth
Than which queen has Elizabeth ruled longer?	Queen Victoria
How is Victoria related to Elizabeth?	great-great-grandmother
In what year did Elizabeth pass Victoria's length of rule?	2015
In the history of what is Elizabeth the longest reigning queen?	world history
Who did England propose to affiliate with Wales to quell Welsh nationalism?	Elizabeth
Why did Britain not want Elizabeth to associate with conscientious objectors?	Britain was at war
What did Elizabeth join in 1946?	Welsh Gorsedd of Bards
Who was the always the Prince of Wales?	heir apparent
Who wanted to name Elizabeth Princess of Wales?	Herbert Morrison
When were Elizabeth and Philip married?	20 November 1947
At what famous cathedral was Elizabeth married?	Westminster Abbey
How many wedding gifts did Elizabeth and Philip receive?	2500
Who designed Elizabeth's wedding gown?	Norman Hartnell
What former King was not invited to the wedding?	Duke of Windsor
Who did Princess Margaret want to marry?	Peter Townsend
What did Queen Elizabeth ask Margaret to do instead of marring Townsend?	wait for a year
What act would the Church of England not permit?	remarriage after divorce
Who did Princess Margaret marry in 1960?	Antony Armstrong-Jones
What title was Armstrong-Jones given?	Earl of Snowdon
Aside from her choice of Eden's successor, what crisis caused Elizabeth to be criticized?	Suez crisis
What did Lord Altrincham accuse Elizabeth of being?	out of touch
When did Macmillan resign?	1963
Who did Elizabeth appoint as Prime Minister after the resignation of Macmillan?	Earl of Home
When was a formal mechanism for electing the Minister adopted?	1965
During the Australian constitutional crisis, what Prime Minister was dismissed?	Gough Whitlam
Who dismissed Whilam from the post of Australian Prime Minister?	Governor-General Sir John Kerr
Who appealed to Elizabeth to reverse the dismissal of Whitlam?	Speaker Gordon Scholes
What did Whitlam have in the House of Representatives?	a majority
What did Elizabeth decline to do in response to the appeal by Scholes?	interfere
When did Elizabeth support constitutional amendments in Canada?	1987
What politician criticized the proposed changes?	Pierre Trudeau
In 1987 what elected government was removed in a coup?	Fijian government
What did coup leader Sitiveni Rabuka declare Fiji to be?	republic
In 1991 what money issue of the Queen was a feature of public criticism?	private wealth
What did Elizabeth celebrate in 2002?	Golden Jubilee
When did Elizabeth's mother die in 2002?	March
What relative of Elizabeth died in February of 2002?	Her sister
How many people in London attended each day of the the three day event?	million
What group was surprised by the public's approval of the Queen?	journalists
When did Elizabeth open the Summer Olympics in Montreal?	1976
When did Queen Elizabeth open the Summer Olympics in London?	2012
For what event did Elizabeth appear in a film as part of the opening ceremonies?	London Olympics
What actor also appeared with Elizabeth in the film?	Daniel Craig
For what activity related to the film industry did Elizabeth receive a BAFTA award?	patronage
What has been a subject of speculation concerning Elizabeth's wealth?	personal fortune
What was Elizabeth's wealth extimated to be in 1971?	£2 million
What did the palace call estimates of Elizabeth wealth in 1993?	"grossly overstated"
What did the Sunday Times estimate Elizabeth's fortune to be in 2015?	£340 million
Where does Elizabeth's wealth place her in the list of the richest in the UK?	302nd
When was Elizabeth's coronation?	1953
When was Elizabeth's Diamond Jubilee?	2012
How old was Elizabeth's father at the time of his death?	56
How did Prince Philip's uncle, Lord Mounbatten, die?	assassination
In what year did Elizabeth's  son's ex-wife die?	1997
When was the coronation of Elizabeth as Queen?	2 June 1953
How was much of the ceremony of Elizabeth's coronation presented to the public?	televised
What Commonwealth symbols were embroidered on Elizabeth's gown?	floral emblems
What is the emblem of England?	Tudor rose
What people have a thistle for their Commonwealth emblem?	Scots
When did Elizabeth address the UN General Assembly?	1957
What parliamentary session did Elizabeth open in 1957 while on tour?	23rd Canadian Parliament
On a tour to Ghana in 1961 what did Elizabeth dismiss as a fear?	her safety
In 1964 what was reported that Quebec extremists planned ?	Elizabeth's assassination
What Jubilee did Elizabeth celebrate in 1977?	Silver
When did Princess Margaret separate from her husband?	1977
In what year did Nicolae Ceausescu visit the UK?	1978
Who, in 1979, was discovered to be a communist spy?	Anthony Blunt
What group assassinated Lord Mountbatten?	Provisional Irish Republican Army
As what was Elizabeth portrayed in the 1950s?	"fairytale Queen"
Of what did Lord Altrincham say Elizabeth's speeches resembled?	"priggish schoolgirl"
What investiture featuring Prince Charles was televised in the late 1960s?	Prince of Wales
In the 1960s, what did Elizabeth begin wearing to events ?	solid-colour overcoats
What was the time after WWII heralded as?	"new Elizabethan age"
What famous jewelry collection is held in trust by Elizabeth?	Crown Jewels
What residences of Elizabeth are held in trust and not owned by Elizabeth?	official residences
What Scottish estate is privately owned by Elizabeth?	Balmoral Castle
How much is the worth of the British Crown Estate?	£9.4 billion
How is the British Crown Estate held by Elizabeth?	in trust
Who was Elizabeth only sibling?P	Princess Margaret
When was Princess Margaret born?	1930
Who was Marion Crawford to the princesses?	governess
What was the title of the book written by Crawford about the princesses?	The Little Princesses
Where were the royal princesses educated?	at home
At what age was Elizabeth when she went on her first solo public appearance?	16
Where did Elizabeth visit on her first solo public appearance?	Grenadier Guards
In case of her father's absence, in what capacity could Elizabeth act?	Counsellors of State
When did Elizabeth join the Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service?	February 1945
In what capacity did Elizabeth serve in the Auxiliary?	driver and mechanic
Where did Philip serve during WWII?	Royal Navy
What did Crawford report that some of the King's advisers thought of Philip?	good enough
To whom did Philip's sisters marry?	German noblemen
What did Elizabeth's mother call Philip?	"The Hun"
What did Elizabeth's mother later say that Philip was?	"an English gentleman"
What was the state of George VI's health during 1951?	health declined
On what date did Elizabeth's father, King George VI, die?	6 February 1952
In what country was Elizabeth when George VI died?	Kenya
When did the prime ministers of Britain and France discuss the idea of France joining the Commonwealth?	1956
What did France sign instead of joining the Commonwealth?	Treaty of Rome
To what was the European Economic Community the precurser?	European Union
When did Britain and France invade Egypt?	November 1956
What did the Treaty of Rome establish?	European Economic Community
When did the decolonization of Africa and the Caribbean accelerate?	1960s and 1970s
How many countries got independence from Britain during decolonization?	Over 20 countries
When did Britain join the European Community?	1973
What did the Rhodesian president declare in 1965?	independence from Britain
In spite of sanctions by the international community, how long did the Ian Smith's regime last?	over a decade
During what ceremony were shots fired at the Queen?	Trooping the Colour
Who was the assailant who shot at Queen Elizabeth?	Marcus Sarjeant
Which of Elizabeth's sons served in the Falklands War?	Prince Andrew
Who was the intruder Elizabeth awoke to find in her bedroom?	Michael Fagan
What island's invasion angered Elizabeth?	Grenada
What political feeling is still a minority view in Britain?	republicanism
What state of affairs produced revelations and problems for Elizabeth?	Charles and Diana's marriage
In spite of criticisms what kind of approval ratings did Elizabeth have?	high
What institution was being criticized during the time of Charles and Diana's breakup?	monarchy
When did Elizabeth write to tell Charles and Diana to get a divorce?	December 1995
When was the second address to the UN by Elizabeth?	2010
Who was UN Secretary General when Elizabeth addressed the UN?	Ban Ki-moon
As what did Ban Ki-Moon introduce Elizabeth to the UN?	"an anchor for our age"
For whom was the garden Elizabeth opened a memorial?	British victims
When was Elizabeth's farewell visit to Australia?	October 2011
Until she became queen, what flower was on Elizabeth's coat of arms?	Tudor rose
When did Elizabeth acquire her father's arms?	Upon her accession
Besides personal flags,what other types of flags does Elizabeth have?	royal standards
What type of flags are used in foreign countries?	personal
When did Elizabeth start to bear a coat of royal arms?	21 April 1944
In what city was Elizabeth born?	London
At the time of her birth, what was the rank of Elizabeth's parents?	Duke and Duchess of York
What were Elizabeth's parents' titles after ascending to the throne?	King George VI and Queen Elizabeth
How many children did Elizabeth's parents have?	two daughters
What event caused Elizabeth's father to become King?	abdication of his brother
When she was born, where in the order of succession was Elizabeth?	third
Before Elizabeth's father who was next in line for the throne?	Edward, Prince of Wales
When did Elizabeth's grandfather die?	1936
What event caused Edward to abdicate the throne?	proposed marriage
What did Edward's proposed marriage to Simpson cause?	constitutional crisis
What name was it assumed Elizabeth would take upon her marriage to Philip?	Mountbatten,
What Prime Minister objected to the name change?	Winston Churchill
What name did Elizabeth keep as her married name?	House of Windsor
What name was adopted for Elizabeth's male-line descendants who do not have royal titles?	Mountbatten-Windsor
When did Elizabeth decree the use of Mountbatten-Windsor as the  surname?	1960
Who did Eden recommend that Elizabeth consult about appointing a new  Prime Minister?	Lord Salisbury
What position did Lord Salisbury have in the government?	Lord President of the Council
Who did Elizabeth appoint as Prime Minister?	Harold Macmillan
What position did Lord Kilmuir have ?	Lord Chancellor
Who in turn did Salisbury and Kilmuir consult?	British Cabinet
When did Edward Heath ask Elizabeth to call a general election?	February 1974
Where was Elizabeth when Heath advised that sh call for an election?	Austronesian Pacific Rim
What did Elizabeth do after Heath adviser her?	fly back to Britain
What did Heath do after his party could not form a coalition with the Labor party?	resigned
Who did Elizabeth ask to form a government?	Harold Wilson
What did high public interest in the  private lives of the royal family cause in the press?	sensational stories
Who was editor of The Sun in the 1980s?	Kelvin MacKenzie
What did the editor of The Observer call the sensational stories about the royals?	royal soap opera
Who, it was rumored,  did Margaret Thatcher say the Queen would vote for?	Thatcher's political opponents
Who said the Elizabeth was a behind the scenes force in ending apartheid?	Brian Mulroney
What incident killed Diana in Paris?	car crash
When did Diana die?	1997
How long did Elizabeth and the royal family remain in seclusion at Balmoral?	five days
What failure did the public find dismaying?	fly a flag at half-mast
What did Elizabeth do to diffuse hostile public sentiment?	live television broadcast
How many years has Elizabeth been Queen?	60 years
What celebration marks 60 years for Elizabeth as Queen?	Diamond Jubilee
What year marks Elizabeth's Diamond Jubilee?	2012
Where did Elizabeth tour as a celebration of her jubilee?	United Kingdom
When was the last time that a sovereign attended a peacetime cabinet meeting?	1781
What governmental style of monarch is Elizabeth?	constitutional monarch
How often does Elizabeth give interviews?	rarely
What type of political religious beliefs does Elizabeth seemed to support?	inter-faith relations
What is Elizabeth's ranking in the Church of England?	Supreme Governor
Apart from her membership in the Church of England, to what other church does she belong?	Church of Scotland
During whose reign was Elizabeth born?	King George V
What was Elizabeth's fathers title at the time of her birth?	Prince Albert, Duke of York
What title and name did Elizabeth's father take upon becoming king?	King George VI
Which Bishop of York baptized Elizabeth?	Cosmo Gordon Lang
What was Elizabeth's nickname when she was young?	Lilibet
When did Britain enter WWII?	September 1939
Who recommended that the two princesses be evacuated to Canada?	Lord Hailsham
Who rejected the idea of sending the princesses away?	Elizabeth's mother
Where did the two princesses live for most of the war?	Windsor Castle
When did Elizabeth make her first radio broadcast?	1940
Where did the newly married Elizabeth and Philip stay until 1949?	Windlesham Moor
After 1949 where did Elizabeth live in London?	Clarence House
In which armed force was the Duke of Edinburgh?	Royal Navy
Where was Philip stationed during WWII?	British Crown Colony of Malta
In whose home did Elizabeth and Philip stay in Malta?	Lord Mountbatten
What entity did the British Empire slowly become during Elizabeth's reign?	Commonwealth of Nations
In what year did Elizabeth become Queen?	1952
What tour did Elizabeth take in 1953?	round-the-world tour
How many nations did Elizabeth visit on tour in 1953?	13 countries
How many miles did Elizabeth cover on her world tour?	40,000 miles
About whom was Elizabeth worried in the 1970s?	Pierre Trudeau
What was the subject under consideration in discussions in 1980?	Canadian constitution
What did patriation of the Canadian Constitution remove from the constitution?	British parliament
What was retained in the constitution?	monarchy
What did Trudeau say Elizabeth favored?	reform
What did Elizabeth's speech on 24 November, 1992 mark?	her accession
What did Elizabeth call her past year?	annus horribilis
When did Price Andrew separate from his wife?	March
Who did Princess Anne divorce in April?	Captain Mark Phillips
What great house caught fire in November?	Windsor Castle
Who, in 2007, frustrated Elizabeth?	Prime Minister, Tony Blair
What issue of Blair's did Elizabeth admire?	peace in Northern Ireland
When did Elizabeth attend a service at Armagm, in Ireland?	20 March 2008
What service did Elizabeth attend in Armagm?	Maundy
When did Elizabeth make the first visit to Ireland by a British monarch?	May 2011.
Who did Elizabeth surpass in longest lived British monarch?	Queen Victoria
What relation was Victoria to Elizabeth?	great-great-grandmother
When did Elizabeth become the longest reigning monarch?	9 September 2015
In age of monarchs, what is the rank of Elizabeth's reign?	world's oldest
What head of stat has served longer than Elizabeth?	King Bhumibol Adulyadej
When was Elizabeth's Silver Jubilee?	1977
What increased in the 1980s?	public criticism
What was the main subject of public criticism in the 80's?	royal family
What attribute of Elizabeth fell to  low in the 1990s?	popularity
What did Elizabeth start paying in the 1990 s?	income tax
What feature do Elizabeth's titles usually follow in each country?	similar formula
What are the Channel Islands and the Isle of Mann?	Crown dependencies
What si Elizabeth's title in the Channel Islands?	Duke of Normandy
What is Elizabeth's title on the Isle of Mann?	Lord of Mann
Once in conversation with the Queen, how is Elizabeth addressed?	Ma'am
What three factors do scientists believe are the cause of sexual orientation?	genetic, hormonal, and environmental
What is the favored influence as to the cause of sexual orientation?	biologically-based
IS there evidence that parenting and/or childhood play a role in determining sexual orientation?	no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role
What is the observed continuum for sexual orientation?	exclusive attraction to the opposite sex to exclusive attraction to the same sex.
Do scientists know the cause of sexual orientation?	Scientists do not know the exact cause of sexual orientation
What three factors do scientists believe are the cause of sexual orientation?	genetic, hormonal, and environmental
Do scientists believe that parenting and/or childhood play a role in sexual orientation?	There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role when it comes to sexual orientation
What are the two extremes of the continuum of sexual orientation?	exclusive attraction to the opposite sex to exclusive attraction to the same sex.
Has science research figured out the cause of sexual orientation preferences?	Scientists do not know the exact cause of sexual orientation
What type of theories are favored by scientists studying sexual orientation?	biologically-based theories
Do scientist's know what can cause somebodys sexual orientation?	Scientists do not know the exact cause of sexual orientation
What can scientifically be considered the main factors in somebodys sexual orientation?	they believe that it is caused by a complex interplay of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences.
What cannot be considered a factor in sexual orientation due to the lack of evidence?	There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role when it comes to sexual orientation.
What has the research that has been done already show about sexual orientation show?	has demonstrated that sexual orientation ranges along a continuum, from exclusive attraction to the opposite sex to exclusive attraction to the same sex.
Which ideas do scientist lean towards causing sexual orientation?	They favor biologically-based theories, which point to genetic factors, the early uterine environment, both, or the inclusion of genetic and social factors
What is sexual identity defined as?	individual's conception of themselves
What is sexual behavior defined as?	actual sexual acts performed by the individual
What does the term closeted mean?	People who have a homosexual sexual orientation that does not align with their sexual identity
What are the terms related to the degree to which a person's sexual attractions, behavior and identity match?	concordance or discordance
What is sexual orientation defined as?	fantasies, attachments and longings
What are the differences in sexual identity and sexual behaviour?	sexual identity referring to an individual's conception of themselves, behavior referring to actual sexual acts performed by the individual
Does a person have to show their sexual oreintation in their personal acts?	Individuals may or may not express their sexual orientation in their behaviors.
What is a term that can be used for someone who does not show their homosexuality openly?	closeted
What word is used when somebodys sexual orientation, behaviors, and idenity do not match?	discordance
Which word is used when somebodys sexual orientation, behaviors, and idenity match?	concordance
What is one reason that a homosexual would engage in heterosexual behavior?	desire for a perceived traditional family
What is one reason that a homosexual would engage in heterosexual behavior?	concerns of discrimination
What is one reason that a homosexual would engage in heterosexual behavior?	religious ostracism
What is a possible scenario that can occur when a closeted homosexual is in a heterosexual relationship?	develop positive gay and lesbian identities while maintaining successful heterosexual marriages
What is a possible scenario that can occur when a closeted homosexual is in a heterosexual relationship?	hide their respective orientations from their spouses
What are some things that can cause a homosexual person to be with the opposite sex?	desire for a perceived traditional family and concerns of discrimination and religious ostracism
Can a homosexual person still grow their sexual identiries while with the opposit sex?	others develop positive gay and lesbian identities while maintaining successful heterosexual marriages
What kind of hardships can a homosexual face when admitting their ssexuality while in a heterosexual marriage?	Coming out of the closet to oneself, a spouse of the opposite sex, and children
Can a homosexual person hide their true idenitys?	some LGBT people hide their respective orientations from their spouses
How does the mental health profession approach efforts to change sexual orientation?	have adopted policy statements
What do these policy statements suggest?	cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation
What are some of the organizations that have released policy statements?	American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association
What are some of the organizations that have released policy statements?	National Association of Social Workers in the USA, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, and the Australian Psychological Society.
Are their any mental health proffesionals that have programs to change sexual orientation?	No major mental health professional organization has sanctioned efforts to change sexual orientation
What policy statement has almost all proffesionals applied to their practices?	cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation.
What are some professional associations that do not offer changing sexual orientation programs?	the American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association,
Who was the sexologist that published a scheme in 1896?	Magnus Hirschfeld
What did the published scheme attempt to do?	measured the strength of an individual's sexual desire
How did the scheme measure desire?	on two independent 10-point scales
What were the two scales defined as?	A (homosexual) and B (heterosexual)
How many points were on each scale?	10-point
When did the questioning of human sexual responses begin?	From at least the late nineteenth century
Who created the ten point scale on a persons sexuals desire?	Magnus Hirschfeld
What year did Magnus Hirschfeld create the ten point scale on a persons sexual desire.	1896
On Magnus's ten point scale what would a homosexual person be considered?	a homosexual individual may be A5, B0
On the ten point scale what would an asexual person be considered as?	an asexual would be A0, B0
What was a concern of the Kinsey scale?	it inappropriately measures heterosexuality and homosexuality
How are masculinity and femininity more appropriately measured?	as independent concepts on a separate scale
What happens if the concepts are measured on the same scale?	they act as tradeoffs such, whereby to be more feminine one had to be less masculine and vice versa
What is the advantage of measuring these elements separately?	the degree of heterosexual and homosexual can be independently determined, rather than the balance between heterosexual and homosexual
What is considered to be a problem with the Kinsey scale?	inappropriately measures heterosexuality and homosexuality on the same scale
What did the research performed in the 1970s show about masculinity and feminity?	more appropriately measured as independent concepts on a separate scale rather than as a single continuum
What would be possible if homesexuality and heterosexuality where measured on different scales?	would allow one to be both very heterosexual and very homosexual or not very much of either.
What is another benefit of measuring sexuality on two scaless verses just the Kinsey scale?	the degree of heterosexual and homosexual can be independently determined,
How does research identify sexual population groups?	scales of assessment
What is the understanding of the scales used?	to reliably identify and categorize people by their sexual orientation
Why might the scales fail?	due to ambiguity regarding the definition of sexual orientation
How many components are used in assessment?	three components
What does the research on sexual orientation use to determine who belongs in which sexual populaiton group?	scales of assessment
What is the general idea regading these scales that are used?	assumed that these scales will be able to reliably identify and categorize people by their sexual orientation.
What can cause problems with these scales that are used?	ambiguity regarding the definition of sexual orientation
How many components are used in an assessment?	there are three components of sexual orientation
What myth did Bruce Voeller perpetuate in the 70's?	that the prevalence of homosexuality is 10% for the whole population
What were the calculations of this myth?	averaging a 13% number for men and a 7% number for women
What message did Voeller deliver using this myth?	we [gays and lesbians] are everywhere
What comes along with defining how much of the population is homosexual?	influences how this population may be seen or treated by the public and government bodies
What does knowing the sexual population influence?	how this population may be seen or treated by the public and government bodies
Who was the cahir of the national gay and lesbian task force in the 1970s?	Bruce Voeller
What did Bruce Voeller do with his findings?	used it as part of the modern gay rights movement to convince politicians and the public that "we [gays and lesbians] are everywhere".
What myth did Bruce Voeller preserve in the 1970s?	that the prevalence of homosexuality is 10% for the whole population by averaging a 13% number for men and a 7% number for women
Do men and women's patterns of arousal differ?	men and women have different patterns of arousal
Are the patterns related to orientation?	independent of their sexual orientations
What types of stimuli were found to arouse women?	both human and nonhuman stimuli
What stimuli did men show no arousal towards?	to non-human visual stimuli
Men's arousal patterns were found to be with?	their specific sexual interest
What did a study on men and womens sexual arousal show?	confirmed that men and women have different patterns of arousal, independent of their sexual orientations
Did women in the studys become aroused to heterosexual stimulation?	become aroused to both human and nonhuman stimuli from movies showing humans of both genders having sex (heterosexual and homosexual
Did men have any arousal from non human videos containing sex?	x. Men did not show any sexual arousal to non-human visual stimuli,
Did mens arousal relate to the sexual interests?	, their arousal patterns being in line with their specific sexual interest (women for heterosexual men and men for homosexual men).
What science terms are used to describe sexual attraction?	Androphilia and gynephilia
These terms are an alternative to what conceptualization?	to a homosexual and heterosexual conceptualization
What are these terms not attributing to the subject/person being described?	a sex assignment or gender identity
What are other terms that do not make similar assignments?	pansexual and polysexual
What are other terms used in the same vein as pansexual?	queer, pansensual, polyfidelitous, ambisexual
Which terms are used in describing sexual desires?	Androphilia and gynephilia (or gynecophilia
What are two other words for androphilia and gynephlia?	homosexual and heterosexual
What are the terms androphilia and gynephial use for?	identifying a subject's object of attraction without attributing a sex assignment or gender identity to the subject
What are other common words that people may use for homosexual and heterosexual people?	queer, pansensual, polyfidelitous, ambisexual, or personalized identities such as byke or biphilic.
What tends to be a major obstacle when comparing cultures?	Translation
What can force individuals to identify with a label that may not reflect true orientation?	Language
Where are the meanings of words negotiated?	mass media
What can be brought into play to describe interpretations of sexual orientation?	New words
What is a major hurdle when studying different cultures?	Translation
Why does translation cause such issues among different cultures?	English terms lack equivalents in other languages, while concepts and words from other languages fail to be reflected in the English language.
What problems can arise due to translation issues?	can force individuals to identify with a label that may or may not accurately reflect their true sexual orientation
What can be used to signal sexual idenitys to others?	Language
Early writers linked orientation to what concept?	the subject's own sex
What theorists agreed with this concept?	Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Magnus Hirschfeld, Havelock Ellis, Carl Jung, and Sigmund Freud,
What two things became to be seen as distinct from one another?	gender identity came to be increasingly seen as a phenomenon distinct from sexual orientation
What negative stereotypes have emerged from this understanding?	gender-conforming heterosexual" and the "gender-nonconforming homosexual
What did a majority of gay men and women experience in their childhood?	gender-nonconformity
What did gender idenity become to be seen as?	phenomenon distinct from sexual orientation
What can be considered to be bad stereotypes to gay communities?	"gender-conforming heterosexual" and the "gender-nonconforming homosexual"
Who performed the studies that found most homosexual people having different degrees of gender issues?	Michael Bailey and Kenneth Zucker
What was thought of early lesbians and gay men?	it was thought that a typical female-bodied person who is attracted to female-bodied persons would have masculine attributes, and vice versa.
In these studies when was the gender-noncomformity experienced?	during their childhood years.
Who is finding themselves in a double minority in the US?	non-Caucasian LGBT
What is an example of a stereotype found in this double minority?	Asian-American LGBTs are viewed as more passive and feminine
What do the non-Caucasian LGBT experience?	neither fully accepted or understood by mainly Caucasian LGBT communities, nor are they accepted by their own ethnic group
What is an example of a culturally specific support network?	Ô-Môi" for Vietnamese American queer females.
Where can lgbt people who are not white find themselves in the united states?	in a double minority,
What does it mean for the LGBT people who are in a double monority?	they are neither fully accepted or understood by mainly Caucasian LGBT communities, nor are they accepted by their own ethnic group
What do many people in the dominant LGBT community face?	racism
Why is racism so bad in the non white LGBT community?	racial stereotypes merge with gender stereotypes
What is the name of the Vietnamese American support network for the LGBT community?	Ô-Môi
Can a persons sexual interest change over different times in their life?	Some research suggests that "[f]or some [people] the focus of sexual interest will shift at various points through the life span
Until 1995 what had no studies done concerning sexual orientation?	longitudinal stability of sexual orientation over the adult life span.
What can possibly predict the future orientation a persons sexual idenity?	. [the] measure [of 'the complex components of sexual orientation as differentiated from other aspects of sexual identity at one point in time']
What do some lesbian woman see as important part of the sexual orientation?	choice
When did part of the world health organization release a statement about curing homosexuals?	2012,
Why did the Pan American Health Organization release this statement?	they lack medical justification and represent a serious threat to the health and well-being of affected people,
What condition do they state cannot be linked to homosexuality?	pathological condition
What did the Pan American Health organization say these treatments violated?	violation of the ethical principles of health care and violate human rights that are protected by international and regional agreements.
What did the Pan American Health Organization reccomend for those who used treatment to stop homosexuality?	that such malpractices be denounced and subject to sanctions and penalties under national legislation,
What does the Kinsey scale provide a classification for?	sexual orientation based on the relative amounts of heterosexual and homosexual experience or psychic response in one's history at a given time.
How does the classifiacation scheme work on the Kinsey scale?	such that individuals in the same category show the same balance between the heterosexual and homosexual elements in their histories
What is the position on the Kinsey scale based on?	relation of heterosexuality to homosexuality in one's history
What positions does the KInsey scale not use?	the actual amount of overt experience or psychic response
What does SASO stand for?	Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation
Why was SASO created?	to address the major concerns with the Kinsey Scale and Klein Sexual Orientation Grid
What did SASO find wrong with the KInsey scale and Klein Sexual Orientation Grid?	measures sexual orientation on a continuum, considers various dimensions of sexual orientation, and considers homosexuality and heterosexuality separately
What is one of SASO's main goals?	providing a final solution to the question of how to best measure sexual orientation
What is SASO causing discussion and debate about?	measurements of sexual orientation.
How are the three component used to determine sexual orientation?	all three are used independently and provide different conclusions regarding sexual orientation
When did Savin WIlliams talk about the issues with these components?	(2006)
What issues to Savin address during this talk?	basing findings regarding sexual orientation on a single component, researchers may not actually capture the intended population
Why does basing sexual orientation on one component cause problems?	Because of the limited populations that each component captures
How should consumers of the research approach these findings?	should be cautious in generalizing these findings.
What have scientists started spending the most time on?	measuring changes in brain activity related to sexual arousal
How do scientiest measure brain activity?	by using brain-scanning techniques
How did both gay and straight men react to pictures of both naked men and women?	positively
What was the only difference in the study between gay and straight men?	The only significant group difference between these orientations was found in the amygdala,
What does the amygdala region of the brain do?	known to be involved in regulating fear.
What can affect how a person is treated?	Perceived sexual orientation
What percent of hate crimes did the FBI relate to sexual orientation bias?	15.6%
When was the UK emloyment eequality (sexual orientation) regulations law take effect?	2003,
Under this law what does this state that is required by employers?	workers or job applicants must not be treated less favourably because of their sexual orientation
What do the majority of defintions surronding sexual orientation include?	psychological component, such as the direction of an individual's erotic desires, or a behavioral component
What does a behaviorial component focus on when defining sexual orientation?	focuses on the sex of the individual's sexual partner/s.
What do other people use to determine a persons sexual idenity?	an individual's self-definition
When do scientists and professions agree that sexual orientation shows in a person?	typically emerge between middle childhood and early adolescence
What is the difference between sexual idenity and sexual orientation?	sexual identity in that it encompasses relationships with others, while sexual identity is a concept of self.
Which two studies where created by Alfred C. KInsey?	In the oft-cited and oft-criticized Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953
What where people asked to do in these research studies?	people were asked to rate themselves on a scale from completely heterosexual to completely homosexual.
What did KInsey find during these studies ?	that when the individuals' behavior as well as their identity are analyzed, most people appeared to be at least somewhat bisexual
In Kinseys mind what percentage of people are considered to be fully heterosexual or homosexual?	(5–10%
Why do people say KInseys work is not correct?	the randomness of his sample population,
What idea did Sigmund Freud bring to the table?	Innate bisexuality
What does Sigmunds idea theorize?	all humans are born bisexual
Why did SIgmund believe all humans are born bisexual?	this was true anatomically and therefore also psychologically, with sexual attraction to both sexes being one part of this psychological bisexuality
What does Sigmund believe we all as adults desire?	both the masculine and the feminine sides of their natures
Even though Sigmund believed all people where born bisexual what did he not believe to be true?	that everyone is bisexual in the sense of feeling the same level of sexual attraction to both genders
Whar words may people use for sexual idenity?	pansexual or polysexual,
What does the American Pyschological Association say sexual orientation refers to?	a person's sense of identity based on those attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of others who share those attractions
What terms does behavorial science use instead of using gender binary conceptualization?	Androphilia and gynephilia
What is androphilia used to describe?	sexual attraction to masculinity
What is gynephilia used to describe?	the sexual attraction to femininity
What does the American Physocological Association say that sexual orientation refers to?	an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions to men, women, or both sexes
What do a lot of cultures use to describe homosexual people?	identity labels
What are the most used labels in America to describe homosexuals?	lesbians (women attracted to women), gay men (men attracted to men), and bisexual people (men or women attracted to both sexes).
What do psychologists says sexual orientation can also mean?	a person’s choice of sexual partners
What does NARTH stand for?	The National Association for Research & Therapy of Homosexuality
What does NARTH consider itself to be?	a "professional, scientific organization that offers hope to those who struggle with unwanted homosexuality,
What does NARTH disagree with?	the mainstream mental health community's position on conversion therapy
What does NARTH state is wrong with the mainstream mental healths stand on conversion therapy?	its effectiveness and by describing sexual orientation not as a binary immutable quality
What concerns did both the American Psychological Association and the Royal College of PSychiatrist have with NARTH?	that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by the science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish
What do the terms andophilia and gynephilia help prevent?	confusion and offense when describing people in non-western cultures, as well as when describing intersex and transgender people
Why does psychiatrist Anil Aggrawal say androphilia and gynephilia are needed terms?	the affected s
What can attempting to label members of the LGBT community cause?	confusion
What does MIlton Diamond say about the terms heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual?	are better used as adjectives, not nouns, and are better applied to behaviors, not people.
What advantages do the terms androphilia and gynephilia have?	when discussing the partners of transsexual or intersexed individuals
What has the KInsey scaled been praised for?	dismissing the dichotomous classification of sexual orientation and allowing for a new perspective on human sexuality.
What has the Kinsey scale been critisized for?	because it is still not a true continuum
How many categories are used in the KInsey scale?	seven
In a study by Masters and Johnson what did the find difficult about KIneys ratings?	to determine the relative amount heterosexual and homosexual experience and response in a person's history when using the scale
What in somebodys past caused problems for the Kinsey scale?	a large number of heterosexual and homosexual experiences
How many questions does the SASO contain?	12
What do six of the questions asses?	sexual attraction
What do the other six questions asses?	four assess sexual behavior, and two assess sexual orientation identity
What questions corresponds to the homosexual ones?	heterosexuality
How are the results simplified when using the SASO?	into four summaries that look specifically at responses that correspond to either homosexuality, heterosexuality, bisexuality or asexuality.
Has the cause for sexual orientation been found yet?	The exact causes for the development of a particular sexual orientation have yet to be established
What has the research that has been conducted for the influence of genetics made many people think?	that biology and environment factors play a complex role in forming it
What was once thought to cause homosexuality?	the result of faulty psychological development
What was found out about the theory of faulty psychological development being the cause for homosexuality?	this was based on prejudice and misinformation.
What can the scales for sexual orientation be used for?	determining what the prevalence of different sexual orientations are within a population
What will cause the amount of homosexuality to vary?	which component of sexual orientation is being assessed
Out of sexual attraction, sexual behovior, and sexual identity which will show more accurately the amount of homosexuals in a population?	Assessing sexual attraction will yield the greatest prevalence of homosexuality in a population
Which chromosome is responsible for produlcing male differentiation on defect female development?	chromosome Y
What is the differentiation process driven by?	androgen hormones,
What results in sexual differences in males and females?	secretion of androgens, that will cooperate in driving the sexual differentiation of the developing fetus, included its brain
What have scientist began to test due to the fact that adrogen results in sexual differences?	the result of modifying androgen exposure levels in mammals during fetus and early life
Who created on of the earliest sexual classification schemes?	Karl Heinrich Ulrichs
When did Karl Heinrich Ulrichs develop this classification scheme?	in the 1860s
Was his classification scheme meant for males or females?	meant only to describe males
What three categories are used in Ulrichs scheme?	dionings, urnings and uranodionings
What did these three categories correspond with?	the categories of sexual orientation used today:
What did both Weinrich and Weinberg critisize the KInsey scale for?	lumping individuals who are different based on different dimensions of sexuality into the same categories.
What caused valuable information to be lost while using the KInsey scale?	collapsing the two values into one final score
Why was collapsing the two values into one score a problem?	A person who has only predominantly same sex reactions is different from someone with relatively little reaction but lots of same sex experience
How could Kinsey have avoided losing this crucial information?	to have measured the two dimensions separately and report scores independently to avoid loss of information
Besides behavior and reactions what else could have been used in the KInsey scale?	one could also assess attraction, identification, lifestyle
What questions did Sell consider the most important on the KInsey scale?	those assessing sexual attraction
Why did Sell consider the questions regarding sexual attraction the most important?	sexual attraction is a better reflection of the concept of sexual orientation
Rather than define sexual orientation as sexual idenity or behavior what did Sell define it as?	extent of sexual attractions toward members of the other, same, both sexes or neither
What is a huge concern for SASO?	the reliability and validity remains largely unexamined.
What reflects the prevalence rates varying?	people's inconsistent responses to the different components of sexual orientation within a study and the instability of their responses over time
What does it mean when someones sexualiity is fluid?	such that one's sexual orientation is not necessarily stable or consistent over time but is subject to change throughout life.
What did Diamond find about the women?	over 7 years 2/3 of the women changed their sexual identity at least once,
What did women acknowledge who considered themselves as lesbian or bisexual?	the possibility for future same sex attractions and/or behaviour
What makes it difficult to determine if someone is homosexual or not?	individuals classified as homosexual in one study might not be identified the same way in another depending on which components are assessed
Why do researches in homosexual studies argued that it is a social and historical constuction?	Because sexual orientation is complex and multi-dimensional
Which philosopher argued homosexuality did not exist as an idenity in the eighteenth century?	Michel Foucault
In what year did Michel Foucalt publish The History Of Sexuality?	1976
What did he state was an invention of the modern state?	'Sexuality
What was a crime in the eighteenth century that could cause severe punishment but was mostly ignored?	Sodomy
What do some researchers argue about the idea of sexual orientation?	the concept may not apply similarly to men and women
What have studies found about women and their believed sexual orientations?	female-female, male-male and male-female sexual activity (oral sex or penetration), have patterns of arousal which do not match
What did the studies reveal about men and their declared sexual preference?	men's sexual arousal patterns tend to be more in line with their stated orientations,
What does research show about sexual orientation?	is independent of cultural and other social influences
What can being openly gay be hindered by?	homophobic/hetereosexist settings.
What group of the LGBT community are the most researched?	white, middle-class, well-educated
What social systems can greatly influence someone realization of their sexual preference?	religion, language and ethnic traditions
What does the american culture put a large emphasis on?	individual attributes, and views the self as unchangeable and constant.
What is a common way to determine a persons sexuality?	according to their sexual role (active/passive; insertive/penetrated)
When deteerming sexual preference this way what is the passive role associated with?	femininity and/or inferiority
When determining sexual preference this way what is the active role associated with?	masculinity and/or superiority
How much is known about lesbians and bisexual women in these cultures?	Little
What do researchers generally believe causes sexual orientation?	a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences
What biological factors do they believe plays a complicated part in sexual orientation?	a complex interplay of genetic factors and the early uterine environment, they favor biological models for the cause
What do they believe about sexual orientation?	not a choice, and some of them believe that it is established at conception.
What differences hace scientist found in certain studies?	statistical biological differences between gay people and heterosexuals
What can these results be caused from?	the same underlying cause as sexual orientation itself
What concept is sexual orientation argued as?	a concept that evolved in the industrialized West
What is causing contreversy as to the concept of sexual orientation?	the universality of its application in other societies or cultures
What is the notion of sexual orientation in west defined as?	as a biological phenomenon rather than a social construction specific to a region and period
What does Bruce criticize the labels heterosexual and homsexual as?	confusing and degrading
What does Bruce Bagemilh write about the labels homosexual and heterosexual terms?	. These labels thereby ignore the individual's personal sense of gender identity taking precedence over biological sex, rather than the other way around
What does Bagemihl say a major issue with this terminology is?	it easy to claim transsexuals are really homosexual males seeking to escape from stigma.
What can impact accurately assesing sexual identity?	sexual orientation and sexual orientation identity are not distinguished
What does the Centre For Addiction and Mental heal along with the American Psychiatric association state about sexual orientation?	sexual orientation is innate, continuous or fixed throughout their lives for some people, but is fluid or changes over time for others,
What does the American Psychological Assocation distinguish between?	sexual orientation (an innate attraction) and sexual orientation identity (which may change at any point in a person's life).
What does the FBO effect stand for?	fraternal birth order
What does this theory entail?	prenatal origin, although no evidence thus far has linked it to an exact prenatal mechanism
What does research show about the FBO effect?	this may be of immunological origin, caused by a maternal immune reaction against a substance crucial to male fetal development during pregnancy,
What does MIH stand for?	maternal immunization hypothesis
What does BBB stand for?	blood/brain barrier
What other name does the KInsey scale go by?	Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale
When was the KInsey scale first published?	1948
Why was the KInsey scale developed?	to combat the assumption at the time that people are either heterosexual or homosexual
What did KInsey state as his reasoning for the scale?	Recognizing that a large portion of population is not completely heterosexual or homosexual and people can experience both heterosexual and homosexual behavior
Who else was featured in The sexual behavior of the human male?	Wardell Pomeroy, and Clyde Martin
What does KSOG stand for?	Klein sexual orientation grid
Who invented the KSOG?	Fritz Klein
Why did pritz klein come up with the KSOG?	response to the criticism of the Kinsey scale only measuring two dimensions of sexual orientation
What kind of scale does the KSOG use?	a 7-point scale
What three points in life does the KSOG evaluate?	past (from early adolescence up to one year ago), present (within the last 12 months), and ideal (what would you choose if it were completely your choice).
What are sexual attraction. behavior, and idenity components of?	sexual orientation
What do individuals typically experience?	diverse attractions and behaviors that may reflect curiosity, experimentation, social pressure
What is there little coherent relationships between?	the amount and mix of homosexual and heterosexual behavior in a person's biography and that person's choice to label himself
Who wrote the paper "Whos Gay? Does It Matter?	Ritch Savin-Williams
What does RItch SAvin-Williams propose in this paper?	suggests that greater priority should be given to sexual arousal and attraction
What did he propose to measure attraction?	that biological measures should be developed and used.
What else does Savin-Williams suggest?	researchers should forsake the general notion of sexual orientation altogether
What components does he believe shoud be used in studies?	assess only those components that are relevant for the research question being investigated
What do these studies suggest?	that men and women are different in terms of sexual arousal patterns
How is this reflected in the studies?	in how their genitals react to sexual stimuli of both genders or even to non-human stimuli.
What are some dimensions of sexual orientation?	attractions, behavior, identity
What do mens sexual orientations tend be focused on?	physical component of attractions
What do researches believe must be taken into account for women in these studies?	emotional attachment
What can make a person believe they know someone elses sexual orientation?	perceived characteristics, such as appearance, clothing, tone of voice, and accompaniment by and behavior with other people
What is a term for someone who tries to determine someones sexuality?	gaydar
What have somes studies show when researching how someone uses "gaydar"?	that guesses based on face photos perform better than chance
What did research in 2015 suggest was an alternate label for gaydar?	using LGBT stereotypes to infer orientation
What did this research also show about face-shape?	not an accurate indication of orientation.
What is part of the reason for the varying estimates of the bisexual population?	due to differing definitions of bisexuality.
What is one way a study can view bisexuality?	if they are nearly equally attracted to both sexes,
What is another way studies can view bisexuality?	they are at all attracted to the same sex (for otherwise mostly heterosexual persons) or to the opposite sex (for otherwise mostly homosexual persons)
What is the percentage of asexuals?	1%.
What do historians and researches argue about concerning the emotional and affectionate activities?	activities associated with sexual-orientation terms such as "gay" and "heterosexual" change significantly over time and across cultural boundaries.
What can be assumed in english speaking nations when two men kiss?	is a sign of homosexuality
What do some cultures have formal ceremonies for?	expressing long-term commitment between same-sex friends
What number was dell on the Fortune 500 list until 2014?	51
When did Dell go private?	2013
Dell is currently the #1 shipper of what?	PC monitors
In which state is Dell the sixth largest company?	Texas
What PC vendor rank did Dell hold?	third largest
What market did Dell ignore at first?	consumer market
When did Dell's internet site gain popularity?	1996
What was happening to Dell's average sale to individuals?	going up
When did Dell create their internal marketing group?	1997
What sales model did Dell use for a long time?	direct
Who were the main driving force behind PC sales?	Consumers
Where were consumers going to buy devices other than online?	consumer electronics retail stores
What market presence did Dell lack?	retail
What was one city that Dell tested retail stores in?	Texas
What industry was getting smaller?	PC
When did Dell fall behind Lenovo?	2011
What other American company fell behind Lenovo with Dell?	Hewlett Packard
What PC was taking corporate customers from Dell?	ThinkPad
What company was Dell behind in profits in 2012?	Apple Inc.
Which of Dell's processes handles PC assembly, testing, and quality control?	manufacturing
Where did Dell configure their notebooks?	in-house
When did Dell describe their changing approach to manufacturing?	2006
Who reported that Dell was offering to sell their manufacturing plants?	The Wall Street Journal
What manufacturers was Dell losing to efficiency-wise?	Asian
What type of Dell media has appeared on TV, on the internet, and in magazines?	advertisements
One of Dell's marketing strategies is what kind of shipping?	free
What year did Dell cut its prices to keep its market share?	2006
By how much did Dell cut it's margins when it cut its prices?	half
Where does Dell take most of its purchases for its products?	Internet
What year did Dell make an agreement with Officeworks?	2008
What computer model did Dell ask Officeworks to carry?	Inspiron
In which country did Dell partner with Harris Technology?	Australian
What company did Dell team with in late 2008?	Dick Smith Electronics
What year did Dell's Australian program end up shutting down?	2010
What department did Dell launch an internal investigation on?	accounting
What was the minimum amount of earnings that would be restated by Dell's investigation?	$50 million
What year did Dell's internal investigation begin?	2006
Who did Dell agree to not buy processors from?	AMD
How much did Dell pay in fines to settle fraud charges against it?	$100 million
What decade did Dell begin to sell things other than PCs?	1990s
IBM, Hewlett Packard, and Compaq were the major providers of what?	servers
What servers did Dell create that they tried to break into the market with?	PowerEdge
What year did Dell's enterprise revenue make up a large chunk of its profit?	1998
Which company did Dell exceed as a server provider?	Compaq
What market made up the majority of Dell's sales?	PC
What advantage did Dell hold in the PC market?	price
What operation did Hewlett Packard and Acer make more efficient to compete with Dell?	manufacturing
Where did Dell miss out on sales due to relying on the internet?	big box stores
What company stated that Dell was preventing itself from innovating?	CNET
What decade did Dell's manufacturing process become less efficient?	2000s
What plant did Dell close in Texas?	Mort Topfer Manufacturing Center
What state was the Dell plant that received $280 million but was later closed?	North Carolina
What company bought the North Carolina plant from Dell?	Herbalife
The plant in what US state still remains in operation?	Florida
What hedge fund group was pressuring EMC into restructuring?	Elliott Management
How much has Dell's value increased since they went private?	doubled
What news source published revenue estimations between Dell and EMC?	The Wall Street Journal
What year did Dell go private?	2013
In what foreign country did Dell open plants in 1995?	Malaysia
What percentage of Dell notebooks are assembled in their asian plants?	95%
How much did Dell spend to construct a new plant in India?	$60 million
How many PCs was Dell's Indian plant slated to make in 2007?	400,000
Who is the founder of Dell?	Michael Dell
How many board members does Dell have?	nine
How many committees are appointed by the board of directors at Dell?	five
Which Dell committee handles accounting issues?	Audit Committee
Which Dell committee keeps the company from violating antitrust laws?	Antitrust Compliance Committee
What decade did Dell sell electronics through big box stores?	1990s
what year did Dell stop selling products through physical retailers?	1994
What store did Dell sell electronics at in 2003?	Sears
What year did Dell begin selling products at retailers again?	2007
Who is the largest electronics retailer in the US?	Best Buy
What was Dell the first IT company to establish?	product-recycling goal
What year did Dell enact its global consumer recycling program?	2006
How much electronics did Dell recycle by 2009?	275 million pounds
What year was 78 million pounds of Dell equipment recycled?	2006
What percentage of Dell electronics from the previous seven years were recycled?	12.4%
What decade did Dell switch to PSUs and boards that had differently wired connectors?	1990s
With what kind of parts were consumers able to upgrade their Dell systems with?	Dell-compatible parts
What year did Dell revert its power connectors to industry standard ones?	2003
What part of their motherboards does Dell not reveal the specifications of?	pin-outs
When did Michael Dell found his company?	1984
How much did Dell receive as capital from his family?	$1,000
What school did Dell go to and later drop out of while he ran his business?	University of Texas at Austin
What year did Dell design its own computer?	1985
How much did Dell profit in its first year?	$73 million
What did Dell enjoy from 1997 to 2004?	steady growth
What company did Dell overtake as the largest PC manufacturer?	Compaq
How much were Dell profiting in 2002?	$35 billion
What company did Compaq merge with in 2002?	Hewlett Packard
What company was the fastest growing in the early 2000s?	Dell
What did Dell rely on that gave it a reputation?	supply chain efficiencies
What did Dell maintain lower spending on than its competitors?	R&D
What was Dell's organizational structure considered?	horizontal
Dell lagged behind Hewlett Packard and Oracle in delivering what kind of solutions?	IT solutions
What was the name of Dell's change campaign?	Dell 2.0
Who relinquished his position as CEO to take a seat on the board?	Michael Dell
Michael Dell removed employee bonuses from what year with his new incentive?	2006
Who replaced Jim Schneider as Dell CFO?	Donald Carty
How much of Dell's revenue was its PC division?	half
Who was Dell's main business rival?	Hewlett Packard
How much did Dell spend on acquiring different divisions?	$13 billion
What happened to Dell's revenue and share price in the post-PC market?	declines
What city is Dell's New Hampshire facility in?	Nashua
What city is Dell's Tennessee facility in?	Nashville
What city is Dell's Minnesota facility in?	Eden Prairie
What city is Dell's Florida facility in?	Miami
What city is Dell's Texas facility in?	Austin
What year was Dell's Tennessee facility opened?	1999
What state was the Dell plant that received $280 million in incentives in?	North Carolina
What continent did a lot of work from Dell's plants get transferred to?	Asia
What subsidiary of Dell remains operating in Florida?	Alienware
What emissions did Dell strive to reduce?	greenhouse gas
By 2015, how much did Dell slate to reduce its emissions?	40%
What year did Dell rank 2nd for product greenness?	2011
What organization scores electronics manufacturers based on how environmentally friendly their products are?	Greenpeace
What year did Dell come under fire from the Taiwanese Consumer Protection Commission?	2009
What percent lower was Dell selling its notebooks in Taiwan?	70%
What did dell sell for $19 in Taiwan?	19" LCD
How much did Taiwan fine Dell for its practices?	NT$1 million
Innovations in what kind of management is Dell known for?	supply chain
What sales model did Dell follow?	direct-sales
For the majority of Dell's existence, what were they a vendor of?	hardware
What company did Dell acquire in 2009?	Perot Systems
What market did Dell begin to compete in in 2009?	IT services
What year did Dell plan to sell PCs at retailers?	1993
What was one retailer that were going to sell Dell PCs?	Wal-Mart
Who convinced Michael Dell to not use retailers to sell PCs?	Kevin Rollins
What position at Dell did Kevin Rollins eventually attain?	CEO
What year did Michael Dell bring in Lee Walker to the company?	1986
What did Lee Walker recruit members to Dell for?	board of directors
What year did Walker retire?	1990
What was Morton Meyerson's position at his former company?	CEO
What country's PC market was Dell reliant on?	U.S
What percentage of Dell's profits were desktop PCs being sold to commercial and corporate buyers?	32 percent
What year were Dell's PC profits shrinking?	2006
What operating system was slated to be the next system upgrade for corporate clients?	Microsoft's Windows Vista
Which division of Dell were unsuccessful in developing mobile devices?	mobility
The release of what electronic had a negative impact on Dell?	iPad
What Dell product was a commercial failure?	Streak
What line of high end electronics did Dell create that failed to compete with Apple products?	XPS
What year did Dell see its first decline in holiday sales?	2012
What did Dell have a poor reputation for?	customer service
Where did Dell move its call centers?	offshore
Which Dell employee was moved from head of manufacturing to head of customer service?	Dick Hunter
How much had Dell spent by 2006 on improving customer service?	$100 million
What year did the Blackstone Group express interest in acquiring Dell?	2013
What was the first private equity firm to decide not to submit a bid for Dell?	KKR & Co
What company did analysts feel would need to find an exit strategy to profit from acquiring Dell?	Silver Lake
How much was the potential enterprise value of Dell?	$25bn
What year did Dell close its largest Canadian call center?	2008
How many employees lost jobs when Dell closed their call center?	1100
How many workers did Dell plan to have at their Ottawa call center?	3,000
What percentage of its workforce did Dell terminate in from 2007 to 2008?	10%
What type of computing is the combined effort of EMC and Dell slated to address?	private cloud computing
What organization commented on the deal between EMC and Dell?	FBR Capital Markets
How much did VMware stock fall after the merger announcement?	10%
What was the original valuation of the merger?	$67bn
What was the value of Dell's buyout deal?	$24.4 billion
What year did Dell announce its buyout deal?	2013
What was the value of the loan that Dell received from Microsoft?	$2 billion
What was the value of the second largest technology buyout?	$17.5 billion
How much space did Dell lease in Texas?	80,000 square feet
How many senior executives were slated to work in the building Dell leased?	100
What year did Dell announce its plans to sublease its building?	2002
Where did Dell move its headquarters back to in 2003?	Round Rock
What was the total amount of space that Dell leased in Las Cimas 1 and 2?	312,000 square feet
What Texas city was Dell's headquarters previously in?	Austin
How many employees worked at Dell's Texas headquarters?	1,200
What year did Dell announce that it was moving most of its employees out of Texas?	1994
Where was the board room located at Dells Arboretum building?	top floor
How many customer support employees did Dell move to Round Rock in 1994?	1,100
For what market did Dell make computers for in Ireland?	EMEA
How many Irish employees did Dell hire?	4,500
What was the value of the aid package given to Dell that the European Union investigated?	€52.7million
What year did Dell announce it was relocating its Irish facility?	2009
What year did Dell begin production in the Lodz, Poland facility?	2007
What kind of hardware support does Dell provide?	multivendor
What kind of customers does Dell provide support to for major outages?	ProSupport
What kind of support does Dell provide using a computer's service-tag?	on-line support
What is the alternate name for the Dell Solution Station?	Dell on Call
What Dell service offers certified technicians to tackle commercial technical support?	Dell Business Support
What Dell service offers remote desktop management?	Dell Everdream Desktop Management
What is the name of the Dell service that gives home-users a support queue?	Your Tech Team
What year did Dell lose its tech lead to Hewlett-Packard?	2006
What was HP's growth during the third quarter of 2006?	15%
What was the rate of decline that Dell experienced in PC shipments?	8.9%
What was Dell's market share at the end of 2006?	13.9%
What toxic chemical did Dell set to eliminate from its products?	polyvinyl chloride
By what year does Dell plan to remove chemicals from its computers?	2011
What activists protested at Dell's offices in response to the usage of toxic chemicals?	Greenpeace
What year did Dell launch its first products that were free of toxic chemicals?	2009
What percentage of Dell support calls were transferred?	45%
How much did Dell originally spend to fix their customer service?	$100 million
What amount did Dell increase its customer service budget to?	$150 million
What does Dell aim to reduce by creating energy efficient products?	external environmental impact
How much does energy efficiency save Dell per year?	$3 million
What is the largest contributor to Dell's energy efficiency savings?	PC power management
How many PCs does Dell employ energy management software on?	50,000
What process begins after a death sentence is handed down at trial?	direct review
In a direct review, what type of court looks at the record?	appellate
How many possible outcomes are there of a capital sentencing direct review?	three
In a direct review, what court has its record reviewed by the appellate court?	trial
What percentage of convictions survive direct review?	60
In what year was the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act passed?	1996
How many habeas corpus suits does the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act normally allow in federal court?	one
What is the US Code citation for the Civil Rights Act of 1871?	42 U.S.C. § 1983
Why does a litigant initiate a lawsuit under the Civil Rights Act of 1871?	to protect their federal constitutional and statutory rights
Who was executed by firing squad on January 17, 1977?	Gary Gilmore
In what state was Gary Gilmore executed?	Utah
On what date was John Spenkelink executed?	May 25, 1979
In what state did Jesse Bishop's execution occur?	Nevada
How was Charles Brooks, Jr. executed?	lethal injection
What was a common nickname for the electric chair?	Old Sparky
What color was Alabama's electric chair?	Yellow
What state notably had electric chair malfunctions?	Florida
Due to electric chair malfunctions, what method of execution became preferred?	lethal injection
Prior to the popularity of lethal injection, what was the preferred method of executing criminals in America?	Electrocution
What state has had only a single execution?	Wisconsin
When was the last person executed in the District of Columbia?	1957
When did Oregon reinstate the death penalty?	1984
In what year did an Oregon referendum succeed in restoring the death penalty, only to be shot down due to a court ruling?	1978
What state notably abolished the death penalty and then reintroduced it, but didn't use it again?	Rhode Island
In the United States, how many murders are there for each execution?	700
How many murder convictions occur in the US per execution?	325
How many states in the US have the death penalty?	32
What state has the highest rate of death sentences per person?	Alabama
What does Alabama law allow judges to do that isn't allowed in other states?	overriding life imprisonment sentences and imposing the death penalty
What territory's constitution says "The death penalty shall not exist"?	Puerto Rico's
What US state prohibits the death penalty in its constitution?	Michigan
How many US states have passed laws outlawing the death penalty?	eleven
Under what jurisdiction can capital offenses still be committed in Puerto Rico?	federal
In what year was the death penalty suspended in the US?	1972
What Supreme Court case resulted in capital punishment being suspended?	Furman v. Georgia
Who was executed on June 2, 1967?	Luis Monge
What amendment to the United States Constitution forbids cruel and unusual punishment?	Eighth
In what year was the suspension of the death penalty in the United States ended?	1976
What state's law says that death sentences must take place in an "enclosure"?	Connecticut
What state's law requires that capital punishment occur "within the walls" of a penitentiary?	North Carolina
What law has similar language to Missouri Revised Statute § 546.730?	Kentucky Revised Statute 431.220
Along with United States Code Title 18 § 3596, what federal law limits the people who can witness a federal execution?	Code of Federal Regulations 28 CFR 26.4
What state's law mandated that executions occur in ""room or place enclosed from public view"?	New Mexico's
In what year was Gregg v. Georgia decided?	1976
Along with the guilt-innocence phase, what is the other phase of a death penalty trial under Gregg v. Georgia?	sentencing
What is the only conviction that can lead to the death penalty?	first-degree murder
Along with aggravating factors, what other factors are considered at the second hearing?	mitigating
What is decided at the first proceeding?	the defendant's guilt
How many executions occurred in 1999?	98
What was the number of people executed in 2015?	28
In what year did the reauthorization of capital punishment occur?	1976
How many people have been executed in the United States since 1976?	1,411
Which state has the largest number of people awaiting execution?	California
In November 2008, who was on death penalty without a murder conviction?	Demarcus Sears
Who did Demarcus Sears kidnap?	Gloria Ann Wilbur
In what state was Gloria Ann Wilbur murdered?	Kentucky
In what year was Demarcus Sears convicted of kidnapping?	1986
A jury in what state sentenced Demarcus Sears to death?	Georgia
When a prisoner is given a death sentence in a state, what is the first step of collateral review?	state collateral review
About what percentage of capital convictions are overturned due to state collateral review?	6
In 2010, how many death sentences were overturned due to reversals from courts or appeals?	53
What is an example of an issue that is raised in collateral review?	ineffective assistance of counsel
In what case did the Supreme Court allow Section 1983 to be used to challenge a method of execution?	Hill v. McDonough
In what year was Hill v. McDonough decided?	2006
What amendment of the Constitution does cruel and unusual punishment violate?	Eighth
What case notably upheld the use of a method of lethal injection?	Baze v. Rees
Along with Section 1983, through what means can a convict on death row challenge his execution?	habeas corpus
How many people were killed in the largest mass execution in US history?	38
On what date did the largest mass execution in American history take place?	December 26, 1862
In what state did the largest American mass execution occur?	Minnesota
What was the ethnicity of the people executed in the second-largest mass execution in US history?	African-American
In what year did the Admiralty Court hang 26 pirates in Newport, Rhode Island?	1723
What act restricted the scope of federal habeas corpus?	the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
How may state prisoners seek to have a death sentence overturned in federal court?	Federal habeas corpus
In what courts can federal habeas corpus suits be brought?	federal
If prisoners use federal habeas corpus to present evidence that they're innocent, what must the evidence be?	truly compelling
Along with New Jersey, what state commuted all life sentences when bills to repeal the death penalty were passed?	Illinois
The governor of what state commuted four death sentences in January 2015?	Maryland
Who was governor of Maryland in January 2015?	Martin O'Malley
In what state's supreme court was State v. Santiago decided?	Connecticut
How many people had their sentences commuted by State v. Santiago?	11
In what court was Bigby v. Dretke decided?	United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
What court heard the case Penry v. Lynaugh?	United States Supreme Court
What amendment to the Constitution did Penry v. Lynaugh address?	Eighth
What sentencing factors did Bigby v. Dretke consider?	mitigating
In what year was Tony Chebatoris killed?	1938
When was Michigan's fourth Constitution ratified?	1963
In what city was Tony Chebatoris executed?	Milan
In what year was there a failed Michigan constitutional amendment to allow the death penalty?	2004
What article of the fourth Michigan Constitution forbids laws allowing capital punishment?	4
Under what federal statute are offenses punished by lethal injection?	Drug Kingpin Act of 1988
According to what law are federal prisoners executed according to the procedures in place in the state in which they were convicted?	Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994
In what month and year was Juan Garza executed?	June 2001
Who was executed by the federal government on March 18, 2003?	Louis Jones, Jr.
In what state is the Federal Correctional Complex in Terre Haute?	Indiana
In what year did the American Law Institute create a death penalty framework for the Model Penal Code?	1962
In what year did the American Law Institute change their mind about their contribution on the death penalty to the Model Penal Code?	2009
What goal did the ALI's study say could not be reconciled with the goal of individualized execution decisions?	systemic fairness for minorities
In what year was Coker v. Georgia decided?	1977
For what offense did Coker v. Georgia forbid the death penalty?	rape of an adult woman
Along with Georgia, what American jurisdiction allowed people to be executed for the rape of an adult prior to Coker?	U.S. Federal government
What ruling forbid the government from executing child rapists?	Kennedy v. Louisiana
Prior to Kennedy v. Louisiana, how many states criminalized child rape?	three
In what year was Nebraska's death penalty statute ruled unconstitutional by a state court?	2008
What state's court ruled capital punishment unconstitutional in 1984?	Massachusetts
In what case did the Kansas Supreme Court rule that the death penalty is unconstitutional in Kansas?	State v. Kleypas
What method of execution did the Nebraska Supreme Court rule unconstitutional?	electrocution
After electrocution was outlawed, how were Nebraska death row inmates executed?	lethal injection
What death penalty drug ceased to be manufactured in 2011?	sodium thiopental
Up until 2011, who manufactured sodium thiopental?	Hospira
What is the nationality of the company that makes pentobarbital?	Danish
Along with anti-death penalty advocacy, why has there been a shortage in drugs for lethal injections in the United States?	low production volume
The EU outlawed the export of products that could be used in what activity?	execution
In what year did the most polled American support capital punishment?	1994
What percentage of polled Americans opposed the death penalty in 1966?	47
In a 1977 poll, what percentage of respondents preferred life imprisonment to the death penalty?	29
In a 2006 poll, what percentage of polled Americans preferred the death penalty to life without parole?	47
What is a notable capital crime in Louisiana?	aggravated rape
In what state is extortionate kidnapping a capital offense?	Oklahoma
Along with Alabama, where is hijacking an aircraft a death penalty offense?	Mississippi
In what state is armed robbery a capital crime?	Georgia
In what states is perjury leading to death a capital offense?	California, Colorado, Idaho and Nebraska
Along with Marshall, who believed that the Eighth Amendment forbade the death penalty?	William J. Brennan, Jr.
Along with Stewart, what Supreme Court justice was concerned about racial disparity in death penalty enforcement?	William O. Douglas
Aside from Stewart, what justice believed that the death penalty could be constitutional?	Byron White
Between 1973 and 2015, how amny prisoners were acquitted or received pardons or commutations of their death sentences due to possible innocence?	156
What percentage of murderers in the United States are given a death sentence?	2.5
How many murderers in Nevada were given a capital sentence?	6
What state notably executes 40% of those given the death penalty?	Texas
How much higher is the rate of execution in Texas versus the national average?	four times
What percentage of murderers in California are given the death penalty and subsequently executed?	1
Under the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988 and Federal Death Penalty Act of 1994, about how many crimes were punishable by death?	fifty
What body passed the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988?	Congress
What is another term for the act of spying for another country?	espionage
Along with treason and espionage, what non-death offense is still a federal capital crime?	high-level drug trafficking
Who was executed on January 17, 1977?	Gary Gilmore
By what method was Gary Gilmore executed?	firing squad
Aside from Gary Gilmore, how many people were executed in the United States between January 17, 1977 and 1984?	ten
What tactic did inmates on death row use to delay their executions?	filing repeated writs of habeas corpus
In what month and year was Troy Davis executed?	September 2011
Who was the Death Penalty Information Center director?	Richard Dieter
What organization did Brian Evans work for?	Amnesty International
How many execution methods are currently used in the United States?	five
What was the most common historical method of execution in the United States?	hanging
In what state did the last burning at the stake take place in the US?	South Carolina
Who was the last person hanged in chains in the Untied States?	John Marshall
When was execution by beheading ended in Utah?	1888
What percentage of American death row prisoners are African American?	41
What percentage of people executed in the United States since 1976 have been African American?	34
What percentage of American prison inmates are African American?	47
What percentage of homicides were committed by Asians between 1980 and 2008?	2.2%
What percentage of the American population is Hispanic?	17.4%
In the United States, how many important steps are usually present in the administration of capital punishment?	four
Along with the President, what officeholder can issue pardons?	Governor
How many death sentences were issued in the period 1995-1996?	309
How many capital sentences were given in 1973?	44
In what year were there 73 death penalty convictions?	2014
On what date was Fred Adams hanged?	April 2, 1937
Where was Bethea hanged?	Owensboro
What was Roscoe Jackson's nickname?	Red
In what state did the hanging of Adams take place?	Missouri
How many people witnessed Timothy McVeigh's execution?	300
What institution does James Liebman work for?	Columbia Law School
What does James Liebman teach?	law
According to Liebman, about what percentage of death penalty habeas corpus petitions were successful between 1978 and 1995?	40
According to Tabak, what percentage of habeas corpus petitions were granted to death row inmates between 1976 and 1991?	47
In what year did Liebman announce his findings?	1996
Who was executed on March 30, 1960?	James W. Rodgers
What method of execution was used on James W. Rodgers?	firing squad
In what state was Rodgers executed?	Utah
On what date was George York executed?	June 22, 1965
Which state executed James French?	Oklahoma
About how many American juveniles have been executed since 1642?	364
In what year was Thomas Graunger executed?	1642
Since 1976, how many Americans have been executed for crimes committed as juveniles?	Twenty-two
How old was George Stinney when he was executed?	14
What method was used to execute Leonard Shockley?	gas chamber
What state employed Robert Patton in May 2014?	Oklahoma
As of May 2014, what was Robert Patton's job title?	Director of Corrections
What race was Clayton Lockett?	African-American
What gas did Oklahoma decide to use for executions in 2015?	nitrogen
What was Clayton Lockett's cause of death?	heart attack
Along with gender, geography and race, what bias do some opponents of the death penalty see in its administration?	socio-economic
According to opponents of the death penalty, what does the death penalty cheapen?	human life
According to death penalty opponents, on whose moral level does execution place the government?	criminals involved in murder
What do death penalty opponents argue that capital punishment isn't effective at doing?	deterring crime
Who do death penalty opponents believe may sometimes be executed?	the innocent
According to Thompson v. Oklahoma, what was the youngest age at which a person might be executed?	Sixteen
In what year was Thompson v. Oklahoma decided?	1988
In what month and year was Roper v. Simmons decided?	March 2005
In Roper v. Simmons, how many Supreme Court justices believed juvenile execution to be unconstitutional?	5
Based on Roper v. Simmons, what is now the minimum age to be executed in the United States?	18
In what year did Missouri pass a law stating that executions should be inside of or near a jail?	1919
What procedure did Missouri use to execute prisoners in 1919?	hanging
In the Missouri of 1919, who handed out passes to witness executions?	the local sheriff
In approximately what year did a movement in favor of private executions begin in the US?	1890
Who commuted all state capital sentences in 1986?	Toney Anaya
Of what state was Toney Anaya governor?	New Mexico
Who was Governor of Ohio in 1991?	Dick Celeste
How many women were on Ohio's death row in 1991?	four
In what year did Bob Graham become Governor of Florida?	1979
Along with South Dakota, what state rejected a death penalty abolition bill in 2010?	Kansas
Who did Idaho execute in 2011?	Paul Ezra Rhoades
Who was executed on October 30, 2012?	Donald Moeller
Since 1976, how many prisoners has Nevada executed?	12
Since 1976, in what year was a prisoner executed in Wyoming?	1992
How many drugs are used to administer lethal injection?	three
What lethal injection drug is manufactured by Hospira?	sodium thiopental
When did Hospira cease to manufacture its lethal injection drug for the United States?	2011
In what country does Hospira manufacture sodium thiopental today?	Italy
What EU law forbids products used in torture to be manufactured in the European Union?	Torture Regulation
Who attached a Game & Watch D-pad to the Famicom prototype?	Katsuyah Nakawaka
What was installed on the front of the console so the joystick could be used?	15-pin expansion port
Why were the controllers hard-wired to the console with no connectors?	cost reasons
Where were the game pad controllers copied from?	Game & Watch machines
What was the abbreviation for Nintendo Entertainment System?	NES
What day did Nintendo unveil the new systems?	October 18, 1985
Where did Nintendo start unveiling the new systems?	New York City
What was the name of the convention where Nintendo unveiled its American version of the Famicom?	Consumer Electronics Show
In June 1989 who was Nintendo of America's vice president of marketing?	Peter Main
In 1990, what percentage of American households owned an NES?	30%
What was the slogan for the Nintendo brand?	It can't be beaten
What outsold the NES in Europe and South America?	Sega's Master System
Where was Nintendo not available?	Soviet Union
Which cartridges were shaped slightly differently?	Japanese (Famicom)
Which interface did the NES use?	72-pin
Which interface did Famicom use?	60-pin
Various companies in Japan did what to their games for certain specifics?	develop their own customized chips
With the NES at its end, which competing consoles with less strict licensing terms were supported?	Sega Genesis and then the PlayStation
Who was an example of a 3rd party publisher?	Electronic Arts
Nintendo relied primarily on what for its support?	first-party games
Rivals in what self-identified era enjoyed much stronger 3rd party support?	post-SNES era
Who caused Nintendo to take formal action regarding rentals?	Blockbuster Video
According to Nintendo what was the danger in renting games?	would significantly hurt sales and drive up the cost of games
Blockbuster was banned from including what with their games?	copyrighted instruction booklets
What did Blockbuster do instead of use copyrighted instruction booklets?	produced their own short instructions
Which company distributed the NES to the UK, Italy, and Australia?	Mattel
When did Nintendo take over European distribution?	1990
Which three countries share the PAL A region?	UK, Italy and Australia
What two versions of the NES were released in the UK, Italy, and Australia?	"Mattel Version" and "NES Version"
What were the two turbo controllers Nintendo made for the NES?	NES Advantage and the NES Max
What did the Turbo feature allow players to do?	shoot much faster during shooter games
Which controller had a non-adjustable Turbo feature?	The NES Max
Which two accessories were featured in the movie The Wizard?	Power Pad and the Power Glove
The NES Max also did not feature what?	"Slow" button
What year did Nintendo release the Famicom Disk System?	1986
Where could the disks for the game be obtained?	kiosks in malls
How were the disks purchased?	buyers could select a title and have it written to the disk
What were the storage disks used for?	storing the game and saving progress
What was the total capacity of a disk?	128k
When was the system originally supposed to be released?	spring of 1985
Retailers in what test area reported a miserable failure of sales?	New York City
When was the second time Nintendo test marketed the NES?	February 1986
When was the nationwide release of the NES?	September 1986
Where was the system released to two separate marketing areas?	Europe and Australia
One region comprised the entirety of mainland Europe save for which country?	Italy
Who released cartridges in mainland Europe?	Nintendo
Who handled distribution in the other region?	Mattel
When did the European brance finally directly distribute throughout Europe?	1990s
Which example of a system started to mark the end of the NES dominance?	16-bit Sega Mega Drive/Genesis
When did the demand for new NES software dry up?	late 1993
What was the final Famicom game released in North America?	Wario's Woods
What year did Nintendo officially discontinue the NES?	1995
How late did Nintendo continue to repair Famicom units?	October 31, 2007
Who did Atari attempt to force ceasing production of games for its system?	Activision
Nintendo actively encouraged  the involvement of what?	third-party software developers
Nintendo's measures for third party game developers were also adopted by which later manufacturers?	Sega, Sony, and Microsoft
Companies did what in an effort to circumvent Nintendo's console authentication?	voltage spike to temporarily disable the 10NES chip
Why did the companies circumvent the authentication system?	refusing to pay the licensing fee or having been rejected by Nintendo
Where did unlicensed games feature a dongle?	Europe and Australia
What did Nintendo do to curb unlicensed game sales?	threatened retailers
What is the abbreviation of Nintendo Entertainment System?	NES
what was it called in Japan?	Family Computer
When was the Family Computer (Famicom) released in Japan?	July 15, 1983
When was it released in Australia?	1987
What succeeded the Famicom?	Super Nintendo Entertainment System
What was the console's most common problem?	blinking red power light
The 10NES would reset the system how often?	once per second
What disrupted the communication as well?	Dirty, aging and bent connectors
What was one example of what users did to combat the blinking problem?	blowing air onto the cartridge connectors
When did Nintendo release a cleaning kit?	1989
How many units of the Famicom were sold in Japan by the beginning of 1985?	2.5 million units
What was this system to be called in North America?	Advanced Video Entertainment System
What magazine stated that Nintendo could be errant in their anticipated product success?	Electronic Games magazine
Which console featured a top-loading design?	NES 2
The design of what was modified slightly?	game controllers
the original design of the controller was what shape?	brick
What was the new design shape of the controller?	dog bone
How long were standard NES controller cables?	6 feet
What year did Nintendo's market surpass all computer software?	1988
Who reported that Nintendo sold 7 million NES systems?	Compute!
When did Compute! report the number of systems sold at 7 million?	1989
The 7 million sold almost equated to which console's five year span?	Commodore 64s
Nintendo charged producers hefty sums to make what?	FDS games
What did companies do instead of making FDS games?	make cartridge titles
Many FDS disks lack what?	dust covers
What broke frequently and needed replacement in the machine?	belt
How long did Nintendo service drives and offer replacement disks?	2003
Which company produced the Twin Famicom and the 19SC111 TV?	Sharp Corporation
What was compatible with Famicom cartridges and FDS systems?	Twin Famicom
Hyundai licensed the Sharp 19SC111 TV with what name in South Korea?	Comboy
Until how long did South Korea ban Japanese cultural products?	1998
How could Japanese products only enter South Korea?	licensing to a third-party (non-Japanese) distributor
The Zelda games were manufactured in what color cartridge?	gold
What is the standard color of all other cartridges?	gray
What color were cartridges produced by Nintendo for internal use?	yellow
What was distinctly made by Nintendo, Konami, and Acclaim?	licensed US cartridges
What was the opening lyric from the Duck Tales theme show?	Life is like a hurricane
What was Nintendo accused of?	antitrust behavior
Why was Nintendo accused of antitrust behavior?	strict licensing requirements
Who interviewed retailers as part of their investigation?	FTC
Who began probing Nintendo's business?	United States Department of Justice
How much were the vouchers worth that Nintendo sent out?	$5
What was the first NES emulator?	Pasofami
What was the first English available emulator?	iNES
What platform was NESticle available for use?	MS-DOS
When was NESticle released?	April 3, 1997
What did the Famicom sorely lack?	lockout hardware
What was the lockout chip number for the USA and Canada?	3193
What was the lockout chip number for most of Europe, save the UK and Italy?	3195
What was the lockout chip number for Asia?	3196
What was the lockout chip number for UK, Italy, and Australia?	3197
Who designed the Famicom system?	Masayuki Uemura
The plans called for how many bits as a feature?	16
Who was the Nintendo president at the time?	Hiroshi Yamauchi
When was the test model constructed?	October 1982
Early Famicom games were written on what computer system?	NEC PC-8001
What was the light gun controller called?	Zapper
What was the name of the auxiliary port used to connect additional devices on the Famicom?	DA-15
How were the special controllers connected to the NES?	control ports on the front
What year did the video game market crash?	1983
The crash was caused in part by the confusion and misrepresentation of what in video games?	marketing
What specifically was misrepresented on game products?	artwork
Nintendo's marketing strategy aimed at what aspect of the consumer via realism?	confidence
How much was the selling price equivalent to in today's money?	$475
How much did the Deluxe NES sell for?	US$199.99
How much did the console sell for bundled with just the Super Mario Bros. game?	US$99.99
Super Mario Bros was paired with which game in the Action Set?	Duck Hunt
The Basic Set sold for how much at release?	US$89.99
What thrived after the NES was discontinued?	unlicensed clone market
What feature does the PocketFami have?	color LCD
The NES was duplicated on which medium in order to make clones easy to produce?	chip
Nintendo produced toys and what other item before its game system?	playing card
Nintendo's era was compared with who as another video game manufacturer?	Atari
Nintendo required what from its software developers?	licensed approval
What did licensing lead to regarding games?	higher quality
Atari created NES products under which name?	Tengen
What did Nintendo sue Tengen for?	copyright infringement
Tengen reverse engineered the lockout chip to develop what animal monikered prototype?	"Rabbit" chip
Tengen got a description of Nintendo's chip from whom?	United States Patent and Trademark Office
What month and year did the Famicom receive a redesign?	December 1993
What used composite video output?	HVC-101
What device was RF only?	HVC-001
What was the newer model called?	AV Famicom
What did Nintendo release in Japan only?	3D graphic capable headset
Who developed Nintendo's PPU?	Ricoh
How many kb of Video RAM did the PPU have?	2
The system has how many colors available on it?	48
How many grays could be used as well?	6
What is the standard display resolution of the NES?	256 horizontal pixels by 240 vertical pixels
Nintendo agreed with Atari to release the Famicom under what name?	Nintendo Advanced Video Gaming System
When was the Summer Consumer Electronics Show held?	June 1983
Which company was illegally demonstrating a Nintendo game?	Coleco
What was the name of the fired Atari CEO?	Ray Kassar
What was Nintendo's euphemism for "video game system?"	Entertainment System
What did Nintendo use instead of the word console?	Control Deck
What was the term used by Nintendo instead of "video games?"	Game Pak
What was printed on all licensed games and accessories by Nintendo?	seal of quality
The seal of quality took on what eventual name?	Official Nintendo Seal of Quality
How were the Famicom controllers attached to the console?	hardwired
The second Famicom controller lacked START and what other button?	SELECT
What did the second Famicom controller have as a unique feature?	microphone
What shape were the A and B buttons on the earliest Famicom controllers?	square
What shape did the A and B buttons eventually become?	circular
When did Sega finally permit third-party publishing?	summer 1988
What was the name of the 1st company Sega permitted?	Mediagenic
Nintendo was the sole manufacturer of what component for third-party developers?	cartridges
As cartridges couldn't be returned to Nintendo, the developers took on the entirety of what?	risk
What year was there a shortage of DRAM and ROM chips?	1988
What does ZIF stand for?	zero insertion force
The ZIF insertion used by Nintendo was set to emulate what device?	VCR
The force of pushing in the cartridge did what to the device over eventual use?	bent the contact pins slightly
What material were the connector springs made of?	nickel
What material comprised the game cartridge connectors?	copper
To address the shoddy hardware, what popped up across the United States?	Nintendo Authorized Repair Centers
What did the repair centers promise?	ensure that the machines were properly repaired
What was done to have the privilege of working on an NES for repair?	paying a fee
The HVC-001 featured which kind of mod output?	radio frequency (RF)
The HVC-101 lost the RF and adopted which output for use in North America and Europe?	composite video
The Super NES had how many pins in its proprietary connector?	12
The re-released NES-101 model in North America went back to what perceived primitive output?	RF modulator
How many pins did the controller ports have on the NES?	7
Unlike the Famicom, the NES controllers possessed what consistent feature?	identical
The second controller possessed the START and SELECT buttons as what other device?	primary controller
What did the Legend of Zelda require in certain instances to kill enemies?	Famicom microphone
What was the name of the NES clone produced in Taiwan?	Dendy
Where was the Dendy sold?	Soviet Union
Which country marketed a clone called "Family Game?"	Argentina
What was the name of the clone in Poland?	Pegasus
India's first gaming console was also a clone, called what?	Samurai
How much does the NES unit weigh in pounds?	11.7
How large was the typical television recommended for the device?	typically 11" to 14"
Where was the Television meant to be placed?	atop
What's the name of the feature on the front of the front of the NES test device?	Game Pak slot
According to Sergio DellaPergola, what percent of Jews worldwide do Ashkenazi Jews's make up?	74%
During what century did Ashkenazi Jews make up around three percent of the Jewish population worldwide?	11th century
Prior to which major event were there approximately 16.7 million Jews in the world?	Holocaust
During what year did Ashkenazi Jews account for 92 percent of Jews worldwide?	1931
By 1931, what percentage of the world’s Jews were Ashkenazi Jews?	92 percent
How many Jews were there in the world just prior to the Holocaust?	16.7 million
From the 11th century until 1931, the population of Ashkenazi Jews grew by what percent?	three percent of the world's Jewish population, while at their peak in 1931 they accounted for 92 percent
Who made rough calculations and implied that Ashkenazi Jews make up less than 74% of the Jewish population worldwide?	Sergio DellaPergola
The present-day population of Ashkenazi Jews is thought to be between which two numbers?	10 million and 11.2 million
In which tractate of the Babylonian Talmud is the name Gomer given as Germania?	Yoma
Ashkenaz is linked to Scandza/Scanzia, which is viewed as what?	cradle of Germanic tribes
Saadia Gaon identified Ashkenaz with the Saquliba or what territories?	Slavic
Who identified Ashkenaz with the Saquliba or Slavic territories?	Saadia Gaon
Even though Gomer is rendered as Germania in the Yoma tractate of the Babylonian Talmud, in other rabbinical literature it was identified with what?	Germanikia in northwestern Syria
Who expelled the Jews from his Merovingian kingdom in 629?	King Dagobert I of the Franks
Does the archeological record suggest that there was a rather large or small population of Jews in Gaul and Germany?	very few Jews
In antiquity, most Jews in Gaul or Germany probably occupied what two roles?	traders or artisans
In what year did Jewish communities exist in Brittany?	465 CE
During the Middle Ages, some Jews assimilated into the dominant Greek and Latin cultures by doing what?	conversion to Christianity
What percentage of Israeli Jews are people of Ashkenazi descent?	47.5%
When Israel was in its infancy as a state, there were cultural conflicts between which two groups?	Sephardic and Ashkenazi Jews
What was the conflict between Sephardic and Ashkenazi Jews attributed to?	the concept of the "melting pot"
What percentage of all Israelis are thought to be of Ashkenazi descent?	35–36%
When Israel was in its infancy as a state, the Ashkenazi Jews involved in conflicts with Sephardic Jews were mainly what type of Jews?	east European Ashkenazim
Culturally, an Ashkenazi Jew can be identified by what concept?	Yiddishkeit
Is there a larger or smaller number of Jews that speak Yiddish today than in the past?	a far smaller number of Jews still speak Yiddish
What does Yiddishkeit mean in the Yiddish language?	"Jewishness"
In the past most Jews prayed in what language?	liturgical Ashkenazi Hebrew
In the past, while most Jews prayed in one language, they used which other language in their secular lives?	Yiddish
For what period of time were the Ashkenazim a reproductively isolated population in Europe?	For roughly a thousand years
A 2013 study of Ashkenazi mitochondrial DNA was conducted by what university?	University of Huddersfield in England
In an ethnic sense, Ashkenazi Jews can trace their ancestry to Jews who settled where?	Central Europe
In the last 50-60 years, have more or less Ashkenazi Jews intermarried with people outside of their community?	many Ashkenazi Jews have intermarried, both with members of other Jewish communities and with people of other nations and faiths
Human geneticists argue that genetic variations have been identified that show high or low frequencies among Ashkenazi Jews?	high frequencies
In the past have relations between Ashkenazim and Sephardim tended to be warm or cold?	have not always been warm
What did Saadia Marciano do with the Israeli Black Panthers?	led to protest movements
How did the Ashkenazim view north African Sepharadim and Berber Jews?	as second-class citizens
Who led the Israeli Black Panthers?	Saadia Marciano
Where was Saadia Marciano from?	Moroccan Jew
What percentage of the modern Ashkenazi genome could possibly be of European origin?	35 to 55 percent
Is the percentage of admixture in the modern Ashkenazi genome higher or lower than previously thought?	admixture is considerably higher
Were Ashkenazi Jews found to be a more or less genetically divergent population than Russians, Orcadians, French, and Basques?	a genetically more divergent population
In one study it was found that the Ashkenazim were more or less diverse than their Middle Eastern relatives?	more diverse
Were the Ashkenazim thought to be a subset or superset of their assumed geographical source population?	Ashkenazim are supposed to be a subset, not a superset
Genetic studies on Ashkenazim have found a significant prevalence of what type of origins?	ancient Levantine origins
Have studies on the genetics of the Ashkenazim come to similar or divergent conclusions regarding the degree and sources of their European ancestry?	they have arrived at diverging conclusions
Have these studies on Ashkenazim genetics researched their paternal lineages, maternal lineages, or both?	researching both their paternal and maternal lineages
Genetic studies on the Ashkenazim have tried to determine how much of their ancestry is derived from European populations and from where?	the Levant
The custom of designating areas of Jewish settlement with biblical names meant that Spain was referred to as what?	Sefarad
The custom of designating areas of Jewish settlement with biblical names meant that France was called?	Tsarefat
The reference to France as Tsarefat was taken from which biblical passage?	1 Kings 17:9
How did Byzantium and Syrian Jewish letters refer to the Crusaders?	as Ashkenazim
Following the Carolingian unification, the term Ashkenazi came to refer to the Jews of what two places?	medieval Germany and France
Did Charlemagne's expansion of the Frankish empire bring about a brief period of upheaval or stability in Francia?	a brief period of stability
Charlemagne's expansion of the Frankish empire created opportunities for Jewish merchants to settle where?	north of the Alps
Charlemagne granted the Jews freedoms similar to those enjoyed under which previous empire?	Roman Empire
When Jews began to return to Frankish lands many took up occupations in which two fields?	finance and commerce
Which language emerged as a result of language contact with various High German vernaculars during the medieval period?	Yiddish
The lack of assimilation of Jews in central and eastern Europe lies in part to the fact that they lived almost exclusively in what?	shtetls
A lack of assimilation of Jews in central and eastern Europe is also attributed to males taking part in what type of system?	a strong system of education
In central and eastern Europe it is thought that Jewish scorn for the life-style of their neighbors increased due to what?	increased with every outbreak of antisemitism
Besides living in shtetls, maintaining a strong system of education for males, and scorning the life-style of their neighbors, Jews in central and eastern Europe also did what?	heeded rabbinic leadership
Who noted that Ashkenazi Jews lived in Jerusalem during the 11th century?	Rabbi Elijah of Chelm
Another piece of evidence of German communities in the holy city in the second half of the 11th century is due to what items being sent from Germany to Jerusalem?	halakhic questions
Mystic Rabbi Elijah of Chelm is from what century?	16th-century
In the story told by mystic Rabbi Elijah of Chelm, one of the German's family members rescued Jews in Palestine and carried them back to where in order to repay a previous favor?	Worms
At the beginning of World War II, about how many Jews lived in Europe?	8.8 million
Of the large number of Jews living in Europe at the beginning of World War II, about how many were Ashkenazi?	about 6 million
What percentage of Polish Jews were killed during the Holocaust?	91%
The percentage of Ashkenazi Jews went from being close to 92% of all Jews in the world in 1931 prior to WWII to what percentage today?	nearly 80%
The vast majority of the Jewish victims of the Holocaust spoke which language?	Yiddish
For religious Jews, what does Minhagim mean?	customs
What type of Jew is required to follow the customs of their ancestors without the option of picking and choosing?	Orthodox Jews
For religious Jews, what does Halakha mean?	religious law
For religious Jews, "Ashkenazic" refers to what two things?	a family ancestry and to a body of customs binding on Jews of that ancestry
Reform Judaism originated among what type of Jew?	Ashkenazi Jews
Most of the Ashkenazi Jews moved away from Europe either immigrating to North America, or other English speaking areas but most to which place?	Israel
For most Ashkenazi Jews, Yiddish was replaced with what language?	Hebrew
What two groups continue to use Yiddish in daily life?	many Hasidic and Hareidi groups
A 2006 study found Ashkenazi Jews to be a what?	a clear, homogeneous genetic subgroup
Ashkenazi Jews, regardless of their place of origin, belong to the same what?	ethnic group
Members of which two Haredi Jewish sects continue to marry exclusively within the Ashkenazi Jewish population?	Hasidic or Hareidi sects
Do Haredi Jews tend to have large or small families?	Haredi Jews often have extremely large families
What percentage of the US population is comprised of Ashkenazi Jews?	2%
What percentage of the top 100 world chess players come from the Ashkenazi Jewish community?	8%
What percentage of Nobel award winners from the United States in the 20th century have been Ashkenazi Jews?	27%
About how many Fields Medal winners have been Ashkenazi Jews?	a quarter
About how many of the world's chess champions come from the Ashkenazi Jewish community?	half the world's chess champions
Researcher Gil Atzmon suggests that Ashkenazim branched off from other Jews around the time of what?	the destruction of the First Temple
The destruction of the First Temple was how many years ago?	2,500 years ago
It is estimated that 400 families left Northern Italy around what year?	1000
Ashkenazi families that left Northern Italy went where?	Central and eventually Eastern Europe
A 2001 study by Nebel et al. showed that which two populations share the same overall paternal Near Eastern ancestries?	Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jewish populations
Levels of the Eu 19 (R1a) chromosome are typically seen between what two percentages in Central and Eastern Europeans?	54%–60%
Levels of the Eu 19 (R1a) chromosome were seen in what percentage of the Ashkenazi Jewish population?	12.7%
The difference in percentages of the levels of Eu 19 (R1a) chromosomes between Central and Eastern Europeans and the Ashkenazi population would indicate what?	low-level gene flow from surrounding European populations and/or genetic drift during isolation
In the late Middle Ages, the Ashkenazi population shifted in which direction?	shifted steadily eastward
In the late Middle Ages, as the Ashkenazi population shifted it moved from what location?	German lands
In the late Middle Ages, as the Ashkenazi population shifted it moved into which location?	Poland and Lithuania (including present-day Belarus and Ukraine)
In the late 18th and 19th centuries, Jews who returned to German lands experienced what?	a cultural reorientation
The name of Ashkenazi derives from which biblical figure?	Ashkenaz
Ashkenaz was the first son of whom?	Gomer
The name of Gomer has often been linked to what ethnonym?	Cimmerians
Assyrian Aškūza expelled which group from the Armenian area of the Upper Euphrates?	Cimmerians
Recent studies have found that contemporary Jews (excluding Indian and Ethiopian Jews) have a close genetic relationship to the people of what area?	the Levant
The genome-wide genetic study carried out in 2010 by Behar et al. examined the genetic relationships among which Jewish groups?	all major Jewish groups
The genome-wide genetic study carried out in 2010 by Behar et al. examined the genetic relationship between Jewish groups and what other population?	non-Jewish ethnic populations
The history of Jews in Greece goes back to which era?	Archaic Era of Greece
Which Greek historian knew of the Jews?	Herodotus
The Synagogue in the Agora of Athens is dated to the period between which two dates?	267 and 396 CE
What did the Greek historian Herodotus refer to the Jews as?	"Palestinian Syrians"
The Greek historian Herodotus listed the Jews as the levied naval forces in service to whom?	the invading Persians
According to Daniel Elazar at the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, at the end of the 11th century, what percentage of the world's Jewry was Sephardic?	97%
According to Daniel Elazar at the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, at the end of the 11th century, what percentage of the world's Jewry was Ashkenazi?	3%
By 1931, Ashkenazi Jews were what percentage of the world Jewry?	92%
In Israel, the term Ashkenazi is now used in what manner?	in a manner unrelated to its original meaning
In Israel, the term Ashkenazi is now used to refer to whom?	all Jews who settled in Europe and sometimes including those whose ethnic background is actually Sephardic
Are Jews of mixed backgrounds more or less common today?	Jews of mixed background are increasingly common
By tradition, when a Sephardic or Mizrahi woman marries into an Orthodox or Haredi Ashkenazi Jewish family she raises her children to be which type of Jew?	Ashkenazi Jews
When an Ashkenazi woman marries a Sephardi or Mizrahi man it is expected that her children will take on which kind of identity?	children inherit a Sephardic identity
A convert generally follows which practice?	the practice of the beth din that converted him or her
When did the Dreyfus affair occur?	1890s
In what years did large numbers of Jews arrive in France?	the 1920s and 1930s
What three factors led to large numbers of Jews moving to France?	antisemitism, the Russian revolution, and the economic turmoil of the Great Depression
By the 1930s, Paris was noted for which two things related to Jews?	a vibrant Yiddish culture, and many Jews were involved in diverse political movements
What is the Siddur?	prayer book
The term Ashkenazi also refers to what?	the nusach Ashkenaz
The nusach Ashkenaz refers to what in Hebrew?	"liturgical tradition", or rite
Two other major forms of nusach among Ashkenazic Jews are what?	Nusach Sefard (not to be confused with the Sephardic ritual), which is the general Polish Hasidic nusach, and Nusach Ari
Nusach Ari is used by whom?	Lubavitch Hasidim
How many types of genetic origin testing currently exist?	three types of genetic origin testing
When did efforts begin to try and identify the origins of Ashkenazi Jews through DNA analysis?	the 1990s
What does Y-DNA show?	a male's lineage only along his strict-paternal line
What are the three types of origin testing?	autosomal DNA (atDNA), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and Y-chromosomal DNA (Y-DNA)
Autosomal DNA is what?	a mixture from an individual's entire ancestry
A 2006 study by Behar et al, suggested that what percentage of the current Ashkenazi population was descended from "founder lineages"?	40%
A 2006 study by Behar et al, suggested that a large percentage of the current Ashkenazi population is descended matrilineally from how many women?	from just four women
The women that a large percentage of the current Ashkenazi population is descended from are also known as what?	founder lineages
The founder lineages were likely from what type of mtDNA pool?	Hebrew/Levantine
When did the idea that the Ashkenazi may have come from Khazar stock come about?	in the later 19th century
Did Eran Elhaik, from Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health argue for or against Khazar descent?	argued for Khazar descent
What did a 2013 study of Ashkenazi mitochondrial DNA find in regards to the Khazar descent idea?	no significant evidence of Khazar contribution to the Ashkenazi Jewish DNA
Grave site excavations near where Roman garrisons were established attest to the presence of Jews after what centuries?	the 2nd and 3rd centuries
The large number of Jews in Pannonia formed communities and built what?	a synagogue
In what year were the Roman garrison populations withdrawn to Italy?	433
What year marked the onset of the Crusades?	1095
As Jews were expelled from England, France, and parts of Germany they head into which three countries?	Poland (10th century), Lithuania (10th century), and Russia (12th century)
What year were the expulsions from England?	1290
What year were the expulsions from France?	1394
After expulsions from England and France, Jewish migration headed in which direction?	Jewish migration pushed eastward
What is the name of the Rabbi mentioned in relation to the Genesis Rabbah?	Rabbi Berechiah
What are the three German tribes or German lands talked about by Rabbi Berechiah?	Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah
Rabbi Berechiah's view is based on what?	the Talmud
What is the name of the Midrash compilation?	Genesis Rabbah
After emigration from the west, did Jewish communities in places like Poland have a stable or unstable sociopolitical environment?	a comparatively stable socio-political environment
What precipitated the development of the Hasidic movement?	A thriving publishing industry and the printing of hundreds of biblical commentaries
Massive western emigration occurred around what time?	in the 19th and 20th centuries
Ashkenazi Jews have made up the majority of the American Jewish community since when?	1750
Religious Ashkenazi Jews living in Israel follow the authority of whom in certain matters?	the chief Ashkenazi rabbi
What is the Knesset?	a unicameral legislature with 120 seats
Religious Ashkenazi Jews look to the authority of the chief Ashkenazi rabbi in which matters?	halakhic matters
What two things were mentioned as contributing to bringing younger Jews together in North American cities?	social trends such as the chavurah movement, and the emergence of "post-denominational Judaism"
What do many Ashkenazi Jews study outside of the Yeshiva framework?	Kabbalah
Which new trend has been associated with the Jewish Renewal movement?	ecstatic worship
Most people with the surname Ashkenazi, hail from which particular community?	Syrian Jewish community
Some people with the surname shorten it to what?	Ash
What famous person is mentioned as having the surname Ashkenazi?	Vladimir Ashkenazy
It was found that the Y-chromosome of Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews contained mutations that are also common with what other people?	Middle Eastern peoples
It was found that the Y-chromosome of Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews contained mutations that are uncommon with what other people?	uncommon in the general European population
The findings related to the Y-chromosomes suggest that males ancestors of Ashkenazi Jews could be traced mostly to where?	the Middle East
A 2013 study estimates that what percentage of Ashkenazi maternal ancestry comes from women indigenous to Europe?	80 percent
A 2013 study estimates that what percentage of Ashkenazi maternal ancestry comes from women from the Near East?	8 percent
A 2013 study estimates that what percentage of Ashkenazi maternal ancestry comes from women of undetermined origins?	while the origin of the remainder is undetermined
In a 2010 study, which two groups were identified by principal component, phylogenetic, and identity by descent analysis?	Middle Eastern Jews and European/Syrian Jews
The 2010 study found that what modern population is most closely related to Ashkenazi Jews?	modern-day Italians
Ashkenazi Jews and Italians may be genetically similar due to what two factors?	inter-marriage and conversions in the time of the Roman Empire
How many geneticists carried out the 2013 trans-genome study?	30 geneticists
What did the 2013 trans-genome study find in regards to Ashkenazi Jews and Khazar origins?	found no evidence of Khazar origin among Ashkenazi Jews
How many universities and academies participated in the 2013 trans-genome study?	13 universities and academies
The most well supported theory on the origins of the Ashkenazim is one that details a Jewish migration through which modern day country?	through what is now Italy
The historical record attests to Jewish communities in southern Europe since what time?	pre-Christian times
Many Jews were denied full Roman citizenship until what year?	212 CE
Who gave Jews the right to full Roman citizenship?	Emperor Caracalla
Jewish communities were seen north of the Alps and Pyrenees as early as which centuries?	8th and 9th century
Jewish settlers appear along the Rhine by what century?	11th century
What two factors contributed the increase in Jewish settlers along the Rhine and other similar areas?	often in response to new economic opportunities and at the invitation of local Christian rulers
When did Hai Gaon refer to questions that had been addressed to him from Ashkenaz?	the first half of the 11th century
Who is Hai Gaon thought to be referring to when he says Ashkenaz?	Germany
In the latter half of the 11th century, Rashi refers to what two things?	both the language of Ashkenaz and the country of Ashkenaz
When did France expel its original Jewish population?	the Middle Ages
By the time of the French Revolution there were how many distinct Jewish populations?	two distinct Jewish populations
All studies agree that genetic overlap with what location exists in both lineages?	Fertile Crescent
What year did David Goldstein report that unlike male Ashkenazi lineages, the female lineages in Ashkenazi Jewish communities did not seem to be Middle Eastern?	2002
In a 2006 study, how many autosomal SNPs were used?	five thousand
Who was the twentieth bishop of Alexandria?	Saint Athanasius of Alexandria
What was one nickname for Saint Athanasius of Alexandria?	Athanasius the Great
For how many years was Saint Athanasius of Alexandria a bishop?	45 years
How many years was Saint Athanasius of Alexandria in exile?	17
When did Saint Athanasius die?	2 May 373
What name is Saint Athanasius also known as?	Athanasius the Great
Of what city was he bishop?	Alexandria
How long did his episcopate last?	45 years
What is another name that Saint Athanasius is know as?	Athanasius the Confessor
In what year was Athanasius consecrated?	326
How old was Athanasius when he became the Patriarch of Alexandria?	about thirty years of age
Did Athanasius want to be the Patriarch of Alexandria?	He was most unwilling to accept
Did the people want Athanasius as their bishop?	people were determined to have him
How long after the Council of Nice did Saint Athanasius die?	five months
Was Saint Athanasius willing or unwilling to fill the vacancy?	unwilling
In what year was he consecrated?	in 326
How old was he when he was consecrated?	thirty years of age.
Where did Athanasius remain for 6 years while living as a monk?	Upper Egypt
What is name of one of the compositions composed by Athanasius while he lived as a monk?	Letter to the Monks
Who took over after Athanasius?	George of Cappadocia
Who influenced George of Cappadocia to become the new ruler?	the Eusebian faction at Constantinople
To where did Saint Athanasius withdraw?	the desert of Upper Egypt
Who influenced the appointment of George of Cappadocia?	the Eusebian faction at Constantinople
How long did he spend in the desert?	six years
What is one thing he wrote during this time?	Apology to Constantius
Who was appointed to rule the see of Alexandria?	George of Cappadocia
Who succeeded Emperor Constantius?	Julian
Who succeeded George of Cappadocia?	Pistus
In what year did Athanasius return to his episcopal capitol?	362
In what year did Emperor Constantius die?	361
How did George of Cappadocia die in prison?	murdered
Were the Arians united in their oppostion?	The Arians no longer presented an unbroken front
When did Athanasius re-enter the capitol?	22 February, 362
Who succeeded the Emperor Constantius?	Julian
Who then succeeded George?	An obscure presbyter of the name of Pistus
What happened to the usurping bishop, George?	flung into prison and murdered
What party benefited from the accession of Valens?	Arian
Valens issued a decree banishing the bishops that were deposed by who?	Constantius
What saint fled from Alexandria on 5 October to a country house outside Alexandria?	Athanasius
Valens' banishment of Athanasius created the greatest consternation in what city?	Alexandria
What did the decree of Valens do?	banishing the bishops who had been deposed by Constantius
When the people in the city were concerned about Athanasius, what did the prefect do?	case of Athanasius would be laid before the emperor
What did  Athanasius do to protect himself?	withdrew from Alexandria, 5 October
How did Valens get him to return?	issued orders allowing Athanasius to return to his episcopal see
Who wrote the biography entitled Life of Antony?	Athanasius
Life of Antony played an important role in the spreading of ascetic ideals in what religion?	Eastern and Western Christianity
The biography, Life of Antony, also resembles of the life of who?	Athanasius
The so-called Athanasian Creed draws upon the phraseology of what?	Augustine's De trinitate
About whom did he write his most widely-read work?	Anthony the Great
Why was this work considered to be important?	spreading of the ascetic ideal in Eastern and Western Christianity
How did he depict Anthony?	illiterate and holy
What does the Athanasian Creed draw upon?	Augustine's De trinitate
Whose life did Anthony's resemble?	Athanasius
Athanasius began his leading role at what age?	27
In what year was the First Council of Nicaea?	325
Athanasius was also known as what?	Athanasius Contra Mundum
How many years after the First Council of Nicaea did Athanasius become archbishop?	Three years
Who is one emporer Athanasius struggled against?	Constantine
What conflict shaped his career?	Conflict with Arius and Arianism
Why was the First Council of Nicaea convened?	Jesus of Nazareth, is of a distinct substance from the Father
Because of his conflicts with the emperors, how was he known?	Athanasius Against the World
Whose position was it that Jesus was the Son of God?	the Arian position
Were the pretend baptisms real?	the baptisms were genuine
As a child, Athanasius imitated what ritual?	ritual of Christian baptism
What work did the Bishop suggest for Athanasius?	clerical careers
Why was Athanasius instructed to stop pretend baptising?	not been properly catechized
Where was persecution of Christianity the worst?	in the East
What famous Greek author did Athanasius  quote?	Homer
In what year was Peter of Alexandria martyred?	in 311
Who could have been one of Athanasius's teachers?	Peter of Alexandria
What suggests that Athanasius was familiar with ancient Greek philosophers?	quoting Plato
What made Arius's belief about Jesus different from Alexander's?	Son (Logos) of God, made, not begotten
Was this differing view common among Christians of the day?	common Christological view
What other leaders believed this?	powerful bishops
What eventually happened to Arius?	excommunicated by Alexander
Who did Athanasius succeed?	Alexander
How many exiles did he endure?	five exiles
The churches of what countries were in his territory?	Egypt and Libya
Was he united with the Arians in his beliefs?	disputes against Arians
Where is Gaul currently located?	Belgium / Holland and surrounding areas
What was the verdict at the Council of Sardica?	his innocence reaffirmed
With whom did Athanasius travel to Sardica?	Hosius of Cordoba
About what did the Council of the Church question Athanasius?	misdemeanours and even murder
Was Athanasius permitted admission to the Council?	objections were overridden by the orthodox bishops
In what year did Pope Julius die?	352
Did Liberius sympathize with Athanasius?	Liberius had been favourable
Where the men armed who arrested him?	armed men
What was the outcome of the Council of Milan?	a fourth condemnation of Athanasius
What was  Athanasius doing when he was arrested?	engaged in services
Who had a policy of condemning Athanasius?	the Arians
What was Athanasius doing the next time an arrest was attempted?	a vigil service
Where did Athanasius flee to after this attempt?	Upper Egypt
In which work did he refer to Constantius as a precursor of the Antichrist?	History of the Arians
What did he write during this time?	Four Orations against the Arians
Where did bishops of the West meet?	Rimini in Italy
What belief was accepted by Constantius?	Arian
What was the belief that was approved at this council?	The Son to be "like the Father"
What did the orthodox leaders believe?	the Nicene
What did the Arians agree upon at Sirmium?	a formula of faith
What position did Ecdicius hold?	Prefect of Egypt
Did he think he would be gone a long time?	short duration
Who was jealous of Athanasius's influence?	Julian
What did Julian try to do to Athanasius?	expulsion
Did Athanasius tell the people to protest?	urged them to submit
When did he write his first works on Orthodox Christianity?	before the Arian controversy
Which of the two first works addresses pagan practices?	Against the Heathen
How did he believe Jesus came into the world?	in human form
Which of his works addresses redemption and the Son of God?	Incarnation of the Word of God
What did he do when he thought he might be made Bishop?	fled
Who did the Catholics of Alexandria want as their Bishop?	"Give us Athanasius!"
When did Alexander ask to see Athanasius?	on his death-bed
Was there someone else that was preferred as Bishop?	The Bishops had nothing better
Was Athanasius well liked by everyone?	many detractors
What was he accused of doing to a church?	defiling an altar
He was accused of selling grain for what reason?	his own personal gain
What did the term Arian mean to him?	Christians who disagreed with his formulation
What did he call his detractors?	Arian
What was he known as soon after he died?	Pillar of the Church
What day is he celebrated in the Eastern Orthodox Church?	18 January
How does the Eastern Orthodox Church refer to him?	Father of Orthodoxy
What do the Protestants call him?	Father of the Canon
What is his feast day in Western Christianity?	2 May
What was Alexandria known for?	important trade center
Was the famous school in Alexandria religious only?	secular character
Did only Christians attend the school?	influential pagans
Was Alexandria welcoming to other cultures?	ethnically diverse
What famous event happened in 303?	Maximian persecution
What writing mentions the Arian accusation that Athanasius was under aged?	the Festal Epistles
At what age was a man eligible to be ordained at Patriarch of Alexandria?	canonical age (30)
Did the followers of Meletius obey the guidelines of Nicaea?	failed to abide
What was Athanasius accused of planning against the Arians?	cut off essential Egyptian grain
What was the verdict of the accusation?	was found guilty
What was his punishment?	anathematized
Who was he accused of harming?	Arians and Meletians
Did Athanasius speak Greek?	knew Greek
Did he understand Hebrew?	not knowing Hebrew
Did he know all of the Old Testament?	limited to the Septuagint
What did students learn in the school in Alexandria?	Scriptural study and of Greek
What translation of the Old Testament did he study?	Septuagint Greek
Who did he have to thank for his ability to come back to Alexandria in 345?	Constans
Were the people glad to have him home?	enthusiastic demonstrations
In what writing did he recount his time in exiles?	Apology Against the Arians
What happened when Constans died?	civil war
Did the new emperor agree or disagree with the Arians?	pro-Arian
What did Athanasius do to avoid speaking to Alexander on his deathbed?	fled
Who did the Alexandrian people want to be their Bishop?	Give us Athanasius
Did the Bishops have someone else in mind?	Bishops had nothing better
Who did Alexander ask for when he was dieing?	called Athanasius
Who tried to bribe Liberius?	Constantius
How much warning was Liberius given before his exile?	three days
Where did Liberius go?	Beroea
Did bribery work in convincing Liberius to believe the Arians?	were refused
What did Liberius have to promise to do in order to return?	comply with the bishops
At what point could Athanasius return to Alexandria?	When Emperor Constantine I died
Who provided for his protection while he was in Rome?	Constans
Who became Patriarch in Alexandria while Athanasius was away?	Gregory of Cappadocia
How did the people of Alexandria know when to celebrate Easter?	Festal Letters
Who declared Athanasius to be exiled again?	Constantius II
Why did the Bishops condemn Athanasius?	threats of the Emperor
What happened to the Bishops who did not take the oath?	sent into exile
Did the Pope agree with this order?	Pope refused to accept
Did the Emperor agree to a new trial for Athanasius?	Constantius consented
What oath did the Bishops have to take at the trial?	Arian formula of faith
What happened to Bishop George?	murder
What happened to Bishop leaders who did not agree with the doctrine?	severe penance
When did Athanasius return to his position as Patriarch?	after the death of Emperor Constantius
Who joined him when he formed a council to encourage unity among Christians?	Eusebius of Vercelli
What Christian beliefs did Emperor Valens adhere to?	Arian
Where did Athanasius during his latest exile?	outskirts of Alexandria
For how long was he exiled this time?	few months
Where did he hide during this time?	his father's tomb
Who convinced Valens to let him return to Alexandria?	local authorities
Who standardized the books of the New Testament?	Athanasius
What books were used before his decision to standardize?	various
How many books are listed that should be included but were not?	7 books
How many books are in the New Testament?	27 books
Have those books changed over time?	in use today
Did Athanasius feel that it was important to believe that Jesus was the Son of God?	not optional but necessary
Did his place more value on his Faith or where he was living?	the true Faith
Did he think that the people that had exiled him were true believers?	outside of the true Faith
Where did Athanasius think Faith resides?	within you
Who was the Festal Letter written for?	his Church in Alexandria
How did the people  know that Alexander had chosen Athanasius as his successor?	thrice repeating his name
How old was Athanasius when he was chosen as Patriarch?	thirty years
Who came to Alexandria to confirm the choice?	bishops of all Egypt
Did all the people want him as Patriarch?	unanimous in their choice
How long after the Council of Nicae did Alexander die?	Five months
Which of the Gospels most agrees with Athanasius?	Gospel of John
What does this Gospel show that Athanasius also believed?	the Divinity of Jesus
Why is the Gospel of John said at the end of Catholic Mass?	a result of Athanasius
Where was this Gospel said?	at the altar
When are different Gospels said?	certain Feast days
Did all Arians believe the same things?	different theological views
Were Arians also Origenists?	supported the tenets
Did the bishops consider themselves Arians?	bishops disagreed
What did the Council of Nicaea decide about Arianism?	a real theological ideology
Did Arians have one set of beliefs?	not monolithic
To what golden event was Seattle the portal?	Klondike Gold Rush
Which large technology giant established its home base in Seattle?	Microsoft
In what area was the Klondike Gold Rush located?	Alaska
What was Seattle's first primary money maker?	Logging
What was the airplane company that helped Seattle return to economic stability?	Boeing
Of which Washington county is Seattle the center?	King County
By 2015 what was Seattle's population?	662,400
What is Seattle's ranking in North America in terms of container processing?	third largest
By what time was Seattle the most rapidly growing city in the US?	July 2013
How far away is the Canadian border from Seattle?	100 miles
What group of settlers established a site at Pioneer Square?	Denny Party
When was New York Alki established?	April 1853
by what name did Charles Terry and John Low first name their settlement?	New York
What was the Chinook enhanced name of Terry and Low's settlement?	New York Alki
What site was eventually abandoned when the settlers moved back in with Denny?	New York Alki
At what date did the name Seattle first appear on official papers?	May 23, 1853
What famous Indian appears on the seal of Seattle?	Chief Sealth
When were the first land allocations made in Seattle?	May 23, 1853
At what date was Seattle incorporated as a town?	January 14, 1865
What type of governing body did Seattle have in 1869?	Mayor-council
What was the industry source that produced Seattle's first financial vigor?	lumber
What name was given to the street Yesler Way?	Skid Road
After Yesler Way fell into ill refute, what was the term generally used for this type of decline?	Skid Row
What percentage of the Seattle population was Asian in 1900?	4.2%
What events occurred in 1885-1886 due to racial disputes?	anti-Chinese riots
After lumbering, what was Seattle's second big economic boom?	Klondike Gold Rush
What event ended the Gold Rush?	depression
What was the start of the depression that stopped the Gold Rush?	Panic of 1893
For whom was Seattle the main port of supply ?	miners
What company did James E. Casey found in 1907 with a borrowed $100?	American Messenger Company
During WWII what company added substantially to Seattle's economy?	Boeing aircraft
What national event during WWII left Seattle without Japanese businessmen?	Japanese American internment
In what facet of the economy did Boeing excel?	commercial airliner market
How did Seattle celebrate its economic rise in 1962?	1962 World's Fair
What company's downturn drastically effected Seattle's economy?	Boeing
What type of theater did Alexander Pantages start in Seattle?	vaudeville
When did Pantages open his movie houses?	1902
Who was Pantages competitor in the theater business?	John Considine
Who was the architect who built a number of theaters in the Seattle area?	B. Marcus Priteca
Which of Seattle's famous, and still extant,  theaters did Priteca disign?	Paramount Theatre
When did Boeing move its headquarters to Chicago?	2001
Before 2001, where was Boeing headquartered?	Seattle
What did Boeing separate from its headquarters facilities?	production facilities
Besides the Renton plant, where else are airplanes made for Boeing?	Everett
To whom is the Boeing credit union open?	all residents
When was ship building the economic master in Seattle?	World War I
What city profited by Seattle's Maritime Strike?	Port of Los Angeles.
What was the first general labor strike in the 20th century?	Seattle General Strike
When did the General Strike happen in Seattle?	1919
What major strike in 1934 damaged Seattle's maritime economy?	Maritime Strike
What violent act happened in Seattle's Chinatown in 1983?	Wah Mee massacre
What type of establishment was Wan Mee?	gambling club
Which huge tech corporation moved its headquarters the Seattle area?	Microsoft
What item for sale in 2000 Seattle was some of the most costly in the US?	real estate
About what time did the big tech boom in Seattle fizzle?	early 2001
What sporting event did Seattle sponsor in 1990?	Goodwill Games
What was the geologic event that followed the Mardi Gras Riots in2001?	Nisqually earthquake
What is Seattle's musical genre developed in the 1990s?	grunge
When did Seattle offer the World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference?	1999
What caused bad press during the conference protests in Seattle?	police reactions
What water mass is located west of Seattle?	Puget Sound
What land area is west of Puget Sound?	Olympic Peninsula
What lake is to the east of Seattle?	Lake Washington
Where is Seattle's prime harbor?	Elliott Bay
Because Elliott Bay is salt water, what kind of port is Seattle?	oceanic port
What large company moved its headquarters to South Lake Union in Seattle?	Amazon.com
When did Amazon begin its latest expansion?	2010
How much of their income do half of Seattle's population have to spend on housing?	more than half
How many new people move to Seattle each year?	14,511
Where does Seattle rank in rush hour traffic?	sixth-worst
What hazardous geologic area does Seattle inhabit?	Pacific Ring of Fire
What type of land area is at most risk of earthquake damage?	reclaimed land
What was the magnitude of the Nisqually quake?	6.8
On what date did the Nisqually earthquake occur that damaged the Pioneer Square area?	February 28, 2001
What is the amount of magnitude possible on the Cascadia subduction zone?	9.0 or greater
What other famous city, besides Seattle, lies on seven hills?	Rome
What type of land area does Capital hill, First Hill, and Beacon Hill constitute?	ridge
What artificial geological feature was added to Seattle in 1909?	Harbor Island
Where is the highest place in Seattle?	High Point
Where was Harbor Island built?	Duwamish Waterway
What is the average rainfall in Seattle?	37.49 inches
Where on the Olympic Peninsula does the rainfall average 142 inches a year?	Hoh Rain Forest
What mountain range is the cause of the variance in rainfall?	Olympic Mountains
What weather factor produces a great variance in local climates in the Seattle area?	variations in microclimate
What is the capital of the state of Washington?	Olympia
During which month does Seattle get more precipitation than other US cities?	November
When does Seattle get it lowest levels of precipitation?	June to September
In the lower 48 states, which city receives some of the least sunny days that any other?	Seattle
What weather feature is highly unusual in Seattle?	Thunderstorms
About how many days a year is thunder a reported weather event in Seattle?	seven
What does the local water ways regulate in the Seattle area?	Temperature extremes
At what location is most weather data collected for the Seattle area?	Seattle–Tacoma International Airport
What land mass protects Seattle from Pacific caused weather?	Olympic Mountains
What geologic feature protects Seattle from the Arctic cold winds?	Cascade Range
What type of rain fall does Seattle most often experience?	light precipitation
What is a very significant part of Seattle's weather system?	Puget Sound Convergence Zone
Of what is the Convergence Zone comprised?	streams of air
From where do the two streams of air come?	Pacific Ocean
What mountain Range splits the wind stream in the west of Seattle?	Olympic Mountains
What bad wind and rain event was not caused by the Convergence Zone?	Hanukkah Eve Wind Storm
What type of snowfall is not often seen in Seattle?	heavy snow
What is the usual average snowfall in Seattle?	6.8 inches
How many times has snowfall been reported at more than 6 inches since 1990?	once
When was there a moderate snowfall  of over one foot that lasted on the ground two weeks?	December 12–25, 2008
On what dates did Seattle experience a snow event of 6 feet?	January 5–9, 1880
What is Seattle's average December temperature?	40.6 °F
How many winter days reach freezing in Seattle?	28 annual days
What month is the warmest in Seattle?	August
What is August's usual temperature?	66.1 °F
How long is the growing season in the Seattle area?	250 days
What quantity of yearly rainfall does Seattle have during the winter?	half
What type of weather does Seattle have in the winter months?	heaviest rainfall
What are atmospheric rivers called  in the Seattle area?	Pineapple Express
When did Seattle have hurricane type winds and heavy rains?	December 2–4, 2007
How many deaths occurred during the 2007  heavy rains?	five deaths
How many more people does Seattle expect to have by 2040?	200,000
What change in building heights did Seattle make to increase population density in its downtown ?	height limits
Who wanted to grow Seattle by 60% by 2040?	Greg Nickels
How much increase in population has the inner Seattle city had since 1990?	77%
What was the downtown Seattle population in 2009?	60,000
How much did Seattle's foreign born population expand between 1990-2000?	40%
What other group of people does Seattle have the largest percentage of in the US?	self-identified mixed-race
From where in China did most of the first immigrants come?	Guangdong province
How many Vietnamese residents are there in Seattle?	55,000
What is the population of Cambodian immigrants in Seattle?	19,000
In 1960, what was the percentage of whites in the Seattle area?	91.6%
What is the basic race of most people in Seattle?	white
According to the 2010 census, what was the white population in Seattle?	69.5%
In 2006-2008, how many people in Seattle spoke English at home?	78.9%
What is the percentage of Asian speakers in Seattle?	10.2%
How many of the Fortune 500 companies are based in Seattle?	Four
What drink do the people of Seattle excel in drinking?	coffee
What famous coffee chain is home in Seattle?	Starbucks
Which huge internet seller is headquartered in Seattle?	Amazon.com
In what city near Seattle is Microsoft based?	Redmond
Before they moved to Chicago, what was the biggest company headquartered in Seattle?	Boeing
For what did Forbes rank Seattle the most expensive?	buying a house
Where in the Seattle area does Boeing have manufacturing plants?	Everett and Renton
Which past mayor of Seattle has been criticized for favoring the rich of industry at the expense of the people?	Mayor Greg Nickels
What type of businesses did Nickles want to attract to Seattle?	biotech companies
What was Seattle's gross product in 2010?	$231 billion
Where does Seattle rank in size of economy in 2010?	11th largest
How does the Port of Seattle container capability rank as compared to others in the US?	8th largest port
When does Seattle want to be rated as a climate neutral city?	2030
What type of industry thrives in Settle?	start-up businesses
By a UCLA study,how many Seattle residents identify as gay, lesbian or bisexual?	12.9%
How does the numbers in the gay community rank compared to other US cities?	second-highest
What city ranked higher in population in the gay community?	San Francisco
What is Seattle's percentage of same sex households?	2.6
What is Seattle's ranking for same sex households as compared with the rest of the US?	highest percentage
How many theater companies does Seattle have in residence?	around 100
How many equity theaters does Seattle have?	28
What Seattle theater was built in 1926?	5th Avenue Theatre
To what type of theater are the two dozen live venues in Seattle associated?	fringe theatre
To what type of theater is Seattle second to New York?	equity theaters
How old is Seattle's Symphony Orchestra?	century
What Seattle organization is one of the top ballet schools in the US?	PNB School
In what venue does the Seattle symphony perform?	Benaroya Hall
Where do the Seattle Opera and Pacific Northwest Ballet perform?	McCaw Hall
What structure was originally at site of the McCaw Hall?	Seattle Opera House
What is Seattle's present nickname?	Emerald City
What did Seattle call itself at the time of the Goodwill Games?	The City of Goodwill
To what distinct feature of the area does Emerald City refer?	evergreen forests
Since Seattle is near Alaska, what is the city called?	Gateway to Alaska
From what company does Seattle get its nickname Jet City?	Boeing
What Seattle fair lasts 24 days?	Seattle International Film Festival
What is Seattle's gay pride parade called?	Bite of Seattle
How many Independence Day celebrations does Seattle have yearly?	two
When are Seafair events held in Seattle?	July and August
What is the focus of the Bumbershoot festival?	art and music
When did Seattle host the national Poetry Slam Tournament?	2001
What poetry festival was first held in 1997?	Poetry Circus
How often is the Seattle Poetry festival held?	biennial
How often does Seattle send to the National Poetry Slam?	annually
To what style of poet does Seattle consider itself home?	performance poets
What genre of music are Nirvana and Soundgarden?	grunge
Where did artists such as Hendrix and Sixx spend their early years?	Seattle
What type of musician is Bill Frisell?	avant-garde jazz
What style of music does Sir Mix-a-Lot and Macklemore represent in Seattle?	hip hop
What type of music do Foo Fighters and Harvey Danger perform?	alternative rock
When did the first art gallery open in Washington state?	1927
What was the name of the first art museum in Washington?	Henry Art Gallery
When did The Seattle Art Museum open its doors?	1933
Besides the museums, what other art offering does SAM operate?	Olympic Sculpture Park
Aside from publically operated museums, what other type of person galleries does Seattle offer?	artist-run
What anime convention is held in Seattle?	Sakura-Con
What is focus of the Penny Arcade Expo?	gaming
How many bicyclists attend the Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic?	9,000
What festival does Seattle have for the transgender community?	Seattle Transgender Film Festival
What is Seattle's festival for the Polish community?	Seattle Polish Film Festival
What was the first American hockey team to win a Stanley Cup?	PCHA's Seattle Metropolitans
When did the Seattle Super Sonics win an NBA championship?	1978–79
In what year did the Seattle Metropolitans win the Stanley Cup?	1917
To where did Seattle's Baseball team relocate in 1969?	Milwaukee, Wisconsin
What was the new name of the Seattle team?	Milwaukee Brewers
How many times have the Seattle Seahawks played in the World Series?	three
Who did the Seahawks beat to win the Super Bowl?	Denver Broncos
What team defeated the Seattle Seahawks to win Super Bowl XLIX?	New England Patriots
What is the Seattle soccer club named?	Seattle Sounders FC
With what team do the Sounders share Century Link Field?	Seahawks
What is Seattle thought to be politically?	liberal
What did the people of Seattle vote to legalize in 2012?	gay marriage
What other political hot issue did voters in Seattle vote to legalize in 2012?	use of cannabis
 What do residents of Seattle believe in matters of religion?	atheism
How does Seattle compare in church attendance to the rest oF the US?	much lower
How many people in Seattle vote Democratic?	over 80%
For whom did the residents of Seattle vote in the 2012 presidential election?	Barack Obama
What party members win most state and national legislative elections?	Democrats
Who was Seattle's , and the nation's, first female mayor?	Bertha Knight Landes
What is the sex of the majority of Seattle's city council?	female
Of what Congressional district is Seattle a part?	7th congressional district
To which states' election laws are Seattle's law and ballots similar?	Like most
Who is the representative for Seattle's district?	Jim McDermott
When was McDermott elected to office?	1988
Who is the present mayor of Seattle?	Ed Murray
What percentage of the Seattle population has a bachelor's degree?	53.8%
How was Seattle ranked on literacy in 2005-2006?	most literate
What is the national average of obtaining a bachelor's degree?	27.4%
How much of the Seattle population have high school diplomas?	91.9%
What is the national average of high school diploma holding citizens?	84.5%
What type of radio stations abound in Seattle?	Non-commercial
Where has KEXP pioneered in Radio?	Internet radio
What are KUOW and KPLU radio stations?	NPR affiliates
With what educational facility is KEXP-FM aligned?	UW
What radio station is operated by the public school system?	KNHC-FM 89.5
What is the Seattle newspaper as of 2010?	The Seattle Times
Who sells the newspaper Real Change on the street?	homeless persons
In what venue does the Seattle Post-Intelligencer publish?	on-line
In what year did the Seattle Post-Intelligencer  first publish?	1863
What is the LGBT newspaper called?	Seattle Gay News
What is Seattle's bus line called?	King County Metro
What service runs between South Lake Union and Westlake Center?	South Lake Union Streetcar
What organization runs the largest line of ferries in the US?	Washington State Ferries
How does the Seattle ferry line compare to the rest of the world?	third largest
To what two islands does the ferry service connect?	Bainbridge and Vashon
What kind of hospital is Seattle Children's?	pediatric referral center
Besides serving Washington, Idaho, and Montana, what northern state uses Seattle Children's?	Alaska
What entity operates Harborview?	University of Washington
In what neighborhood is the Fred Hutchington Cancer Research Center located?	Eastlake
Where is the Veterans Affairs Hospital located?	Beacon Hill
What machine caused the end of city rail lines in Seattle?	automobile
The use of what caused the end of the use of streetcars in 1941?	trolleybus
When did the Tacoma-Seattle rail service end?	1929
In what year did the Everett-Seattle rail lines cease?	1939
In what year were the first streetcars used in Seattle?	1889
What is mainly used for transportation in Seattle?	streets
What road was built in 1953 and later damaged by an earthquake?	Alaskan Way Viaduct
What is planned to replace the Alaska Way Viaduct?	tunnel
When is the tunnel now expected to be finished?	2017
What was the original projected cost of the viaduct replacement tunnel?	$4.25 billion
What educational institution is at home in Seattle?	University of Washington
Where can a student find to study art in Seattle?	arts colleges
What is the purpose of the University of Washington Outreach?	continuing education
In what year did Time magazine choose Seattle Central Community College as community college of the year?	2001
Beside the public universities, what other type of institutions provide education in Seattle?	private universities
On what type of transportation system has Seattle begun to focus?	mass transit
From what kind of transportation has Seattle been moving away?	automobile
What measure was passed by Seattle voters in 2006?	RapidRide
By what year do plans call for the completion of a rail line to Bellevue?	2023
Which former mayor backed the expansion of rail lines from downtown to Ballard?	Michael McGinn
Which three processes does phychology recognize as memory?	process in which information is encoded, stored, and retrieved.
Why may some memory retrieval processes fail?	the type of information, and other attempts to remember stored information may be more demanding for various reasons.
What happens to information during the encoding process?	g allows information from the outside world to be sensed in the form of chemical and physical stimuli.
What is the second memory stage?	Storage
What is the third process that happens during the memory process?	retrieval of information that has been stored
What does short-term memory depend on?	an acoustic code for storing information, and to a lesser extent a visual code.
What did conrad find about test subjects?	subjects had more difficulty recalling collections of letters that were acoustically similar
What does Conrads finding seem to mean?	. Confusion with recalling acoustically similar letters rather than visually similar letters implies that the letters were encoded acoustically.
What was Conrads deal with?	encoding of written text;
What is another name for short-term memory?	working memory.
What exactly does short-term memory allow a person to do?	recall for a period of several seconds to a minute without rehearsal
How much information can one store and recall in short-term memory?	capacity is also very limited
How can one higher their memory capacity?	chunking.
Why do some countries display numbers in chunks of two to four numbers?	because we are able to chunk the information into meaningful groups of numbers
Why can't some memories be held onto forever?	The storage in sensory memory and short-term memory generally has a strictly limited capacity and duration
If a memory that is stored in with long term-memories, how long can you possibly rememeber it?	sometimes a whole life span)
What is the capacity of long term memory?	capacity is immeasurable
If you knew a telephone number one week ago, but have forgotten it now, where was this memory stored?	in our short-term memory
What are some examples of units that short-term memory can be categorized in to?	visual information and acoustic information
Who performed a study in 1986 invovling a participant known as KF?	Zlonoga and Gerber
What did KF disprove during this study?	Atkinson–Shiffrin model.
What did KF have trouble doing?	difficulties regarding short-term memory.
What did this study seem to conclude?	a dichotomy between visual and audial memory.
Which part of the brain does short-term memory seem to rely on?	frontal lobe (especially dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and the parietal lobe
Which part of the brain does long-term memory rely on?	hippocampus
How much information can the hippocampus store?	does not
If the hippocampus doesn't store information what does it do?	may be involved in changing neural connections for a period of three months or more after the initial learning.
How long does sensory  memory to to store information?	less than one second
Can we control what is stored in our sensory memory?	It is out of cognitive control
Who did the first studies on exploring a new idea of sensory memory?	George Sperling
What did Spellings' findings reveal?	this form of memory degrades so quickly, participants would see the display but be unable to report all of the items
How does short term memory encode information?	acoustically
What did Baddeleys test subjects have touble doing?	recalling a collection of words that had similar meanings
How does long term memory encode information?	semantically
What is episodic memory?	"which attempts to capture information such as 'what', 'when' and 'where'
If someone where to recall a wedding they had went to a year before, which type of memory would be used?	episodic memory,
Why do infants and young childrens memories need to be assesed differently?	do not have the language ability to report on their memories
Can researchers study an infants or young childs memories?	, researchers have adapted and developed a number of measures for assessing both infants’ recognition memory and their recall memory.
How can a researcher study a childs memory?	elicited imitation techniques
What are some catgories of retrospective memory?	semantic, episodic and autobiographical memory
If a memory is triggered by a time, which kind of memory is this?	Time-based prospective memories
What is something somebody can use to remember something?	Cues
If Bob realized he needed to mail his mother a letter after seeing the postal office, which kind of memory did he trigger?	Event-based prospective memories
Was Hebb's thought of the relationship between short and long term memory true?	research showed this to be false
Which drugs seemed to help someone remember earlier events?	cortisol or epinephrine
What relationship does excitement and memory share?	excitement enhances memory
Bob was in a car accident and couldn't remember his wifes name, what part of his brain could have been damaged?	hippocampus
Is it important to know how information is coded in the brain?	that is crucial
Have researchers learned anything studying plasticity?	have gained much knowledge
What are the roles of Covergence-divergence zones?	might be the neural networks where memories are stored and retrieved.
What has most of the research on memories revolved around?	simple learning in simple neuronal circuits;
What do cognitive neuroscientists believe memory is?	the retention, reactivation, and reconstruction of the experience-independent internal representation
What suggests that memory has two different components?	term of internal representation
What showed that memory exists even before that memory is known to the person?	Moscovitch 2007
What is an engram trace?	the underpinning physical neural changes
What is another term for procedural memory?	implicit memory
If bob remembered how to bake a cake after seeing this on television what memory is he using?	procedural memory
What set of skills is reliant on procedural memory?	motor skills
If Bob does throws 15 more free throws than he did last week, how many more explicit memories has he gained?	no new explicit memories have been formed,
Which model explains why bob has an easier time reading a book, and then discussing it rather than reading two books?	working memory model
Which concept is criticised for being unworthy and too broad?	concept of a central executive
Which part of memory allows us to go about our daily lives?	Working memory
What do most elderly people worry about?	memory loss,
Is an eldery person with alzheimers having the same problem as a similar aged person experiencing memory loss?	memory loss is qualitatively different
Which part of the brain is associated with the memory loss an elderly person suffers?	frontal regions
Which memory is an elderly person helping by using appointment books?	prospective memory
Does a 6 month old have short term memory?	can recall information over the short-term
What age can an infabt recall steps in an order?	9 months of age
What part of a two step sequence can a 6 month old remember?	one step of a two-step sequence
What part of the brain is not fully developed in infants which can cause the memory differences in ages?	the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the frontal components of the neural network are not fully developed
When remembering your first day of school or first dance, which memory are you using?	Episodic memories
Which type of memory enables us to remember knowledge of the world?	Semantic memory
When fondly remembering your memory, which type of memory are you using?	Autobiographical memory
Which type of memory is used when remembering something that we've seen?	Visual memory
What can cause your memory to deterioriate or not work as well?	Stress
Which hormones are produces when a animal is stressed out?	adrenal hormones
Who performed a study that involved having peoples hands in cold water while also memorizing words?	L. Schwabe and O. Wolf
What did L. Schwabes and O. Wolfs study seem to conlcude?	stress experienced during learning distracts people by diverting their attention during the memory encoding process.
What trouble can interference cause?	can hamper memorization and retrieval
What is retroactive interference?	when learning new information makes it harder to recall old information
What is proactive interference?	where prior learning disrupts recall of new information
What is a term used to describe being able to learn something quicker due to an older ability?	positive transfer.
In 1960 did people believe an infant was able to remember things?	Up until the middle of the 1980s it was assumed that infants could not encode, retain, and retrieve information.
What is the minimum age researchers think a child begins to have memory?	. A growing body of research now indicates that infants as young as 6-months can recall information
Does a persons memory capacity increase with age?	Furthermore, research has revealed that as infants grow older they can store information for longer periods of time
Who has a better memory retention a 6 month old or a 9 month old?	9-month-olds
What role does the amygdala play in memory?	thought to be involved in emotional memory
Can you pin point certain areas of the brain to certain memories.	it is not sufficient to describe memory, and its counterpart, learning, as solely dependent on specific brain regions
What changes can be linked to learning and memory?	neuronal synapses,
What is the hippocampus's relationship to memory?	believed to be involved in spatial learning and declarative learning
Does it matter how long someone is exposed to stress to have an impact on their memory?	the more impact it may have. However, short term exposure to stress also causes impairment in memory by interfering with the function of the hippocampus
Whar does research show happens to blood glucorticoid levels during stressful events?	levels that have increased drastically
Can a unborn child face issues with stress than can affect their future abilities?	prenatally, the offspring show increased levels of glucocorticoids when they are subjected to stress later on in life.
Do the people studied in different research perform as well after stress as they did before becoming in contact with stressful situations?	When subjects are asked to complete a learning task after short term exposure they have often difficulties
What neurons are damaged during stressful events?	The CA1 neurons found in the hippocampus
What can make someone more prone to memory loss as they age?	the more stressful situations that someone encounters,
What will a person often do with extremely stressful memories?	repression of memories where a person moves an unbearable memory to the unconscious mind
What is the cause of neuron loss due to stress?	high level of extracellular glutamate allow calcium to enter NMDA receptors
Does sleep hurt a persons memory?	There have been several studies which show that sleep improves the retention of memory,
What does SWS stand for?	slow-wave sleep
What take place during SWS?	System consolidation
What is the role of the neocortex whe it relates to memory?	reviews and processes memories, which moves them into long-term memory
In studies what is a relationship between sleeping and learning?	activation patterns in the sleeping brain that mirror those recorded during the learning of tasks from the previous day
Can one increase their brain efficency?	people can improve cognitive function and brain efficiency
What can a person do to increase their brain efficiency?	simple lifestyle changes such as incorporating memory exercises, healthy eating, physical fitness and stress reduction
In a study performed with 17 subjects, what relationship did healthy changes and brain efficiency have?	After 14 days, they showed greater word fluency (not memory) compared to their baseline performance.
Do lifestyle changes definitely have an affect on long term memory?	it is therefore unclear if this intervention has lasting effects on memory.
What is a term to describe memory loss?	amnesia.
What diseases can have a major imact on memory?	Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease
What is Korsakoff's syndrome?	an organic brain disease that adversely affects memory by widespread loss or shrinkage of neurons within the prefrontal cortex.
Is amnesia only seen in one form?	There are many sorts of amnesia,
What happens to a person whose autobiographic memory is damaged?	that they cannot forget small details that otherwise would not be stored
Does excersice have any role on cognitive brain function?	has many cognitive benefits and effects on the brain.
Is a child who excercies likely to perform better in school?	The effects of exercise on memory have important implications for improving children's academic performance
What positive things can happen to your brain when you excersise?	increases in neurotransmitter levels, improved oxygen and nutrient delivery, and increased neurogenesis in the hippocampus
What type of excercise has shown the best benefit for the brain?	aerobic exercises
What can impact memory performance in a positive way?	when material is linked to the learning context,
In their study what was the relationship that both groups shared?	both stressed and unstressed, performed faster when the learning and retrieval contexts were similar.
What can the scent of vanilla be used for?	strong cue for memory.
What did a study performed by Schwabe and wolf show?	memory impairment and the detrimental effects of stress on learning can be attenuated.
In Schwabe and wolfs study what where particpants asked to memorize?	were asked to remember the locations of 15 pairs of picture cards –
What can cause a person to have fake memories?	repeatedly imagine actions that they have never performed or events that they have never experienced
Who performed a study that showed the similarirty of imaginging doing something and then later remembering actually doing that task?	Goff and Roediger
What did a similar study done by Garry find?	researchers found that one-fourth of the students asked to imagine the four events reported that they had actually experienced such events as children
What has research shown about our memories?	our memories are constructed
How does a person build their memories?	when they encode them and/or when they recall them.
What did a study done by Elizabeth Loftus and John palmer show?	that when people were provided with misleading information they tended to misremember, a phenomenon known as the misinformation effect.
In their study what did people say they say when they really hadn't due to having the word "smashed" inserted into the question?	broken glass
What is the most widely used way in learing?	Rote learning
What is the Zeigarnik effect?	states that people remember uncompleted or interrupted tasks better than completed ones.
What does memorization mean?	a method of learning that allows an individual to recall information verbatim
What learning tool did Cosmos rosselliius write about?	using visual alphabets.
What is the spacing effect?	shows that an individual is more likely to remember a list of items when rehearsal is spaced over an extended period of time
When was the first federal population census taken in the US?	1790
What were the two categories for race in the census?	white or "other."
Who all was identified by name in the house holds?	Only the heads of households
What were Indians categorized as after they were included as others?	"Free people of color"
When was the first US federal population census taken?	In 1790, the first federal population census was taken in the United States
How were enumerators instructed to classify residents?	. Enumerators were instructed to classify free residents as white or "other."
Was every resident listed by name?	Only the heads of households were identified by name in the federal census until 1850.
when did any changes to counting procedures  happen?	until the Civil War and end of slavery.
Were all residents counted together or separately?	Slaves were counted separately from free persons
When did the US begin to take census?	1790
At what point were all members of the household named on a census?	1850
What does mulatto mean?	visible European ancestry in addition to African
Who were considered "free people of color"?	Native Americans
Where would a Native American live to not be counted in the census?	Indian reservations
The Census Bureau had gone from two categories to how many by the 1990s?	more than a dozen
By 2002, what percent of African Americans had multiracial ancestries?	over 75%
Why were there more immigrants in the US?	due to changing historical forces and new immigration laws in the 1960s
How had the Census Bureau changed its collection of data?	allowing people to self-identify as more than one ethnicity
What is one of the many outcomes of the Census data?	federal assistance
How many different ethnic categories were listed on the modern census?	By 1990, the Census Bureau included more than a dozen ethnic/racial categories on the census,
Can people self identify as more than one ethnicity on the US census currently?	The Census Bureau changed its data collection by allowing people to self-identify as more than one ethnicity
About how many African American have multiracial ancestries	According to the Census Bureau, as of 2002, over 75% of all African Americans had multiracial ancestries.
Do some ethnic groups have concerns about census changes?	Some ethnic groups are concerned about the potential political and economic effects, as
How is some federal assistance allocated to certain groups?	federal assistance to historically underserved groups has depended on Census data
Twelve or more categories for race and ethnicity were in the Census by when?	1990
When did laws allow for more immigrants?	in the 1960s
How many African Americans identify as multiracial on the Census of 2002?	over 75%
What type of federal assistance depends on Census data?	assistance to historically underserved groups
Americans with African ancestry have always been classified as what race?	black (historically) or African American
What were slaves and others of African ancestry classified by what term?	hypodescent
Melungeons are generally classified as white but what are they genetically what other races?	European and sub-Saharan African ancestry
What did many with European ancetry "marry white" and want to be part of the white society?	for its social and economic advantages
Which Americans have been historically classified as African American or black?	Americans with Sub-Saharan African ancestry
What caused lower classification status for African Americans?	slavery became a racial caste
How did many multiracial Americans attain social and economic advantages?	Many of majority European ancestry and appearance "married white" and assimilated into white society
What are some historical reasons multiracial Americans have been classified as black?	slavery, partus sequitur ventrem, one-eighth law, the one-drop rule of 20th-century legislation
What is the group called who are genetically sub Saharan and European but are classified as white?	Melungeons,
What is Melungeon?	genetically to be of European and sub-Saharan African ancestry.
What does it mean to have "marred white"?	assimilated into white society
What were those with Sub-Saharan African ancestory classified as?	black (historically) or African American
What were slaves and Africans classified by?	hypodescent
What is the effect of there no longer being a stigma on interracial marriage?	more people are openly forming interracial unions
What has caused more people of mixed races to the US?	Diverse immigration
When was there a period of formal racial segregation?	in the former Confederacy following the Reconstruction Era
Who was elected and was the first multiracial president of the United States?	Barack Obama
Why were Americans allowed to start checking more than one box to identify their race in the Census in 200?	Because more Americans have insisted on being allowed to acknowledge their mixed racial origins
Who was the first multiracial president elected in the US	In 2008 Barack Obama was elected as the first multiracial President of the United States
When did the US begin to experience a growing multiracial identity movement?	Since the 1980s, the United States has had a growing multiracial identity movement
Who are "mestizos"?	large population of Hispanics identifying as mestizos
When did the US census start to allow residents to mark more than one ethno-racial identity on the census form?	the 2000 census for the first time allowed residents to check more than one ethno-racial identity and thereby identify as multiracial
What has brought more mixed race people to the US?	. Diverse immigration has brought more mixed-race people into the United States
What was it once considered socially advantageous to do?	try to "pass" as white
What is an example of the multiracial identity movement at work?	Loving Day
What does the first multiracial president identify as?	African American
When did the census begin allowing multiple boxes to be checked?	2000
When was an African American president elected?	2008
What were put in place to prevent the mix of races?	Anti-miscegenation laws
Why did the anti-miscegenation not insure that there was no interracial mixing?	white men from taking slave women as concubines and having multiracial children with them
Where was there greater numbers of Latinos and Asian residents?	In California and the western US
When were the laws against marriage between Asians and Europeans lifted?	1950s
What races were prohibited from official relationships with whites?	Latino and Asian residents
When were anti-miscegenation laws passed?	Anti-miscegenation laws were passed in most states during the 18th, 19th and early 20th centuries
Were Latino residents also prohibited from marrying whites?	were prohibited from official relationships with whites.
Did these laws change behavior of white slaveholders and other powerful white men?	this did not prevent white slaveholders, their sons, or other powerful white men from taking slave women as concubines
Which region has greater numbers of Latino and Asian residents?	In California and the western US,
Were there any laws against marriage between whites and Asians in the US?	White legislators passed laws prohibiting marriage between European and Asian Americans until the 1950s.
In the western US, who were not allowed to have relationships with whites?	Latino and Asian residents
When did laws stop banning marriage between whites and asians?	the 1950s
Who were taking slaves as concubines?	white slaveholders, their sons, or other powerful white men
When did the numbers of free people of color increase dramatically?	After the American Revolutionary War
How were the laws in New York abolished?	in programs of gradual emancipation
How long did it take for states like New York to abolish all slave laws?	more than two decades to be completed
Who in the south were urging their churches to free their slaves in the south?	Quaker and Methodist preachers
When were the last slaves freed in New York state?	The last slaves in New York were not freed until 1827.
When did the number of free people of color begin to increase in the North and South?	After the American Revolutionary War
Who implored slaveholders to free their slaves?	Quaker and Methodist preachers in the South urged slaveholders to free their slaves
What caused many slaveholder to free their slaves?	Revolutionary ideals led many men to free their slaves
How much did the percentage of free people in the South change from 1782 to 1810?	the percentage of free people of color rose from less than one percent to nearly 10 percent of blacks in the South.
What is it called when it takes several years for slaves to be freed in a program?	gradual emancipation
The last slave in New York was freed when?	1827
What caused Quaker and Methodist preachers to want to free slaves?	Second Great Awakening
In 1810, how many black people were considered free?	nearly 10 percent
What caused many men to free slaves from 1782 to 1810?	Revolutionary ideals
What is the one-drop rule?	defining as black, persons with any known African ancestry
What did some courts call the one-drop rule?	"the traceable amount rule."
What is a hypodesecnt rule?	meaning that racially mixed persons were assigned the status of the socially subordinate group
When was the one-drop rule in effect?	in the early 20th century
What is the one-drop rule?	black, persons with any known African ancestry.
What is the hypodescent rule?	racially mixed persons were assigned the status of the socially subordinate group.
Why were laws like the one drop rule enacted?	In their attempt to ensure white supremacy decades after emancipation
What made the one drop rule stricter than rules in the 19th century?	it ignored the many mixed families in the state and went against commonly accepted social rules of judging a person by appearance and association.
In the early 1900s, what was did black mean in southern states?	persons with any known African ancestry
Prior to the 1900s, what was the socially accepted rule for racial interpretation?	judging a person by appearance and association.
What rule means multiracial people are given status of the socially subordinate group?	a hypodescent rule
What was the rule used in law in the 1900s called?	the one-drop rule
What was the rule in the 1800s called?	the traceable amount rule
Approximentally how many Americans identified themselves as multiracial in the 2010 US census?	In the 2010 US census, approximately 9 million individuals, or 2.9% of the population, self-identified as multiracial.
Why did muticultural Americans hid their heritage?	many people hid their multiracial heritage because of racial discrimination against minorities
Before the mid-20th century were people open about their muticultural heritage and why or why not?	Prior to the mid-20th century, many people hid their multiracial heritage because of racial discrimination against minorities.
Are all muticultural Americans aware of their cultural heritage?	While many Americans may be biologically multiracial, they often do not know it
What is the accepted definition of "multicultural" ancestry?	Multiracial Americans are Americans who have mixed ancestry of "two or more races"
Approximentally how many Americans identified themselves as multiracial in the 2010 US census?	In the 2010 US census, approximately 9 million individuals, or 2.9% of the population, self-identified as multiracial.
What is the accepted definition of "multicultural" ancestry?	Multiracial Americans are Americans who have mixed ancestry of "two or more races".
Why did muticultural Americans hid their heritage?	Prior to the mid-20th century, many people hid their multiracial heritage because of racial discrimination against minorities
Which cultural do multicultural people usually identify with?	, generally that of the culture in which they were raised.
Are all multicultural Americans aware of their heritage?	While many Americans may be biologically multiracial, they often do not know it
What does it mean to be a mutliracial?	mixed ancestry of "two or more races"
How many multiracial people in the US were there in 2010?	approximately 9 million individuals
When did people stop hiding mutliracial heritage?	the mid-20th century
What are people most likely to identify themselves as?	the culture in which they were raised
Would DNA show a higher number or lower number of mutliracial people than those reported in the census?	higher number
What does it mean to be a mutliracial?	two or more races
How many multiracial people in the US were there in 2010?	approximately 9 million individuals
When did people stop hiding mutliracial heritage?	the mid-20th century
What occured from 1955 to 1968?	The African-American Civil Rights Movement
How much of the population identified as mixed race in the 2000s?	less than 5%
What is race sometimes seen as?	a social construct
Who are descendents of various culturally distinct groups?	The American people
What does affect recent identification in many cases?	mixed racial ancestry
Who were considered "white Indians"?	Europeans living among Indigenous Americans
Who had Indigenous "Country wives"?	Some traders
Who lived in native communities, speaking the language and participating in the affairs of tribes?	"white Indians"
Why were some multiracial children sent to Europe?	for their education
Where were legal wives usually kept?	in the city
When could white women and black men be in a union?	In the colonial years
Where did 80% of free people of color in NC come from?	Virginia in colonial years
What is Paul Heinegg?	scholar
What censuses did he study?	from 1790–1810
Who were not identified by name on the census before the civil war?	slaves
Who was Thomas Jefferson in a relationship with?	Sally Hemings
Not recognizing white fatherhood for multiracial slave children cause what to be lost?	paternity
Who will not reveal full ancestral data to mixed race people?	elder family members
Who brought Christian missionaries to Hawaii?	traders
What cause royal Hawaiian females to find themselves ugly?	the Anglo-Saxon presence
What are some examples of how a noble person should look before Christians came?	dark skin and ample bodies
What did westerners call the women of Hawaii?	Hawaiian squaws
When would white men marry the paler and thinner Hawaiian ladies?	By the last half of the 19th century
Who are blamed in this paragraph for Jim Crow laws?	white Democrats
When did Virginia add the one drop rule to their laws?	1924
Why were laws limiting people of color passed?	to restore white supremacy
What had popularity in the early 20th century that caused rising racial discrimination?	eugenics and ideas of racial purity
What fact was ignored by enacting one-drop rule laws?	that many whites had multiracial ancestry.
A person is not a member of a racial minority if ancetry does not what?	exceed one-fourth
Who are consdered to have the most physical differences?	African blacks and whites
What are groups other than blacks considered to be?	less threatening to whites
Who says genetic tests can't tell the difference between different Native American nations?	Geneticists
What are geneticists looking for?	the pattern of markers
What is there genetic evidence of?	three major migrations into North America
How do some mixed raced people feel?	marginalized by U.S. society
How many racial choices are there on standardized tests?	Typically, about five race choices
How many race choices may someone check?	only one
What does the "other" box do?	groups together individuals of many different multiracial types
When do mixed race individuals feel marginalized?	when applying to schools or for a job
What usually played a larger role than laws regarding a person's race?	social acceptance
Where did people not ask about racial background?	frontier areas
What were the hallmarks of free citizens?	they served in the militia and voted
Whos acceptance decided inheritance issues?	neighbors
The President's father is from what country?	Kenya
What community still has some effects of slavery?	American slave descendant community
What must Africans who recently immigrated do?	recognize their own unique ancestral backgrounds
Who argue for a term other than African American to describe recent immigrants?	some black writers
When did multiracial people start to organize for more inclusive racial identifiers?	In the 1980s
What was the response to the idea of identifying people as biracial or multiracial?	mostly negative
What could have cause loss of power via the use of the term biracial and multiracial?	if African Americans reduced their numbers by self-identification
Who are some of the opponents of biracial and multiracial as identifiers?	Congresswoman Diane Watson and Congressman Augustus Hawkins
What determined a child's social identity?	the tribe's kinship system
What heritage system do Southeast tribes use?	matrilineal
What were multiracial children with a tribal mother considered to be in tribes of the Southeast?	Indian
What race did the Omaha view a multiracial child with a white father to be?	white
How could a white child be considered a member of the Omaha tribe?	if adopted by a man
Who was a doctor?	Charles Eastman
Who did the relative of the doctor marry?	Sioux woman
Who was the doctor related to?	Seth Eastman
Who met their husbands at the Hampton institute?	three European-American middle-class female teachers
What tribe was Eastman related to?	Sioux
Who said many African Americans have NAtive American heritage?	Sherrel W. Stewart
Who disproved Sherrel's hypothesis?	genetic researchers who have done extensive population mapping studies
Who hosts a TV series on the genetic history of African Americans?	Henry Louis Gates
What jobs did the earliest Europeans who mingled with natives hold?	explorers and soldiers
Who started marrying or having unions with native women after settlment increased?	traders and fur trappers
Why did Chesapeake Bay colonists begin to buy slaves?	a continuing, critical labor shortage
Who first imported slaves to New York?	the Dutch
Who freed some of the early slaves?	their masters
President Thomas Jefferson had a relationship with who?	Sally Hemings
What was the name of the Smithsonian-Monticello exhibit that discussed their relationship?	Slavery at Monticello: The Paradox of Liberty
How long were Jefferson and Hemmings in a relationship?	nearly 40 years
Which child of Jefferson identified as black?	Madison Hemings
How much of the children of Jefferson and Hemmings were white?	Seven-eighths
As an example, whose status was downgraded after the civil war?	traditionally free people of color in Louisiana
Who were increasingly included as African Americans in the 20th century?	people of any portion of African descent
Where did most Chinese men enter the US?	primarily on the West Coast and in western territories
Who imported Chinese laborers?	white planters
What cause wives to be unable to move to the US with their Chinese husbands after 1882?	the Chinese Exclusion Act
What did racial bias generally mean for Chinese people?	they did not take white spouses
What did Chinese laborers do after they left that line of work?	set up groceries in small towns throughout the South
What office is responsible for the census form changes?	the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
When did the OMB change racial guidelines for the census form?	1997
What did the OMB vote to allow on the 2000 census?	participants to select more than one of the six available categories
When were the OMB racial directive made mandatory for every government form?	2003
What was the result of a child having an African mother?	born into slavery
What is the rule that allows children with white fathers to be slaves?	partus sequitur ventrem
Who was the first African American to gradute from Vassar College?	Anita Florence Hemmings
What makes a person mulatto?	parents were black and white
What does a person have to have to be an octoroon?	one black great-grandparent and the remainder white
Why did Steele think people were not attacking Barrack Obama?	Because he has no slave blood in him
What does Condoleeza Rice prefer to term people as?	"black" or "white"
What did President Sarkozy think Secretary of State Rice was?	recent American immigrant
Who is Charles Kenzie Steele Jr?	CEO of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
Why did Steele say what he did?	to be "provocative"
When was the wedding of Rolfe and Pocahontas?	April 5, 1614
What did English laws not exclude people with some native blood from being?	considered English or white
Who married Indigenous women early on?	male settlers
Where did Rolfe marry Pocahontas?	present-day Virginia
Who was an ancestor of the First Families of Virginia?	Thomas Rolfe
What has helped geneologists researching slaves?	Colonial records of French and Spanish slave ships and sales, and plantation records in all the former colonies
What were slaves usually not allowed to do?	learn to read and write
What replaced written records for black families?	oral histories
Who caused the Census Burea to drop the terms free people of color and mulatto?	Southern Congressional bloc
When were the terms mulatto and free people of color taken off the census?	1930
Who did colonists ask for help in returning runaway slaves?	Indigenous American tribes
When was a treaty with the Iroquis made to return slaves?	1726
What asked for the return of slaves who married indigenous americans or spoke their language?	Numerous advertisements
How did natives and Africans come to know each other?	through the institution of slavery
Why did natives consider Africans to have a 'Great Medicine'?	because Africans were virtually immune to the Old-World diseases
What did the laws passed in the 17th century do?	gave children the social status of their mother
What is the rule called that causes a father's race to not matter?	partus sequitur ventrem
What did white fathers do after the American Revolution to provide for mixed children?	paying or arranging for education or apprenticeships and freeing them
English common law generally said what?	a man gave his status to his children
What are many Latin American migrants?	mestizo, Amerindian, or other mixed race
What do latinos consider a light skinned mulatto to be?	white
Who is overlooking darker skinned latino multiracial people?	the U.S. Hispanic media
What does the typical latino in media look like?	blond and blue/green-eyed white
Before 1920, how would a person be white by law?	if having seven-eights or more white ancestry
What year was mulatto left off the US Census?	1920
Who is responsible for the Census Bureau discarding the mulatto category?	Southern-dominated Congress
Who wrote an article in the New York Dail News about Obama?	Stanley Crouch
What did David Ehrenstein call Obama in 2008?	"Magic Negro",
What did Ehrenstein say Obama does for white people?	assuage white 'guilt'
What was the title of Crouch's article?	"What Obama Isn't: Black Like Me."
What does the "mixture" heading mean?	cannot be racially categorized
What year did the US Census write in response category have a code-listing?	2000
Bi-racial would be coded as what?	Mixture
How many race options were there?	five enumerated races
What is considered to be neglected in American history?	Interracial relations between Indigenous Americans and African Americans
When is it recorded that Africans and natives interacted earliest?	April 1502
Where did Africans escape and mate with naitves?	Santo Domingo
Where did Ayllon lay down a Spanish colony?	near the mouth of the Pee Dee River
How many slaves were at San Miguel de Gualdape at its inception?	100 enslaved Africans
Who is related to Bliss Broyard?	Anatole Broyard
Gregory Howard Williams wrote what type of book?	autobiography
What documentary features a white man in North Carolina?	Colored White Boy
When did people lobby for allowing more than one category to be selected on legal forms?	the 1980s
How did the public react to the categories of "bi-racial" and "multiracial"?	mostly negative
Which political leaders spoke out against the proposed designations?	Senator Diane Watson and Representative Augustus Hawkins
What did they fear would happen?	a loss in political and economic power
Who married Sacagewea?	French trapper Toussaint Charbonneau
Who made up most unions between Europeans and natives?	European men and Indigenous American women
What factor affected the ability of a child to be in a tribe?	the kinship system of the woman's tribe
What nations are considered matrilineal?	Creek and Cherokee
How could a white child be considered a member of the Omaha tribe?	adopted into the tribe by an adult male
What brought African Americans together?	the one-drop rule
Who made it next to impossible to learn about their heritage for African Americans?	family elders
Slaves were not allowed to do what?	to learn to read and write
What did Indigenous Americans not do that makes it difficult to trace their heritage?	spoke English, nor read or wrote it
What factors did not affect racial solidarity amoung African Americans?	their multiracial admixture, or social/economic stratification
What stock character lived with her white father until he left the picture?	"tragic octoroon"
Who was the first to use the tragic octoroon?	Lydia Maria Child
What story was written by Child in 1842?	"The Quadroons"
What does the tragic octoroon point out?	sexual exploitation in slavery
Who used the figure of the tragic octoroon?	abolitionists
Who identified the active substance?	John Abel
Who developed the method to obtain epinephrine in a pure state?	Jokichi Takamine
Who marketed epinephrine?	Parke Davis
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?	Adrenalin
As an inhaler, what was epinephrine used to treat?	nasal congestion
Who developed the method to get epinephrine in it's pure form?	Jokichi Takamine
What could epinephrine treat?	nasal congestion
When did epinephrine stop being available in the United States?	2011
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?	Adrenalin
In what year was epinephrine discovered?	1897
What was the trade name of epinephrine?	Adrenalin
Who first discovered epinephrine?	John Abel
What is epinephrine used to treat?	asthma attacks
In what year was Primatene Mist no longer sold in the United States?	2011
Who developed Amphetamine?	Smith, Kline and French
Who synthesized Amphetamine for asthma?	Gordon Alles
What are common side effects of Amphetamine?	sensations of exhilaration and palpitations
When were tricyclic antidepressants developed?	1960s
What were some uses for Amphetamine?	narcolepsy, post-encepheletic parkinsonism, and mood elevation in depression and other psychiatric indications
Ephedrine was used as an oral medicine for what illness?	asthma
In what year was amphetamine first tested on asthma patients?	1929
What was the trade name of amphetamine as a nasal decongestant?	Benzedrine Inhaler
In what year did the American Medical Association approve amphetamine for medical use?	1937
In what decade were tricyclic antidepressants created?	1960s
What is diabetes caused from?	absence of a substance normally produced by the pancreas
Why was insulin therapy delayed?	difficulties in producing the material in sufficient quantity and with reproducible purity
How can diabetes be induced in dogs?	surgical removal of the pancreas
Before insulin, what was the life expectancy of diabetics?	only a few months
Who discovered that pancreatic extract reversed symptoms of pancreas removal?	Frederick Banting and his student Charles Best
Diabetes is caused by the removal of what organ?	pancreas
Left untreated, how long were diabetic patients were expected to live?	a few months
What could be adjusted in a sample of pancreatic extract to produce purer insulin?	pH
To purify insulin, Banting and Best sought the assistance of what company?	Eli Lilly and Co.
Minkowski and von Mering did surgical tests on what animal?	dogs
What is phenobarbital used for?	epilepsy
Who discovered a reaction that induced sleep in dogs?	Hermann Emil Fischer and Joseph von Mering
What sleep aid was marketed in 1904?	Veronal
What is amphetamine used for today?	attention deficit disorder
Why was barbiturates and amphetamines restricted?	addictive properties and abuse potential
What compound was discovered to induce sleep?	diethylbarbituric acid
What was the first trade name of diethylbarbituric acid?	Veronal
What is phenobarbital mainly used to treat today?	epilepsy
In what year was phenobarbital discovered?	1911
What was Veronal used for when Bayer put it on the market?	sleep aid
Who developed Arsphenamine?	Paul Ehrlich and chemist Alfred Bertheim
What was the first effective treatment for Syphilis?	Arsphenamine
What complications are associated with Syphilis?	severe skin ulceration, neurological damage, and death
What is Amphetamine's market name?	Institute of Experimental Therapy
Where is the Institute of Experimental Therapy located?	Berlin
Bacterial infections could be treated with medicines containing what kind of dye?	arsenic
What was the name of the first synthetic bacterial drug?	arsphenamine
Arsphenamine became the first treatment for what previously incurable disease?	syphilis
In what year was arsphenamine discovered?	1911
What was the commercial name of arsphenamine?	Salvarsan
When was Morphine and Quinine first available?	mid 1800s
Who was the compound named after?	Morpheus
Who came up with the name Morphine?	Friedrich Sertürner
Where were was Morphine extracted from?	opium
Who is responsible for purification of compounds found in mineral sources?	German dye manufacturers
Morphine was named after what Greek god?	Morpheus
Burroughs-Wellcome is now part of what medical company?	Glaxo Smith Kline
Who discovered morphine?	Friedrich Sertürner
What is the name of the plant that produces morphine?	opium
Who received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939?	Gerhard Domagk
Prontosil is in what drug class?	antibiotics
Who is responsible for creating Prontosil?	Josef Klarer, Fritz Mietzsch, and Gerhard Domagk
What causes Streptococci?	pathogens
Many deaths occurred before World War II due to what?	infectious diseases
What was the name of the first sulfonamine antibiotic?	Prontosil
What award did Domagk receive in 1939?	Nobel Prize in Medicine
Anti-infective drugs became more prominent after what war?	World War II
Were sulfonamides more or less toxic than arsphenamine?	less
Streptococci and other pathogens could be treated by what type of antibiotics?	sulfonamides
Who created the first rabies vaccine?	Louis Pasteur and Pierre Paul Émile Roux
How many cases of Diphtheria were there in 1921?	206,000
In 1923, what was discovered to be safer to treat Diphtheria Toxin?	formaldehyde
Who created a vaccine to treat Japanese Encephalitis?	Maurice Hilleman
How many deaths occurred due to Diphtheria?	15,520
The rabies vaccine was created in what year?	1885
In what year was the diphtheria vaccine made?	1914
What compound made the diphtheria vaccine safer to use?	formaldehyde
Who developed the first encephalitis vaccine?	Maurice Hilleman
What company did Hilleman later work for?	Merck
Who manufactured "Elixir Sulfanilamide"?	S.E. Massengill Company
What was one of the things the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act do?	explicitly prohibited false therapeutic claims
What year did Congress pass the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act?	1938
What drug killed 100 people in 1937?	Elixir Sulfanilamide
What is Diethylene Glycol commonly used for now?	antifreeze
What company manufactured Elixir Sulfanilamide?	S.E. Massengill Company of Tennessee
What drug killed over 100 people in 1937?	Elixir Sulfanilamide
Diethylene glycol is mainly used today as what liquid?	antifreeze
What law did Congress pass following the Elixir Sulfanilamide incident?	Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938
The name "elixir" implied a solution in what liquid?	ethanol
When was the first effective treatment for Tuberculosis discovered?	1943
50% of tuberculosis-infected people died within 5 years where?	cities in developed countries
What drug effectively treated Tuberculosis?	Streptomycin
Who was Eli Lilly's work based off of?	Giuseppe Brotzu and Edward Abraham
Where was Tetracyclines discovered?	Lederle Laboratories
What was the first treatment for tuberculosis?	Streptomycin
What percentage of patients infected with tuberculosis died within 5 years?	50%
In what year was streptomycin discovered?	1943
Many more antibiotics were made following the end of what war?	World War II
What company funded the research that led to the discovery of streptomycin?	Merck
When was the Polio vaccine created?	1954
Who announced that SV40 was not associated with cancer?	United States Cancer Institute
Who identified the SV40 virus?	Maurice Hilleman
What was a complication of the SV40 virus?	cause tumors
Who funded the Polio vaccine?	National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis
In what year was the polio vaccine created?	1954
Who created the polio vaccine?	Jonas Salk
What virus caused tumors in most mammals?	SV40
Who identified the SV40 virus?	Maurice Hilleman
SV40 was present in what vaccine?	polio
How much was the settlement GlaxoSmithKline agree to?	$3 billion
What was one of the causes of the health-care fraud case?	illegal promotion of prescription drugs
When did GlaxoSmithKline plead guilty?	2 July 2012
What drugs were related to a kickback scheme?	Imitrex, Lotronex, Flovent, and Valtrex
What drugs were used for off-label uses?	Paxil, Wellbutrin, Advair, Lamictal, and Zofran
In what year did GlaxoSmithKline pay a $3 billion dollar settlement?	2012
How much was the largest healthcare fraud case in the US settled for?	$3 billion
What company was sued for promoting medicines for unlicensed uses and bribing doctors?	GlaxoSmithKline
What is the speculation of the relationship between doctors and the drug industry?	become fully transparent.
What is the Physician Financial Transparency Report part of?	Sunshine Act
Where can you obtain information about the Sunshine Act?	Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services website
What information is collected by Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services?	financial relationships with physicians and hospitals.
When did Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services have to start collecting information?	starting in 2013
The Physician Financial Transparency Reports was part of what other act?	Sunshine Act
In what year were Medicaid and Medicare required to disclose information about their relationships with doctors and hospitals?	2013
Where can financial relationships between Medicaid, Medicare and pharmaceutical companies be found?	Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services website
What is expected when the relationships are made public?	relationship between doctors and Pharmaceutical industry will become fully transparent
What disease had the biggest decline of deaths?	tuberculosis
What was responsible for the decline in spreading diseases?	use of antibiotics, early diagnosis, and other factors
What period was the report issued in 1958 cover?	1946-1955
Who issued the report in 1958?	Federal Trade Commission
What were eight diseases examined for?	mortality rates
How much did the mortality rate of common bacterial infections decline between 1946-1955?	56%
How much did the mortality rate of tuberculosis drop between 1946-1955?	75%
Who issued a report describing the effects of antibiotic developments?	Federal Trade Commission
In what year was the FTC's report issued?	1958
How much did treatment for each patient in Africa cost?	10,000 and 15,000 USD per patient per year
Who backed the South African government which caused the case to be dropped?	The Netherlands, Germany, France, and later the US
Who brought litigation to South Africa?	40 multi-national pharmaceutical companies
How many signatures were collected by MSF?	250,000 signatures
When was litigation brought to South Africa?	March 2001
How many companies sued South Africa for its Medicines Act?	40
South Africa's Medicines Act allowed for the generic production of what kind of drugs?	antiretroviral
How much did ARV drugs cost patients yearly?	between 10,000 and 15,000 USD
How many signatures were collected supporting public health rights?	250,000
What Act forbade misbranded drugs?	Pure Food and Drugs Act
What caused a Tetanus outbreak?	contaminated smallpox vaccine and diphtheria antitoxin
What act allowed premarket approval for drugs?	The Biologics Control Act of 1902
When did the Pure Food and Drugs Act get implemented?	1906
Who restricted the federal government's enforcement powers?	Supreme Court
What was the name of the law that required premarket approval for producing drugs?	Biologics Control Act of 1902
What law banned the interstate distribution of mislabeled food and drugs?	Pure Food and Drugs Act
In what year was the Pure Food and Drugs Act passed?	1906
Who adopted the Doha Declaration?	World Trade Organization
What did the TRIPS agreement accomplish?	countries must allow pharmaceutical products to be patented
Why are patents criticized?	thought to reduce access to existing medicines
What did the Doha Declaration do?	indicates that the TRIPS agreement should be read with the goals of public health in mind, and allows some methods for circumventing pharmaceutical monopolies
When was the Doha Declaration adopted?	2001
What has been accused of reducing access to medicines in developing countries?	Patents
The Doha Declaration allows for what ways for monopolies to be bypassed?	compulsory licensing or parallel imports
When did the World Trade Organization adopt the Doha Declaration?	2001
How much money was recovered through the False Claims?	$2.5 billion
What are some of the schemes used to defraud the health care system?	Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Violations, Off Label Marketing, Best Price Fraud, CME Fraud, Medicaid Price Reporting, and Manufactured Compound Drugs.
What is pharmaceutical fraud?	deceptions which bring financial gain to a pharmaceutical company
Who had the biggest fraud case settlement?	GlaxoSmithKline
What provision rewards "whistle-blowers"?	qui tam
What kind of fraud financially benefits a drug company?	Pharmaceutical fraud
Who is affected by pharmaceutical fraud?	individuals and public and private insurers
How much money lost to pharmaceutical fraud was recovered in 2010?	$2.5 billion
Which act allows whistleblowers to recover money lost from pharmaceutical fraud?	False Claims Act
What drugs reduce the risk of death and other events in people with high blood pressure?	thiazide antihypertensive drugs
Who conducted the review on Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs?	Cochrane
What were Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs used with?	combination therapy
What do ACE inhibitors do?	reduce the risk of new onset kidney disease [RR 0.71] and death [RR 0.84] in diabetic patients
In what year did Cochrane release the report?	2009
What reduces the risk of new onset kidney diseases and death?	ACE inhibitors
What type of drugs reduced the risk of strokes and heart disease for people with high blood pressure?	thiazide antihypertensive drugs
In what year was thiazide antihypertensive drugs shown to help those with heart problems?	2009
Who put out a report in 2012?	President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
What has been argued restricted innovation?	excessive regulation
What was a recommendations brought about from the report?	expanding the FDA's use of accelerated approval processes
What is one thing excessive regulations causes?	therapeutic innovation
What can be used to evaluate new approval processes?	pilot projects
What is excessive drug regulation said to suppress?	therapeutic innovation
In what year was a report made to reduce the burdens of drug development?	2012
What was argued to be holding back new knowledge for treating diseases?	current cost of regulator-required clinical trials
Who discovered Hydralazine?	researchers at Ciba
Why were the researchers recognized in 1975?	the saving of untold thousands of lives and the alleviation of the suffering of millions of victims of hypertension
Who developed Chlorothiazide?	Karl H. Beyer, James M. Sprague, John E. Baer, and Frederick C. Novello of Merck and Co
What is  Chlorothiazide used to treat?	hypertension
What was the main shortcoming in the drug Hydralazine?	lost its effectiveness over time
What was the name of the first oral vasodilator?	hydralazine
What is the most used antihypertensive drug today?	chlorothiazide
Beyer, Sprague, Baer, and Novello received what award in 1975?	Public Health Lasker Award
In what year was hydralazine discovered?	1952
Chlorothiazide helped reduce the mortality rate among those with what disease?	hypertension
What act needed provisions?	FD&C
Who led the congressional hearings?	Senator Estes Kefauver
What were the major issues that needed to be addressed?	advertising abuses, questionable efficacy of drugs, and the need for greater regulation of the industry
What caused a need for more regulation?	a new tragedy emerged
When did this push occur?	1959
Congressional hearings emerged addressing revisions to what act?	FD&C
Who led the Congressional hearings in 1959?	Senator Estes Kefauver
Did the US Congress call for more or less regulation of pharmaceuticals?	greater
What did the first measles prevent in it's first 20 years?	an estimated 52 million cases of the disease, 17,400 cases of mental retardation, and 5,200 deaths
Who originally created the measles vaccine?	John Franklin Enders
How much did the occurrence of serious diseases shortly after the release of the measles vaccine?	>95%
When did the Rubella vaccine come out?	1969
Who recreated the measles vaccine?	Maurice Hilleman
In what year was the measles vaccine made?	1962
Who helped refine the measles vaccine?	Maurice Hilleman
In what year was the mumps vaccine made?	1967
How much did rubella, measles, and mumps infections drop after vaccination?	>95%
Measles vaccinations helped prevent how many estimated cases of the illness?	52 million
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment become a law?	10 October 1962
What did this new law require?	all drugs introduced between 1938 and 1962 had to be effective
What did the National Academy of Science's study discover?	nearly 40 percent of these products were not effective
How long after the National Academy of Science's study did a study on over the counter drugs occur?	ten years later
What brought up enhancement of drug regulations?	The thalidomide tragedy
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment became law?	10 October 1962
What federal agency regulated the advertising of prescription drugs?	FDA
Drugs made between which years had to be tested before going to market?	1938 and 1962
What percentage of drugs were shown to be ineffective after an FDA study?	40 percent
How many Americans were given the drug Kevadon?	Over 20,000
When was the drug taken off shelves in Germany?	November 1961
How many newborns were born with issues due to Kevadon?	about 17
How was Kevadon distributed to doctors?	under the guise of investigational use
Why was this drug pulled off shelves?	association with grave congenital abnormalities
In what year was thalidomide banned in Germany?	1961
What adverse effect was thalidomide associated with?	congenital abnormalities
Thalidomide was distributed in the USA by what name?	Kevadon
About how many Americans received thalidomide in a supposed study?	Over 20,000
How many newborn American babies were affected by thalidomide?	17
What law prohibited birth control?	Comstock laws
When was Enovid first approved?	1960
What increased due to the availability of birth control?	pre-marital co-habitation
Who created the first oral birth control?	E.D. Searle and Co
In 1965, how many women were on the birth control pill?	6.5 million
Discussing contraception sometimes led to prosecution under what laws?	Comstock laws
What was the name of the first oral contraceptive?	Enovid
By 1965, about how many American women were taking Enovid?	6.5 million
When did the FDA approve Enovid?	1960
Birth control was prohibited in most countries before what war?	second world war
Who received the Laser-Debakey Clinical Medical Research Aware?	Endo
How much money did Merk make in 1995?	over US$1 billion
How many patients received Zocor?	4,444
What study did Merk sponsor in 1994?	Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study
What did the study reveal after 5 years?	a 35% reduction in their cholesterol, and their chances of dying of a heart attack were reduced by 42%
What was the brand name of simvastatin?	Zocor
Patients treated with Zocor had their cholesterol reduced by how much?	35%
How much did Zocor reduce the chance of dying from a heart attack?	42%
How much money did Merck make from sales of Zocor and Mevacor?	over US$1 billion
Endo received what award in 2008?	Lasker-DeBakey Clinical Medical Research Award
What is a drug discovery?	the process by which potential drugs are discovered or designed
Who is usually responsible for early stages of drug discovery?	universities and research institutions
What is used to manipulate pathways?	molecular biology or biochemistry
What is involved in drug discovery?	isolating the active ingredient from traditional remedies or by serendipitous discovery
What focuses on metabolic pathways?	biotechnology
What is the name of the process in which possible drugs are discovered?	Drug discovery
What groups carry out most early drug discoveries?	research institutions
What kind of technology studies the understanding and manipulation of disease states and pathogens?	biotechnology
Most drugs have been found by isolating what from traditional remedies?	active ingredient
How much does it cost to develop a new drug?	about 1.3 billion
How many approvals of new drugs happen every year?	averaged 22.9 approvals
Who is responsible for approval or rejection of new drugs?	Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
How many drugs were approved in 2007?	18 approvals
Who reported the stable average rate in 2012?	Professors Light and Lexchin
What does NMEs stand for?	New Molecular Entities
How many pharmaceutical drugs were approved on average since 2001?	22.9
What is the approximate cost of developing a new drug, including the costs of failure?	1.3 billion USD
What has been the stable approval rate of new drugs?	15 to 25
What drugs are the least expensive to develop?	those based on re-formulation of an existing active ingredient
What accounts for nearly half of the costs to develop drugs?	opportunity cost of investing capital
What is the consequence in the value chain?	increasingly outsource risks related to fundamental research
What happens when companies outsource?	somewhat reshapes the industry ecosystem with biotechnology companies
What is re-formulations of active ingredients referred to?	Line-extensions
Investing capital can increase drug development costs by how much?	nearly half the total expense
What kind of companies have had a more important role in drug development?	biotechnology
What firms tend to outsource drug development?	major pharmaceutical multinationals
Why was Mevastatin never marketed?	adverse effects of tumors, muscle deterioration, and sometimes death
Who discovered Mevastatin?	Akira Endo
What is HMG-CoA responsible for producing?	cholesterol
Where did Endo discover ML-236B?	Penicillium citrinum
What was discovered in long term studies?	too toxic for human use
In what year was mevastatin discovered?	1971
Who discovered mevastatin?	Akira Endo
What organism produces mevastatin?	Penicillium citrinum
What enzyme helps produce cholesterol?	HMG-CoA reductase
How much did Pfizer settle the illegal marketing suit for?	$301 million
What drugs were involved in cases of the largest criminal fines?	Zyprexa, and the other involved Bextra
What was Pfizer accused of illegally marketing?	Geodon
What companies have been involved with health care fraud cases?	Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson
What do illegal marketing cases fall under?	False Claims Act
Firms such as Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and AstraZeneca have settled claims under what act?	False Claims Act
Zyprexa was owned by what company?	Eli Lilly
Pfizer was charged with illegally marketing what antipsychotic drug?	Geodon
Pfizer settled the Geodon lawsuit for how much money?	$301 million
Who were some of the companies that encouraged the interactions between doctors and the pharmaceutical industry?	World Economic Forum, the Gates Foundation, the Wellcome Trust, and the Food and Drug Administration
When did the article come out about the importance of interactions?	May 2015
What was the reason behind these interactions?	bring greater benefits to patients
What was believed to have created a financial conflict of interest?	moral outrage over industry malfeasance
Who printed the article about the importance of interactions?	New England Journal of Medicine
What publication had an article about the importance of pharmaceutical industry-physician interactions in 2015?	New England Journal of Medicine
When was the editorial published?	May 2015
Did major healthcare organizations support or discourage interactions between doctors and industries?	encouraged greater interactions
Who conduced an investigation on doctors?	ProPublica
Billions of dollars have been paid by which companies?	AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson and Eli Lilly
How much was discovered to have been paid to doctors by drug companies?	more than $500,000
What was the reason these companies have to pay fines?	allegations that they paid doctors to promote drugs for unapproved uses
How many doctors have been paid by varies companies?	at least 21
A ProPublica study found that some doctors were being paid how much money for speeches?	more than $500,000
Half of the top earners were mostly in what field?	psychiatry
Drug manufacturers paid off doctors a total of how much money?	$2 billion
Why are collaborative agreements important?	to explore the potential of new drug substances
How do large corporations show vertical integration?	participating in a broad range of drug discovery and development, manufacturing and quality control, marketing, sales, and distribution
What are large companies relying on outside organizations for?	to manage drug development
What are smaller organizations responsible for?	focus on a specific aspect such as discovering drug candidates or developing formulations
What type of integration do large corporations often do?	vertical
What type of integration do smaller organizations do?	a specific aspect
What type of agreements are made to research potential new drugs?	collaborative agreements
What type of organizations are multinational corporations increasingly rely on?	contract research
Who is the core guide?	The British National Formulary
Who is responsible for approving drugs in the United Kingdom?	Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
After an approval in the United States, when does an approval occur in the United Kingdom and other countries?	comes later
Who decides how NHS will allow drugs?	National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
Who does the evaluations for drugs in the United Kingdom?	European Medicines Agency
What UK firm approves pharmaceutical drugs?	Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
What UK organization evaluates drugs?	European Medicines Agency
What firm in England and Wales decides if the NHS allows drugs?	National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
What is the name of the core guide for pharmacists and clinicians?	British National Formulary
What is subject to the Orphan Drug Act?	diseases involving fewer than 200,000 patients in the United States, or larger populations in certain circumstances
What is given to companies who develop drugs for "orphan diseases"?	tax reductions, fee waivers, and market exclusivity on that drug for a limited time (seven years), regardless of whether the drug is protected by patents
Why are these companies rewarded?	Because medical research and development of drugs to treat such diseases is financially disadvantageous
What size of disease populations are subject to the Orphan Drug Act?	fewer than 200,000 patients
What is one financial benefit to researching orphan drugs?	tax reductions
What is the length of time of market exclusivity of an orphan drug?	seven years
What is a term for rare diseases in some territories?	orphan diseases
Who argued against regulators?	Ben Goldacre
Who argued that drug regulators were greater serving the interests of the drug companies than the patients?	Ben Goldacre
The business friendships between which parties have been criticized?	regulator and company employees
Goldacre argued that which party didn't require that new drugs be improved at all?	regulators
NICE decides the availability of drugs in which two countries?	England and Wales
What is the name of the organization in Scotland that decides the availability of drugs?	Scottish Medicines Consortium
What threshold must a drug pass before it is approved?	cost-effectiveness
How much money did the top ten bestselling drugs make in 2013?	$75.6 billion
What was the name of the top-selling anti-inflammatory drug in 2013?	Humira
What was the bestselling drug in history?	Lipitor
How much money did Lipitor make before the patent expired?	$141 billion
In what year did Pfizer's patent over Lipitor expire?	2011
How long do drug exclusivity rights usually last?	20 years
Governments grant permission to market drugs after how many years?	10 to 15 years on average
What enables a drug's owner to recover R&D costs?	Patent protection
What kind of drug is produced by competitors once a patent expires?	generic
What decade was the pharmaceutical industry's "golden era"?	1990s
The safety and efficacy of new drugs must be approved by what organization in the US?	Food and Drug Administration
What type of filing is used before beginning human trials?	Investigational New Drug
How many phases of human trials may be done after IND approval?	three
What type of application is filed after completing three phases of human trials?	New Drug Application
What type of risk assessment results in approving the drug to go on the market?	positive benefit-risk
"Drug reps" are usually hired by what type of firms?	Pharmaceutical companies
What law regulates drug marketing in the US?	Prescription Drug Marketing Act of 1987
Who do drug reps market to?	directly and personally to physicians
Drug reps have been accused of giving what to health professionals?	'gifts' and biased information
Drug marketers have hired who as paid consultants?	physicians
What publications can drug ads be commonly found?	journals and conferences
In what year CE did the Second Muslim Civil War end?	692
During what period did the Berber Revolt occur?	740–743 CE
What branch took over Umayyad leadership during the Second Civil War?	Marwanid
In what year was Ali killed?	661
Who killed Ali?	Kharijite partisan
Who made peace with Muawiyah I?	Hasan ibn Ali
Where was the capital of the Umayyad dynasty?	Damascus
What form of tax were Christians required to pay?	jizya
Who was the mother of Yazid?	Maysum
What was Maysum's religion?	Christian
How many major Islamic caliphates existed after Muhammad's death?	four
Who was the third caliph?	Uthman ibn Affan
Who founded the Umayyad regime?	Muawiya ibn Abi Sufyan
How many million square miles was the Umayyad caliphate at its largest size?	5.79
When did Muawiyah become caliph?	661
When did the caliphate of Uthman Ibn Affan end?	656
Who was the son of Al-Hakam ibn Abi al-'As?	Marwan ibn al-Hakam
What opposition movement was based in Arabia and Basra?	Kharijites
Who sent an army in 683 to stop the opposition movements?	Yazid
In what battle was the Medinese opposition movement defeated?	Battle of al-Harrah
Where is the Kaaba located?	Mecca
What is another term for the Umayyads?	Banu Abd-Shams
Traditionally, who did the Umayyads and Muhammad both descend from?	Abd Manaf ibn Qusai
From what city did the Umayyads originate?	Mecca
What son of Abd-Shams was the ancestor of the Umayyads?	Umayya
Where did Muawiyah fight Ali?	Battle of Siffin
Who was appointed arbitrator by Ali?	Abu Musa Ashaari
In what battle did Ali fight the Kharjites?	Battle of Nahrawan
What did the term Kharjites mean?	those who leave
Who was the second caliph?	Umar
Who ruled Syria before it was conquered by the followers of Muhammad?	Byzantine Empire
Who controlled Iraq before the Arabs?	Persian Sassanid Empire
How many top leaders of the Umayyads were killed in the Battle of Badr?	three
Who was the son of Abu Sufyan?	Muawiyah I
Who did the Umayyads fight in the Battle of Badr?	Hashimites
What do historians see as the first military defeat of Islam?	Battle of Uhud
Who was the spouse of Abu Sufyan?	Hind
What tax did non-Muslims pay in the Umayyad period?	jizyah
What was another term for Muslims who were not Arab?	mawali
Along with Christians and Jews, what was a major non-Muslim religious group under the Umayyads?	Zoroastrian
When did Uthman die?	656
What tribe did Ali belong to?	Quraysh
What does Fitna mean?	civil war
Along with being his cousin, what relationship did Ali have to Muhammad?	son-in-law
Where was the capital before Ali changed it?	Medina
What group murdered Uthman ibn al-Affan?	Egyptians
Who was Marwan I related to?	Muawiyah I
Who adopted Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr?	Ali ibn Abi Talib
Who was the great grandson of Muhammad ibn Ali Bakr?	Ja'far al-Sadiq
Where did Ibn al-Zubayr flee to in 680?	Mecca
Who did Al-Husayn send to Kufa?	Muslim bin Agail
What did Ubayd-Allah bin Ziyad rule?	Basrah
Who did Ubayd-Allah bin Ziyad murder?	Muslim bin Agail
When did Muhammad bin Wasim sail to Pakistan?	712
Along with the Punjab, what did Muhammad bin Wasim conquer?	Sindh
At what battle did the Hindus of India defeat the Umayyads?	Rajasthan
Who was a notable king in this period from the Pratihara dynasty?	Nagabhata
To what dynasty did Vikramaditya II belong?	Pratihara
Where was the Dome of the Rock built?	Jerusalem
In what year was the Dome of the Rock finished?	692
During whose reign was the Dome of the Rock constructed?	Abd al-Malik
Who was the son of Sarjun?	John of Damascus
Along with Rhodes, what Byzantine possession did Muawiyah occupy?	Crete
Who group of Christians rose up against Muawiyah?	Mardaites
What did Muawiyah found in North Africa?	Kairouan
Who was the son of Yazid?	Muawiya II
When did Muawiya II's reign begin?	683
In what year did the battle of Marj Rahit occur?	684
Who had the support of the Confederation of Qays?	Ibn al-Zubayr
From whom was Marwan descended?	Umayya via Wa'il ibn Umayyah
Who was the father of Abd al-Malik?	Marwan
When did Abd al-Malik's rule begin?	685
Where was Al-Mukhtar based?	Kufa
Who was the father of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah?	Ali
In what year did Ibn al-Zubayr die?	692
Who appointed the governors in the Umayyad empire?	khalifah
Where was the government of the Umayyads based?	Damascus
Along with army leaders, police and civil administration, what did the governor control in his province?	religious officials
What was the main city of Tokharistan?	Balkh
What was the central part of Transoxiana called?	Samarkand
In what year did the Day of Thirst occur?	724
Who was the leader of the revolt of 734?	al-Harith ibn Surayj
What notable battle occurred in 731?	Battle of the Defile
What group were the Hashimiyya a sect of?	Kaysanites Shia
Who led the Hashimiyya movement?	Abbasid family
Who was named successor by Abu Hashim?	Muhammad ibn Ali
Of what clan were the Abbasids members of?	Hashim
What year saw the death of Abu Hashim?	717
When did the Umayyads begin to occupy Iberia?	711
What was the final year that the Umayyads held Narbonne?	759
What was Marwan II's name before he became caliph?	Marwan ibn Muhammad
Who defeated the Arabs at the Battle of Tours?	Franks
In what year did the Berber Revolt begin?	739
Who was the father of Hisham?	Abd al-Malik
In what part of Syria was Resafa located?	northern
When did Hisham's reign start?	724
Where did Hisham base his court?	Resafa
What notable defeat was suffered by the Arabs under Hisham?	Battle of Akroinon
What was the name of Muawiyah's wife?	Maysum
What tribe did Muawiyah's wife belong to?	Kalb
Where was the Kalb tribe based?	Syria
What was the religion of Muawiyah's wife's tribe?	Christian
What was the ethnicity of the Kalb tribe?	Arab
What Umayyad ruler is regarded as especially just and pious by Sunni scholars?	Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz
For whom did Umar end the jizya?	converts to Islam
In what year did Umar ibn Ad Al-Aziz die?	720
What was Umar ibn Ad al-Aziz's cause of death?	poisoned
What group did Umar ibn Ad Al-Aziz grant liberties to?	Mawali
Who became leader of the Khurasan Hashimiyya in approximately 746?	Abu Muslim
What symbol did Abu Muslim use in his revolt against the Umayyads?	black flag
Where did Marwan die?	Egypt
Who was the Umayyad governor of Khurasan who was defeated by Abu Muslim?	Nasr ibn Sayyar
When did the Hashimiyya conquer Kufa?	749
In the later Abbasid era, what branch of Islam did Iran adhere to?	Sunni
What notable work of Islamic history was written in Iran during the later Abbasid period?	Al-Tabri
What group was notably disliked in Iran after the Persian Empire fell?	Arab
What is the meaning of the term Kurdus in English?	cohort
What caliph reigned from 740 to 750?	Marwan II
What did the Umayyads call the mangonel?	manjaniq
What style of dress did Arab troops wear under Marwan II?	Greek
Along with artillery and infantry, what was the third division of Umayyad troops under Marwan II?	cavalry
Who first brought a postal service into Umayyad lands?	Mu'awiyah
Along what highway did Umar bin Abdul-Aziz build caravanserais?	Khurasan
In dirhams, what was the yearly cost of the Iraqi postal service when Yusuf bin Umar was governor?	4,000,000
Along with horses and camels, what animals were used by the postal service?	donkeys
In kilometers, how far apart was each stage of the Umayyad highways?	19
What nation lost the Battle of Yarmouk?	Byzantine
Who was the Byzantine leader at the Battle of Yarmouk?	Heraclius
Along with Syria, where did the Muslims extend their control after the Battle of Yarmouk?	Jerusalem
Who was the father of Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan?	Abu Sufyan ibn Harb
Along with Muawiyah, Abu Sufyan ibn Harb and Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan, what notable Muslim participated in the Battle of Yarmouk?	Hind bint Utbah
What were non-Muslim groups under the Umayyads called?	dhimmis
Along with Berbers, Zoroastrians and Christians, what notable non-Muslim group existed in the Umayyad Caliphate?	Jews
Along with Jews, what non-Muslim religion produced notable theological works under the Umayyads?	Christians
What is another name for people who recently converted to Islam?	mawali
Who argued that the Umayyads regarded Islam as a particularly aristocratic faith?	G.R. Hawting
What sorts of families did the Umayyads show favor to?	old Arab
What Christian saint was also an Umayyad administrator?	John of Damascus
What tax collectors did the Umayyads often leave in place after they conquered regions?	Roman
In addition to criticism received for employing non-Muslims, for what notable reason did some Muslims criticize the Umayyads?	not reducing the taxes of the people who converted to Islam
What Arabic term did the Umayyad caliphs use to refer to themselves?	khalifat Allah
Where was the Abbasid court based?	Baghdad
What is the Arabic term for kingship?	mulk
What was the tradition Arabic title used by caliphs?	khalifat rasul Allah
What does khalifat Allah translate to in English?	deputy of God
What is another term for asphalt?	bitumen
Besides occurrences in Canada, where in the US is asphalt found?	Utah
How much of the planet's asphalt is located in Canada?	most
What is the area amount of the Canadian asphalt deposits?	142,000 square kilometres
Where does most of Canada's asphalt end up these days?	oil refineries
What group initially made use of asphalt?	indigenous peoples
For what purpose did American Indians use asphalt?	adhesive
What sort of deposits does asphalt overlay?	petroleum
What would early users of asphalt want to achieve by putting it on baskets?	watertight
On what type of boat was asphalt used to seal planks?	canoes
What is used asphalt turned back into?	new pavement mixtures
How much of yearly acquired asphalt is reclaimed?	99%
What percentage of new roadways are surfaced with asphalt?	95%
During what action is asphalt often reclaimed?	maintenance
For what reason is asphalt removed from a road?	worn or damaged
How many asphalt upgraders operate in Alberta?	five
What synthetic product is produced by upgraders?	crude oil
Besides crude oil, what does the Suncor Energy plant produce?	diesel fuel
Where is a sixth upgrader being built in Alberta?	Redwater, Alberta
How much of the production of the Redwater plant will into diesel fuel?	half
About what temperature is asphalt shipped?	150 °C
To promote what characteristic is diesel oil added to asphalt for shipping?	liquidity
What is the liquefied mixture called?	bitumen feedstock
What truck feature is occasionally used to keep asphalt warm?	engine exhaust
Due to what concerns is diesel fuel no longer used as a release agent for transporting asphalt?	environmental
What ancient group used bitumen extraction?	Romans
When were the first published reports of bitumen extraction in Albania?	1868
What government had exploitation rights for bitumen extraction?	Ottoman
When were the Ottoman rights given to the Simsa company?	1912
When was management of Albanian bitumen acquired by the French?	2001
What is the last origination of the word asphalt?	late Middle English
From what language does asphalt initially come?	Greek
What are the meanings of the Greek word for asphalt?	asphalt/bitumen/pitch
What is the French term for natural asphalt?	asphalte
To construct what feature was asphalt brought to Babylon?	wall
How are the words bitumen and asphalt frequently used?	interchangeably
Where is bitumen the usual term for refined residue from crude oils?	United States
What group likes the term bitumen instead of asphalt?	Geologists
What is a naming term for asphalt?	tar
What is asphalt called outside of the US?	bitumen
From where does most asphalt come?	petroleum
What are the sources of natural deposits of asphalt?	once-living things
How much heat is required for the natural production of asphalt?	above 50 °C
Besides heat, what other requirement is needed to form asphalt?	pressure
What other product of heat and pressure does the formation of asphalt and petroleum  produce?	kerogen
What is the name of the world's greatest deposit of bitumen?	Athabasca oil sands
Where are the Athabasca oil sands located?	Northern Alberta
What formative period  produced bitumen?	early Cretaceous
How old are the Athabasca deposits?	110 million years
What percentage of recovery of bitumen is by oil wells?	80%
In what early technology was bitumen used?	photographic
What photographer used bitumen to make the earliest extant nature picture?	Joseph Nicéphore Niépce
What feature of bitumen use in photography made it impractical?	hours of exposure
During what period was bitumen used in printing processes?	1850s to the 1920s
Exposure to what natural element was necessary for early photographic plates?	light
When did Richard Tappin Claridge patent asphalt for use in pavement?	25 November 1837
When was the first British patent for the use of bitumen?	1834
Where had Claridge previously seen asphalt used as pavement?	France and Belgium
What friend of Claridge's was helpful in introducing asphalt for use in pavements?	Samuel Ryland Phipson
What type of pavement techniques had already been tried by a competitor of Claridge?	mastic
Since what date has asphalt been used for road paving in the US?	1870
In front of what NJ building was the street paved with asphalt in 1870?	City Hall
What natural substance was used in early road pavings?	bituminous rock
From what Virginia  mines was asphalt obtained for early street pavings?	Ritchie Mines
For what purpose was asphalt used in swimming pools and baths?	waterproofing
In what year was asphalt used for uses aside from road paving?	1838
In what places were asphalt used as waterproofing?	pools and baths
For what reason was asphalt used in the flooring of buildings?	damp proofing
When was Claridge's asphalt the most often used?	1840s and 50s
Many of what were granted in France, but denied in Britain?	patents
Who experimented with bitumen extraction techniques to make shipping easier?	Sidney Ells
What researcher patented a hot water oil process to separate bitumen?	Dr. Karl A. Clark
When did Ells begin using bitumen as a paving in Alberta?	1915
Who constructed the Bitumont oil separation plant?	Robert C. Fitzsimmons
For what was most of the the Bitumont plant's output was used for waterproofing?	roofs
What property of bitumen makes it difficult to move through pipelines?	extremely viscous
What industry is capable of refining bitumen directly into gasoline without preprocessing?	modern oil refineries
Why do refineries like to buy bitumen instead of synthetic oil?	cost is lower
How much Canadian bitumen was exported to the US by 2015?	65%
What does mixing bitumen with water create?	emulsion
What percentage of bitumen is found in bitumen/water emulsions?	70%
What are the two types of bitumen emulsions?	cationic and anionic
What are some bitumen emulsions blended with to make a low-cost product?	recycled
What kind of asphalt pavements an cold-mix asphalt resemble?	hot-mixed
Where is naturally occurring bitumen in rock being developed as a feed stock for petroleum production?	Alberta, Canada
How much area does Canada's natural bitumen cover?	140,000 square kilometres
Where does Canada rank in world's oil supplies?	second-largest
What is Canada's only surface bitumen mine?	Athabasca oil sands
What is the amount of bitumen that can be extracted in Alberta?	310 billion barrels
Besides fuels and paving, what accounts for most of the other use of bitumen?	Roofing shingles
What lacquer is bitumen used to make for iron and steel production?	Japan black
Why is Japan black used for outdoor paint?	weather resistance
Besides weather resistance, why else is Japan black used in paints?	permanence
What product is bitumen used in manufacturing as a sealant?	alkaline batteries
What language originated the word bitumen?	Sanskrit
What does the Sanskrit word translate as?	pitch creating
To what English word does the Latin translate?	pitch
 Through what language did bitumen pass to reach English?	French
To what word does the Anglo Saxon translate?	mastix
To what similar substance can asphalt be confused?	coal tar
For what was coal tar used in road paving?	binder
What is the common word is used to describe the combination of tar and macadam?	tarmac
What use has pushed out the need to produce roads with coal tar?	natural gas
Instead of tar, what does the La Brea Tars Pits contain?	bitumen
Who described the use of bitumen and pitch to tar ships?	Pierre Belon
When did Belon make his shipbuilding observations?	1553
In what year did a French magazine describe the use of asphalt?	1838
After what event in France did  asphalt begin to be used for pavements and assorted other uses?	revolution of 1830
Where in France in 1835 was asphalt used to lay pavement?	Place de la Concorde
In what year did Claridge acquire patents for the use of asphalt?	1838
From what French mine did Claridge offer asphalt?	Pyrimont Seysell
What did Claridge's formation of a company with distinguished backers help inspire?	British asphalt industry
In what famous place did Claridge first begin to lay and test the use of asphalt pavement?	Whitehall
By 1838 how many companies beside Claridge's were offering asphalt?	two
For what  did Canadian natives use asphalt as a waterproofing material?	canoes
Who was the first European trader to see asphalt?	Henry Kelsey
 For what trading company did Kelsey work?	Hudson’s Bay Company
Who was the first European to see the Athabascan oil sands?	Alexander MacKenzie
What country has the largest deposits of bitumen?	Canada
How much additional binder does rolled asphalt concrete have?	5%
How is asphalt used in the construction industry?	waterproofing
What is the percentage of binder in mastic asphalt?	7–10%
Prior to spreading, how hot is mastic asphalt heated?	210 °C
What is the usual thickness of the mastic spread on roofs?	20 millimeters
What is done to crude bitumen to promote its movement through pipelines?	diluted
What is the natural gas condensate used to dilute bitumen?	dilbit
What is the synthetic crude additive to bitumen called?	synbit
What is the usually sold standard blend of bitumen and oils named?	Western Canadian Select
In what uniform use was Western Canadian Select meant to excel?	refining
To what is the organic matter in asphalt similar?	meteorites
What did the Alberta bitumen mines begin as?	living material
What kind of living materials formed the basis of bitumen?	plants and animals
What feature originally covered Alberta?	ocean
What temperatures did the organic deposits need to form bitumen over the eons?	50 to 150 °C
What component is added to bitumen to improve it?	Selenizza
To what other paving material is Selenizza added?	mastic asphalts
What purpose does Selenizza have in the drilling industry?	fluid additives
In what form is Selenizza offered?	granular
How is Selenizza shipped?	bags
To what type of aggregate did asphalt used to refer?	mixture
What is the mixture of bitumen and minerals called?	tarmac
When mixed wit clay, what is bitumen called?	asphaltum
With what word in America, is bitumen used interchangeably?	'asphalt
What is the geological term for asphalt?	Bitumen
What pigment did 19th century artists use that was deemed unfavorably?	Bitumen
What did bitumen when used as a paint not do correctly?	solidifies
What did even limited use of bitumen do to damage paintings?	deterioration
What artist's work i considered to be an example of the damaging effects of bitumen?	Théodore Géricault's
What major problem did bitumen as a pigment show itself to be?	unstable
Which of Claridge's two tar macadams was the more successful?	Clarmac
When did Claridge's company liquidate?	1915
What world event caused the end of Claridge's company?	First World War
What was the subsidiary company that lead Claridge into ruin?	Clarmac Roads Ltd
What kind of money did Claridge  invest in attempting  to save his companies?	substantial amount
What is the biggest use of asphalt?	road surfaces
How much is the percentage of use of bitumen for roads is there in the US?	85%
How much bitumen is in usual concrete mixtures?	5%
What percentage of concrete mixes is aggregates?	95%
How many concrete plants are in the US?	4,000
What is synthetic crude oil usually called?	syncrude
Where is the mined bitumen taken for refining?	upgrading facility
Who invented the process for removing bitumen from sands?	Dr. Karl Clark
Un what decade did Clark develop the hot water removal process?	1920s
How many barrels of crude were upgraders making per day by 2015?	1 million barrels
How many tons of bitumen ere produced in 1984?	40,000,000
What boiling point is considered to be the for asphalt?	500 °C
What method is used to divide asphalt from other materials?	Vacuum distillation
What is the process used to harden the asphalt?	blowing
In processing asphalt, what is the unit used to separate it?	de-asphalting
To what location is Selenizza bitumen native?	Selenice, in Albania
What is it about the mine that is unusual?	still in use
In what way is Selenizza bitumen geologically different than bitumen found in sands?	rock asphalt
What is the variance in bitumen content rock asphalt?	83% to 92%
How is the rock asphalt mainly found?	veins
By what means can humans be exposed to bitumen?	fumes or skin
What is the nationally set limit for exposure of asphalt in a 15 minute period?	5 mg/m3
How must asphalt be treated to be workable?	heated or diluted
At what temperatures is heated asphalt seen to be a greater health risk?	greater than 199 °C
What feature in the treatment of asphalt in the workplace causes the most potential danger?	temperature
Who did Victoria marry?	Prince Albert
What is her nickname that she was given because her children married into royal families across the continent?	the grandmother of Europe
In the later half of her reign, what happened to her popularity?	her popularity recovered
What year did Prince Albert die?	1861
How many children did she have?	nine
How many children did Queen Victoria and Prince Albert have?	nine
What was the year of Alberts death?	1861
Queen Victorias Golden and Diamond jubilees were a time of public what?	celebration
What was the name the first cousing that Victoria married?	Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
What was the nickname given to Queen Victoria because all of her children married into noble families?	first cousin
What was the name of the first cousin that Queen Victoria was married to?	Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
Whatyear did Victoria marry Prince Albert?	1840
How many children did Victoria and Albert have?	nine
What year did Prince Albert die?	1861
Due to Victorias mourning over Alberts death, what political party gained strength?	republicanism
When did Queen Victoria get married?	1840
What was the name of Victoria's husband?	Prince Albert
What was Queen Victoria's nickname?	the grandmother of Europe
When did republicanism gain strength during Queen Victoria's reign?	After Albert's death in 1861
How many children did Queen Victoria and Prince Albert have?	nine
Who did Victoria marry?	Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
When were Victoria and Prince Albert married?	1840
How many children did Victoria and Prince Albert have?	nine
What was Victoria's unofficial title?	the grandmother of Europe
When did Prince Albert die?	1861
Who was extremely protective over Victoria?	mother
What system of rules kept her isolated from other children?	Kensington System
Who was the Dutchess' rumored lover?	Sir John Conroy
What was Victoria's dog's name?	Dash
During her free time, what did she play with?	dolls
Who did Victoria share a bedroom with when she was a child?	her mother
What languages did Victoria take lessons in?	French, German, Italian, and Latin
What was the only language Victoria spoke at home?	English
Who was Victoria's mothers lover?	Sir John Conroy
What is the formal name given to the system of rules Victoria was raised under?	Kensington System
What system did Victorias mother raise her under?	Kensington System
Who was Victorias mothers comptroller?	Sir John Conroy
Who was rumored to be Victorias mothers lover?	Sir John Conroy
Who was the Duchess's suspected lover?	Sir John Conroy
What was the name of Victoria's childhood dog?	Dash
What was the Kensington System?	an elaborate set of rules and protocols devised by the Duchess
How did Victoria describe her childhood?	rather melancholy
What languages did Victoria study?	French, German, Italian, and Latin
What was the name of Victoria's King Charles Spaniel?	Dash
What are some of the languages that Victoria studied?	French, German, Italian, and Latin
What system was in place to raise and educate Victoria; while also rendering her weak and dependent?	Kensington System
Who was the Duchess' comptroller and cohort?	Sir John Conroy
Who was included in the list of people that the Duchess and Sir John Conroy didn't want the Princess Victoria associating with?	most of her father's family
Who was Victoria's eighth child?	Leopold
What anaesthetic helped her give birth to her eighth child?	chloroform
What did Victoria suffer from after he pregnancies?	post-natal depression
Why did medical professionals advise against using an anaesthetic during childbirth?	thought it dangerous
What did Albert complain about Victoria?	her "continuance of hysterics" over a "miserable trifle"
What was the name of Victoria's eighth child?	Leopold
Hysteria and loss of control after the birts of many of her children were likely caused by what?	post-natal depression
What was the name of the new anesthetic given to Victoria for the birth of Leopold?	chloroform
What year did Victoria give birth to her final child?	1857
What was the name of Victoria's final child?	Beatrice
When did Victoria give birth to her eigth child?	1853
What was the name of Victorias eighth child?	Leopold
What was the name of the new anesthetic used during leopolds birth?	chloroform.
What year was victorias final child born?	1857
What was the name of Victorias final child?	Beatrice
Who was Victoria's eighth child?	Leopold
When was Victoria's final child, Beatrice, born?	1857
What was the new anastethetic Victoria used in her last two childbirths?	chloroform
Why did members of the clergy oppose the use of chloroform?	considered it against biblical teaching
What did Albert complain about in letters to Victoria after the birth of her children?	loss of self-control
What was the name of Victoria's eigth child?	Leopold
What was a new anaesthetic being used for childbirth in Victoria's time?	chloroform
What was the name of Victoria's ninth child?	Beatrice
Why did members of the clergy oppose the use of chloroform for childbirth?	considered it against biblical teaching
After nine pregnancies, what could Victoria have been suffering from that would make her sad and depressed?	post-natal depression
During which year did Victoria's mother die?	1861
How did Victoria realize that her mother deeply loved her?	Through reading her mother's papers
What was Albert ill with?	chronic stomach trouble
What did Victoria blame Albert's death on?	Prince of Wales's philandering
What was Prince of Wales attending to in Dublin?	army manoeuvres
What year did Victoria's mother die?	1861
What year did Albert die?	1861
Who did Victoria blame for her poor relationship with her mother?	Conroy and Lehzen
Who took on most of Victoria's duties while she grieved her mothers death?	Albert
What illness was Albert suffering from while he helped Victoria through her grief?	chronic stomach trouble
When did Victoria's mother die?	March 1861
What disease was Albert diagnosed with?	typhoid fever
When did Albert die of his illness?	14 December 1861
What was Victoria's nickname following Alberts death?	widow of Windsor
Who was the Prince of Wales suspected to be having an affair with?	an actress in Ireland
When did the Duchess die?	1861
Who did Victoria blame for the problems between herself and the Duchess?	Conroy and Lehzen
What caused Prince Albert's death?	typhoid fever
Who did Victoria blame for Prince Albert's death?	their son, the Prince of Wales
What gossip did Prince Albert hear about their son?	had slept with an actress in Ireland
Who shot at the queen?	Roderick Maclean
When was the shooting?	2 March 1882
What was Maclean's occupation?	poet
Which college were to two boys attending?	Eton College
With what did the college boy's hit the shooter with?	umbrellas
Who shot Queen Victoria?	Roderick Maclean
What year was the Queen shot?	1882
Who stopped Maclean after he shot the Queen?	Two schoolboys from Eton College
What did the court determine was the fate for Maclean after shooting the Queen?	not guilty by reason of insanity
How did the schoolboys stop Maclean?	struck him with their umbrellas
What disgruntled poet shot at Victoria's carriage on March 2, 1882?	Roderick Maclean
What school did the boys who defended the Queen with umbrellas attend?	Eton College
What was the verdict in Roderick Maclean's trial?	he was found not guilty by reason of insanity
What provoked the attack on Queen Victoria as she left Windsor?	offended by Victoria's refusal to accept one of his poems
What was Victoria's reaction to the verdict?	outraged
Who attempted to assassinate the Queen?	Roderick Maclean
What was the verdict in Maclean's trial?	not guilty by reason of insanity
What position did Victoria take on being shot at?	"worth being shot at—to see how much one is loved"
When did Maclean attempt to shoot Victoria?	2 March 1882
Why did Maclean shoot at Victoria?	refusal to accept one of his poems
What year did Gladstone return to power?	1892
How old was Gladstone in 1892?	82
What year did Gladstone retire?	1894
What position did Victoria appoint Lord Rosebery?	prime minister
What year did Gadstone return to power?	1892
Who replaced Lord Rosebery the year following his appointment?	Lord Salisbury
How old was Gladstone when he returned to power?	82 years old
What year did Gladstone retire?	1894
Who did Victoria appoint to replace Gladstone?	Lord Rosebery
How old was Gladstone after the general election in 1892?	82 years old
What radical MP did Victoria object to being appointed to the cabinet by Gladstone?	Henry Labouchere
Who did Victoria appoint to Prime Minister after Gladstone retired in 1894?	Lord Rosebery
Who replaced Lord Rosenbery after only a year of government?	Lord Salisbury
How long did Lord Salisbury remain as Prime Minister?	for the remainder of Victoria's reign
Who was returned to power in 1892?	Gladstone
Who did Victoria appoint as Gladstone's succesor?	Lord Rosebery
How did Lord Roseberry fare as Prime Minister?	His government was weak
Who replaced Lord Roseberry as Prime Minister?	Lord Salisbury
How long was Lord Sailsbury Prime Minister?	the remainder of Victoria's reign
Which two people helped lift Victoria's body into the coffin?	Edward VII, the Kaiser and Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught
What item from her wedding was Victoria dressed in inside her coffin?	wedding veil
What color was her dress?	white
Who's dressing gown was placed by her side?	Albert's
A plaster cast of what part of Alberts body was placed in the coffin with the Queen?	his hand
Where was the funeral of Queen Victoria held?	St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle
What clothing was Queen Victoria laid to rest in?	a white dress and her wedding veil
What year did Queen Victoria die?	1897
What was placed in the Queens left hand when she was placed in her coffin?	a lock of John Brown's hair
What did Victoria wear upon her death in her coffin?	She was dressed in a white dress and her wedding veil
Whose lock of hair was concealed in her left hand by flowers?	John Brown
When did John Brown give Victoria his mother's wedding ring?	1883
When was Queen Victoria's funeral held?	Saturday, 2 February
Where was Queen Victoria laid to rest after her death?	Frogmore Mausoleum at Windsor Great Park
Where was Victoria laid to rest?	Frogmore Mausoleum at Windsor Great Park
When was Queen Victoria's funeral held?	2 February
What was hidden in Queen Victoria's hand by her father's family?	a lock of John Brown's hair, along with a picture of him
How was Victoria dressed for burial?	a white dress and her wedding veil
Who placed Victoria into her coffin?	Edward VII, the Kaiser and Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught
Who was considered Victoria's best and kindest advisor?	uncle Leopold
Who did Victoria describe as sensible, kind, and amiable?	Albert
Who introduced Albert to Victoria?	uncle Leopold
What Uncle was Victoria's favorite adviser?	Leopold
How old was Victoria when she met Albert?	17
Who introduced Victoria and Albert?	her uncle Leopold
What qualities did Victoria believe Albert posessed when she met him?	every quality that could be desired to render me perfectly happy
Whom did Queen Victoria consider her "best and kindest adviser"?	uncle Leopold
Who was Victoria not ready to marry at age 17?	Albert
What was Victoria's opinion of Albert's appearance?	the most pleasing and delightful exterior
Who did Victoria credit for her relationship to Albert?	her uncle Leopold
What did Victoria think of Albert at 17 years of age?	He possesses every quality that could be desired to render me perfectly happy
What were Albert's best qualities?	sensible, so kind, and so good, and so amiable
How did Victoria find Albert's looks?	most pleasing and delightful exterior and appearance
How old was Victoria when she was introduced to Albert?	17
What did the Queen commission Sir Robert Peel to do?	to form a new ministry
In what year did Melbourne resign?	1839
Which party was Sir Robert Peel a part of?	Tory
What is the name of crisis where the wives of the Tories were replacing the wives of the Whigs?	bedchamber crisis
What year did Melbourne resign?	1839
Who voted against the bill to end the constitution of Jamaica?	Radicals and Tories
Who did the Queen commission to form a new ministry?	Sir Robert Peel
Who returned to office after Peel resigned?	Melbourne
The removal of the Queens bedchamber ladies became known as what?	the bedchamber crisis
Who resigned their position in 1839?	Melbourne
Why did the Radicals and Tories oppose the bill about the constitution of Jamaica?	The bill removed political power from plantation owners who were resisting measures associated with the abolition of slavery.
What Tory did Victoria commision after Melbourne resigned his postion?	Sir Robert Peel
After Queen Victoria refuse to replace her ladies with wives of Tories, what did Sir Robert Peel do?	resigned his commission
Who did Victoria reappoint to the position after the Bedchamber Crisis?	Melbourne
What did the Radicals and Tories do that made Melbourne resign?	voted against a bill to suspend the constitution of Jamaica
Which group was resisting the abolisment of slavery and were subsequently removed from power when the bill was voted down?	plantation owners
Who did Robert Peel want to replace the ladies of the bedchamber with, instead of wives of Whigs?	wives of Tories
Why did Peel resign his comission?	Peel refused to govern under the restrictions imposed by the Queen
Who returned to office after Peel resigned?	Melbourne
Which two countries was Victoria trying to improve relations between?	France and Britain
How was the House of Orleans and the British Royal family related?	by marriage through the Coburgs
Who did Victoria stay with in Normandy?	King Louis Philippe I
What year did Victoria first visit Ireland?	1849
What year did Louis Philippe visit England?	1844
What two countries did Victoria take a large interest in improving relations between?	France and Britain
What year was Victorias first visit to Ireland?	1849
Queen Victoria set up meetings between The Britian royal family and what house to help improve relations between Britain and France?	House of Orleans
What was the name of the King of Normandy that Victoria and Albert stayed with in 1843 and 1845?	King Louis Philippe I
Who was the first French King to visit Queen Victoria?	Louis Philippe
Who was the first French king to visit Queen Victoria?	Louis Philippe
What happened to Louis Philippe after the revolution in France?	fled to exile in England
Where did Victoria and her family retreat to safety during a conflict in 1848?	Osborne House
What nation was visited for the first time by Victoria in 1849?	Ireland
What French family did Victoria try to foster relations with?	House of Orleans
What was one of Victoria's major concerns?	improvement of relations between France and Britain
When was Louis Phillipe deposed?	1848
Where did Victoria and her family go to for safety during the revolutionary scare of April 1848?	Osborne House, a private estate on the Isle of Wight
When was Osborne house purchased?	1845
Which groups were demonstrating and trying to bring about a revolution before, ultimately, failing?	Chartists and Irish nationalists
Where was Orsini from?	Britain
Who did Orsini try to assassinate?	Napoleon III
What happened in June 1859?	Victoria recalled Palmerston to office
What position did Derby hold?	prime minister
What was the date of an attempted assasination on Napoleon?	14 January 1858
What was the name of the person that attempted to assasinate Napoleon?	Orsini
What was the name of the French military port that opened on 5 August 1858?	port of Cherbourg
Where was the bomb that Orsini used to attempt to assasinate Napoleon made?	England
Who resigned due to the attempt on Napoleons life?	Palmerston
Who survived an assasination attempt by the Italian refugee Orsini in 1858?	Napoleon III
Who resigned their position following the scandal due to Orsini's bomb being made in England?	Palmerston
What new military port in France did Victoria and Albert visit after the crisis in 1858?	Cherbourg
Why did Victoria repremend Derby following her visit with Napolean III?	the poor state of the Royal Navy in comparison to the French one
Who did Victoria recall to office following her disappointment with Derby in June of 1859?	Palmerston
Who attempted to assassinate Napoleon?	an Italian refugee from Britain called Orsini
When did Orsinin attempt to assassinate Napoleon?	14 January 1858
How did Orsini try to assassinate Napoleon?	a bomb
When did Victoria ask Palmerston to resume his office?	June 1859
Where did Victoria visit that led her to reprimand Derby for the state of the Royal Navy?	French military port of Cherbourg
Who died in 1865?	Palmerston
Who resigned in 1868?	Derby
How long was Disraeli in office?	matter of months
Who was Disraeli's rival?	William Ewart Gladstone
What political view did Gladstone hold?	Liberal
What year did Palmerston die?	1865
Who let the ministry for a very short time after the death of Palmerston?	Russell
Who returned to power after Russels brief rule of the ministry?	Derby
Following Alberts death, what was the first year that Victoria attended the State opening of Parliment?	1866
Who replaced Derby after his resignation?	Benjamin Disraeli
What year did Pamerston die?	1865
What event did Victoria attend in 1866 for the first time following Albert's death?	State Opening of Parliament
What Act by Victoria granted the ability to vote to working men, but not women?	Reform Act 1867
Who replaced Derby when he resigned in 1868?	Benjamin Disraeli
What Liberal replaced Disraeli after only a few short months in office?	William Ewart Gladstone
When did Palmerston die?	1865
Who was ultimately returned to office after Palmerston's death?	Derby
When did Derby resign?	1868
Who was Derby's replacement?	Benjamin Disraeli
How long did Disralei last in office?	only lasted a matter of months
How many kings and princes were invited to the Golden Jubilee?	50
What year anniversary does the Golden Jubilee celebrate?	fiftieth anniversary
Who accused Karim of spying?	Her family and retainers
What was Munshi lying about?	his parentage
What year was Victoria's Golden Jubilee held?	1887
Who did Ponsonby report the Munshis lies about his parentage to?	Lord Elgin, Viceroy of India
What was the name of the waited that was promoted to Munshi?	Abdul Karim
Whio was Equerry Frederick Ponsonby's father?	Sir Henry
Who discovered that Victoria's new Munshi lied about his parentage?	Equerry Frederick Ponsonby
When was Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee?	1887
What was Abdul Karim teaching Queen Victoria after his promotion?	Hindustani
Who was Karim accused of spying for by Victoria's family?	Muslim Patriotic League
Who discovered that Karim had lied about his parentage to Victoria?	Equerry Frederick Ponsonby
What day did Queen Victoria celebrate her Golden Jubilee at a dinner with kings and queens from other nations?	20 June
When was Victoria's Golden Jubilee?	1887
What is the point of the Golden Jubilee?	the fiftieth anniversary of her accession
Who was promoted from waiter to Munshi?	Abdul Karim
Why did Victoria's family disapprove of Abdul Karim?	spying for the Muslim Patriotic League, and biasing the Queen against the Hindus
How long was Karim in the Queen's employment?	until he returned to India with a pension on her death
Who was the first reigning monarch from Britain to set foot in Spain?	Victoria
What year did Queen Victoria first set foot in Spain?	1889
What year did Victoria stop her annual visits to Spain due to the Boer war?	1900
Where did Victoria visit instead of Spain during the Boer war?	Ireland
What year did Victoria's second son Alfred die?	1900
Where did Victoria stay in Spain in 1889?	Biarritz
What war prevented Queen Victoria from taking her annual trip to France in 1900?	Boer War
What country did Victoria visit instead of France during the Boer War?	Ireland
Which of Queen Victoria's children died in July of that year?	her second son Alfred
Where did Victoria often go for holiday?	mainland Europe
In 1889, what was Victoria the first reining monarch from Britian to do?	set foot in Spain
Why did Victoria visit Ireland in 1861?	acknowledge the contribution of Irish regiments to the South African war
Why was Victoria advised not to visit France in April of 1900?	the Boer War
What tragedy did Victoria face in July of 1900?	her second son Alfred ("Affie") died
How tall was Queen Victoria?	no more than five feet tall
The extent of Victorias political influence became well known after the publishing of what?	her diary and letters
What year did Elizabeth Longford write a biography of Victoria?	1964
What year did Cecil Woodham Smith writ Victorias biography?	1972
How tall was Queen Victoria?	five feet
Who wrote the biography about Queen Victoria that is now considered to be out of date?	Lytton Strachey
What woman wrote a biography of Queen Victoria in 1964?	Elizabeth Longford
When did Celcil Woodham-Smith also write a well recieved biography about Victoria?	1972
What was Victoria like, physically?	stout, dowdy and no more than five feet tall
When did people really start to understand the political mind of Queen Victoria?	after the release of her diary and letters
Who were two good biographers of Queen Victoria?	Elizabeth Longford and Cecil Woodham-Smith
When were the best biographies of Queen Victoria written?	1964 and 1972
What kind of person was Victoria?	emotional, obstinate, honest, and straight-talking
In 1830, what part of England did Victoria travel to with Dutchess of Kent and Conroy?	the centre of England
What town did Victoria visit in the center of England on her trip with the Dutchess of kent and Conroy?	Malvern Hills
What years were journeys similar to the Queen trip to Melvern Hills made?	1832, 1833, 1834 and 1835
Willam was concerned that Victoria would was being portrayed as what because of her trips to central England?	his rival
Who was annoyed that Victoria was welcomed at each of her visits to central England?	William
Who was annoyed at how well recieved Victoria was on her tours of the countryside of England and Wales?	William
Where did Victoria become seriously ill during one of her trips?	Ramsgate
Who did Victoria dislike so much she banned him from her presence once she became Queen?	Conroy
What position did Conroy try and fail to get Victoria to appoint him to during her illness and later?	private secretary
Who took Victoria on a trip to Malvern Hills in 1830?	the Duchess of Kent and Conroy
Who was Victoria convinced to make her secretery when she was very ill?	Conroy
How did Victoria feel about all of the trips?	disliked
What annoyed the King about the way Victoria was received at her stops?	enthusiastically welcomed in each
Why did the King dislike Victoria taking the trips?	concerned that they portrayed Victoria as his rival
When she was made Queen, what did Victoria do about Conroy?	banned him from her presence
Who was in charge of the Governemnt at the time of Victorias ascession?	Lord Melbourne
What was the name of the Whig Prime minister at the time of Victorias ascession?	Lord Melbourne
When was Queen Victorias coronation held?	28 June 1838
Where was Victorias coronation held?	Westminster Abbey
How many visitors came to London for Victorias coronation?	Over 400,000
When did Victoria's coronation take place at Westminster Abbey?	28 June 1838
Who thought that Melbourne saw Victoria as if she was his daughter?	Charles Greville
How many people visited London for the Coronation of Queen Victoria?	400,000
What was Victoria's allowance upon becoming Queen?	£385,000 per year
What Whig was prime minister during Victoria's accession?	Lord Melbourne
Who was leading the government at the time of Victoria's accension?	Whig prime minister Lord Melbourne
What kind of influence was Melbourne to Victoria?	powerful
When was Victoria's coronation?	28 June 1838
What major accomplishment did Victoria achieve with her civil list allowance?	she paid off her father's debts
Where did Queen Victoria reside?	Buckingham Palace
What year was the potato blight in Ireland?	1845
How much money did Victoria donate to famine relief?	£2,000
How long did the Great Famine last?	four years
How many Irish people died during the Great Famine?	over a million
What was the label given to Queen Victoria during the Great Famine?	The Famine Queen
What crisis struck Ireland during 1845?	potato blight
How many people died during the Great Famine in Ireland?	over a million
What was Queen Victoria called in Ireland during the Great Famine?	The Famine Queen
What story was later proven false about Victoria during the Great Famine?	that she donated only £5 in aid to the Irish, and on the same day gave the same amount to Battersea Dogs Home
How much did Queen Victoria actually donate to support relief in Ireland, making her the top individual donor?	£2,000
What happened that decimated a large portion of Ireland?	potato blight
When did the potato blight begin?	1845
How many people did Ireland lose to the potato blight?	a million
What did the potato blight cause Victoria to be called?	The Famine Queen
How much did Victoria donate to Ireland to help with famine relief?	£2,000
When Victoria isolated herself from the public, what movement began to grow?	the republican movement
Where did Victoria isolate herself?	in her royal residences
What was the name of the private Estate in Scotland that Albert and Victoria purchased?	Balmoral Castle
What year did the Queen and Albert purchase Balmoral Castle?	1847
What year did a protester attach a note to the door at Buckingham Palace saying it was to be sold?	1864
What private estate did Victoria aquire with Albert in 1847?	Balmoral Castle
Where did a protector put a notice because of Queen Victoria's lack of public appearances in March of 1864?	Buckingham Palace
Where did Victoria visit after Leopold advised her to make more public appearances?	the gardens of the Royal Horticultural Society at Kensington
What movement gained popularity due to the lack of Victoria appearing in public?	republican movement
What was a major reason Victoria's monarchy was not as popular as some others?	self-imposed isolation from the public
What did Victoria's isolation give way to?	the growth of the republican movement
Who advised Vicotria to begin appaering in public?	Her uncle Leopold
Where did Victoria visit to become more in the public view?	Royal Horticultural Society at Kensington
What else did Victoria do to try to return her former public image?	take a drive through London in an open carriage
What year was the Indian Rebellion?	1857
What company was dissolved after the Indian Rebellion?	British East India Company
What company ruled much of India before the end of the Indian Rebellion?	British East India Company
Who did the Queen condemn in the Indian Rebellion?	both sides
What ruler was dissolved after the Indian Rebellion in 1857?	British East India Company
Who encouraged Victoria to issue an official statement on the conflict of the civil war in India?	Albert
What happened to the British possesions after the Rebellion of 1857?	were formally incorporated into the British Empire
What statement was replaced in her proclamation about the civil war?	a reference threatening the "undermining of native religions and customs"
Before 1857, who controlled most of India?	British East India Company
What caused the British East India Company to lose control of India?	the Indian Rebellion of 1857
What happened to the assets of the British East India Company after it was removed from power?	formally incorporated into the British Empire
How did the Queen view the Indian Rebellion?	relatively balanced view of the conflict, and condemned atrocities on both sides
What did Victoria believe that an official proclamation transferring control from the company to the monarchy would do?	"should breathe feelings of generosity, benevolence and religious toleration"
What year did Victoria fall down the stairs at Windsor?	1883
After her fall down the stairs, what health issue was Victoria plaged with thereafter?	rheumatism thereafter
Who died 10 days after Victorias fall down the stairs?	Brown
How was Victoria notified of her youngest son leopolds death?	by telegram
Who was Victorias private secretary during the years following her accident at Windsor?	Sir Henry Ponsonby
When was Queen Victoria get injured after taking a fall down some stairs?	17 March 1883
Who did Queen Victoria write a biography about that was never published?	John Brown
Where did Victoria's youngest son, Leopold die?	Cannes
Victoria initially opposed Beatrice's marriage to what man?	Prince Henry of Battenberg
Where did Beatrice meet and fall in love with Prince Henry?	at the wedding of Victoria's granddaughter Princess Victoria of Hesse
What caused Victoria's rheumatism?	she fell down some stairs at Windsor
Who died 10 days after Victoria's accident?	Brown
What did Victoria begin working on after Brown's death?	a eulogistic biography
Who was opposed to Victoria writing a biography of Brown?	Sir Henry Ponsonby
What happened in Victoria's life on the day after the one year anniversary of Brown's death?	her youngest son, Leopold, had died in Cannes
What blood clotting disease did Victorias youngest son have?	haemophilia B
How many of Victorias daughters were carriers of the blood clotting disease that Leopold had?	two
It was believed that Victorias true father was a hemophiliac and not who?	the Duke of Kent
What is the sex of carriers that always suffer the blood clotting disease haemophi;ia B?	male
How old was Victorias father at the time of her conception?	over 50
What disease did Victoria's youngest son have?	the blood-clotting disease haemophilia B
Which two of Victoria's daughters also were carriers for the blood clotting disorder?	Alice and Beatrice
Who was Queen Victoria's father rumored to be instead of the Duke of Kent?	a haemophiliac
What disease affected Leopold and was carried by two of Victoria's daughters?	haemophilia B
Which Royal haemophiliacs are said to have descended from Victoria?	Tsarevich Alexei of Russia, Alfonso, Prince of Asturias, and Infante Gonzalo of Spain
Which of Victoria's daughters were carriers of haemophilia?	Alice and Beatrice
What is a big factor on whether or not an offspring will spontaneously develop haemophilia?	older fathers
In how many births do spontaneous cases of haemophilia arise?	about a third of cases
Who was Queen Victorias father?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, the fourth son of King George III
What year did Victorias Father die?	1820
How old was Victoria when she inherited the throne?	18
What year did King George III die?	1820
What nationality was Queen Victorias mother?	German
What was the name of Victoria's father?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn
When did the Duke of Kent die?	1820
What was Victoria's mother's name?	Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
At what age did Victoria inherit the throne, upon the death of her father's three eldest brothers?	18
Who was Victoria's father?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, the fourth son of King George III
Who raised Victoria?	mother Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
When did Victoria inherit the throne of England?	aged 18
Why did Victoria inherit the throne?	her father's three elder brothers had all died, leaving no surviving legitimate children
What kind of government did England have at the time?	constitutional monarchy
What was Victorias place in line of succession to the throne when she was born?	fifth
What year did Victoria's father and grandfather die?	1820
What year did Victorias Uncle George IV die?	1830
What was th elength of time between the deaths of Victoria's father and grandfather?	within a week of each other
What year did the Duke of York die?	1827
What place was Victoria in the line of succession after her birth?	fifth
Whose infant daugheters both died, leaving him without an heir to the throne of England?	Duke of Clarence
When did George IV die?	1830
What was the Regency Act of 1830?	made special provision for the Duchess of Kent to act as regent in case William died while Victoria was still a minor.
Who distrusted the Duchesses capability to reign in Victoria's place until she became of age?	King William
Where did Victoria fall in the line of succession?	fifth
Who came in line for the throne before Victoria?	her father and his three older brothers
What happened when Victoria's Uncle George IV died?	became heiress presumptive to her next surviving uncle
Who was Victoria's last surviving uncle?	William IV
Who was to act as regent if George died while Victoria was still a minor?	Duchess of Kent
On what date did Victoria turn 18?	24 May 1837
On what date did William IV die?	20 June 1837
How old was William IV when he died?	71
What was the exact time that Victorias Uncle, the King, died?	12 minutes past 2
What is the name given to Victoria on official documents?	Alexandrina Victoria
When did Victoria turn 18?	24 May 1837
When did Victoria become Queen upon William IV's death?	20 June 1837
What name was Victoria referred to as on only the first day of her reign?	Alexandrina Victoria
How old was Victoria's Uncle, King Willaim on his death?	71
Who informed Victoria of her Uncle's passing and that she was now to become Queen of England?	the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Conyngham
What caused Victoria to become the Queen of the United Kingdom?	20 June 1837, William IV died
Who came to tell Victoria that she was to be Queen of the United Kingdom?	Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Conyngham
What name did the first official documents of Victoria's monarchy have her listed as?	Alexandrina Victoria
How old was William IV when he died?	71
Where did she receive the news that she was to be queen?	sitting-room
What was the marital status of Victoria when she became the queen?	unmarried
Whi did Victoria have to live with because she was unmarried?	her mother
Victoria and her mother had differences over what system?	Kensington System
Victoria and her mother had differences over her mothers reliances on who?	Conroy
Where was Victorias mother assigned to live?	a remote apartment in Buckingham Palace
What did Victoria and her mother disagree on?	the Kensington System
Whom did Victoria's mother continue to rely on, despite Victoria's displeasure?	Conroy
To whom did Queen Victoria lament that marriage was a shocking alternative to her mother's prescence?	Melbourne
Where did both Queen Victoria and her mother reside after she became Queen?	Buckingham Palace
Where did Victoria live at the beginning of her reign?	with her mother
Why did Victoria live with her mother at the beginning of her reign?	was required by social convention
What could have allowed Victoria freedom from living with her mother?	marriage
How did Victoria feel about having to be married in order to escape living with her mother?	a "schocking  [sic] alternative"
How did Victoria feel about the prospect of having to live with her mother, no matter how far away in the palace they put her?	close proximity promised "torment for many years"
What was the name of the man that tried to shoot Queen Victoria?	John Francis
Why did Francis fail to kill Queen Victoria?	the gun did not fire
On what date did John Francis try to shoot Queen Victoria?	29 May 1842
Where was Queen Victoria when Francis tried to shoot her?	riding in a carriage along The Mall, London
What happened to Francis after his attempt to shoot Victoria?	he escaped
Who made two unsuccessful attempts on Queen Victoria's life in 1842?	John Francis
What was John Francis's eventual sentence for the attempt on the Queens life?	transportation for life
Who shot at Queen Victoria on July 3, days after John Francis's sentence was commuted?	John William Bean
Who fired a shot at Queen Victoria's carriage in 1849?	William Hamilton
What person recieved a seven year transportation sentence for striking Victoria on the head with his cane?	Robert Pate
Who escaped Victoria's guards after attempting to fire a shot at her?	John Francis
What happened to John Francis after his second attempt to fire on the Queen?	death sentence was commuted to transportation for life
What did John William Bean try to fire at Queen Victoria?	paper and tobacco
What were the consequences of John William Bean's attempt to fire at the Queen?	18 months in jail
When did William Hamilton fire a powder charge at Victoria's carriage?	1849
What political party was Russells ministry?	Whig
What was president Bonapartes name changed to?	Emperor Napoleon III
What was the name of the foreign secretary that Victoria found offensive?	Lord Palmerston
To whom did Victoria complain about Palmerston?	Russell
What year was Palmerston removed from office?	1851
What position did Lord Palmerston hold?	Foreign Secretary
What scandal prompted Palmerstons removal in 1851?	he announced the British government's approval of President Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte's coup in France without consulting the Prime Minister
President Bonaparte was declared what in France?	Emperor Napoleon III
Who briefly replaced Russell as Prime Minister?	Lord Derby
What did Victoria express her displeasure at to Russell about Palmerton?	Palmerston sent official dispatches to foreign leaders without her knowledge
Who was the Foreign Secretary of Russell's ministry?	Lord Palmerston
To what party did Russell and Palmerston belong?	Whig
What replaced Russell's administration?	a short-lived minority government led by Lord Derby
What happened to President Bonaparte in 1852?	declared Emperor Napoleon III
Whom did Palmerston fail to gain approval from befoe announcing the support of the British government of Napoleon's coup?	Prime Minister
Who did Victorias eldest daughter marry?	Prince Frederick William of Prussia
Where did Victoria's oldest daughter get married?	London
How old was Princess Victoria when she agreed to marry the Prince?	14
How old was Princess Victoria when she was married?	17
Where did princess Victoria move to after she was married?	Germany
Who did Princess Victoria marry at the age of 17?	Prince Frederick William of Prussia
How old was Princess Victoria when she became engaged to Prince Frederick?	14
Where did Princess Victoria and her husband leave for after their marriage?	Germany
What was the name of Queen Victoria's first grandchild?	Wilhelm
What position did Wilhelm later hold in Germany?	last German Kaiser
When was Victoria's oldest daughter married?	Eleven days after Orsini's assassination attempt
How old was Victoria's oldest daughter when she was amrried?	17
What did Queen Victoria hope for the marriage between her daughter and Prince Frederick William?	liberalising influence in the enlarging Prussian state
Who was the Queen's first grandchild?	Wilhelm
What future awaited the first grandson of Queen Victoria?	the last German Kaiser
Who was Queen Victorias father?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn
Who was the only grandchild of George iii until 1817?	Princess Charlotte of Wales
Who was the reigning King of the United Kingdom until 1817?	George III
What year did Princess Charlotte of Wales die?	1817
Who did the Duke of kent marry in 1818?	Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Who was Queen Victorias father?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn
Who was the only legitimate grandchild of George III?	Princess Charlotte of Wales
Who did Prince Edward marry in 1818 in the hopes of producing a child?	Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Who was Princess Victoria widowed from?	Prince of Leiningen
What time was Queen Victoria born on May 24, 1819?	4.15 a.m
Who was Princess Charlotte married to until her death?	Leopold
Who are Queen Victoria's mother and father?	The Duke and Duchess of Kent
When was Queen Victoria born?	4.15 a.m. on 24 May 1819
What was Queen Victoria's father's official title?	Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, the fourth son of the reigning King of the United Kingdom, George III
What was Queen Victoria's mother's official title?	Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld
Who were Princess Victoria's children from her previous marriage?	Carl (1804–1856) and Feodora (1807–1872)
The Dutchesses brother Leopold was the King of what country?	the Belgians
What year did Leopold become King of the Belgians?	1831
Who was the nephew of leopold?	Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
Who was Alberts father?	Ernest I, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
How did Victoria describe the physical appearance of Alexander?	very plain
Who disapproved of the proposed marriage between Victoria and Albert?	William IV
Who was the man William IV wanted Victoria to wed instead?	Prince Alexander of the Netherlands
Prince Alexander was the second son of whom?	Prince of Orange
What did Victoria think of her suiter, the Prince Alexander of Orange?	very plain
How did Victoria feel about Albert?	enjoyed Albert's company from the beginning
Who wanted to see Victoria and Albert marry?	the Duchess's brother, Leopold
Who opposed Victoria marrying Albert, or any Coburg?	William IV
Who did William IV feel was a suitable husband for Victoria?	Prince Alexander of the Netherlands
What health issue did Flora hastings develope that began to ruin Victorias reputation?	an abdominal growth
What was the job of lady Flora Hastings in Victorias household?	one of her mother's ladies-in-waiting
What was Flora hastings abdominal growth rumored to be?	an out-of-wedlock pregnancy
Who was rumored to be the father of Flora Hastings "pregnancy"?	Sir John Conroy
What year did Victorias reputation begin to suffer?	1839
What lady in waiting was at the heart of a 1839 court scandal?	Lady Flora Hastings
What was the cause of Lady Flora's death in July?	large tumour on her liver
With whom did Lady Flora consipire against Queen Victoria?	Conroy and the Duchess of Kent
What was Queen Victoria called after Lady Flora's death due?	Mrs. Melbourne
Who, in Victoria's court, was accused of having a pregnancy outside of mariage?	one of her mother's ladies-in-waiting, Lady Flora Hastings
Who was believed to be the father of Lady Flor's "baby"?	Sir John Conroy
What did Victoria think of Lady Flora?	despised
Why did Victoria hate Sir Conroy and Lady Flora?	the Kensington System
What was actually the cause of Lady Flora's "pregnancy"?	large tumour on her liver that had distended her abdomen
What year was the Third French Republic established?	1870
Where was the republica rally held that called for Vuictorias removal?	Trafalgar Square
Who spoke against Victoria at the rally in Trafalgar Square?	Radical MPs
In 1871, Victoria became seriously ill with an abscess on what part of her body?	arm
Who lanced and treated the abscess on Queen Victorias arm?	Joseph Lister
How was the republican sentiment in Britain changed?	boosted after the establishment of the Third French Republic
Where was a rally calling for Queen Victoria's removal held?	Trafalgar Square
What cutting edge treatment did Joseph Lister use to treat Queen Victoria's illness?	new antiseptic carbolic acid spray
What disease nearly took the Prince of Wales life?	typhoid fever
WHat was a new antiseptic being used to treat abcesses in the 1870's?	acid spray
What helped to boost the rebublicians in 1870?	establishment of the Third French Republic
When did the Third French Republic come onto the scene?	1870
WHat was a new antiseptic being used to treat abcesses in the 1870's?	carbolic acid spray
What disease was contracted by the Prince of Wales that nearly ended his life?	typhoid fever
Who spoke against Victoria at Trafalgar Square?	Radical MPs
After what event did the Prince of Wales' health begin to improve?	the tenth anniversary of her husband's death
What year was Queen Victorias first pregnancy?	1840
Who attempted to assasinate Victoria while she was riding in a carriage?	Edward Oxford
How old was Edward Oxford?	18
Who was riding in the carriage with Victoria when Oxford attempted to assasinate her?	Prince Albert
How many times did Oxford fire the gun at Victoria and miss?	twice
Who tried to assassinate Queen Victoria while she was pregnant with her first child?	Edward Oxford
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert had how many more children after Victoria's birth?	eight
When was Queen Victoria's first daughter born?	21 November 1840
What year was Albert Edward, Queen Victoria's first born son born?	1841
What major life event was Victoria facing when she also had to contend with her first assassination attempt?	first pregnancy
When was Victoria's first assassination attempt?	1840
What did the first assassination attempt do for Victoria's reign?	popularity soared
What was Edward Oxford charged with after his assassination attempt?	high treason
What happened to Edward Oxford to after he was found guilty of high treason?	acquitted on the grounds of insanity
Who did Victoria try to convince Disraeli  to act against during the Russo-Turkish war?	Russia
What impact did Victorias threats have on the impact of the Russo=Turkish war?	no impact
What Disraeli policy did Victoria endorse?	expansionist foreign policy
Who lost the Disraeli general election in 1880?	Disraeli
Who returned as prime minister when Disraeli lost the general election in 1880?	Gladstone
What caused Queen Victoria to threaten to abdicate five times?	Russo-Turkish War
What ended the Russo-Turkish War?	Congress of Berlin
Why did Queen Victoria want to take over other countries?	protecting native peoples from more aggressive powers or cruel rulers
Who was elected Prime Minister after Disareli lost the election in 1880?	Gladstone
To whom did Queen Victoria dedicate a memorial after his death for grateful service?	Disraeli
What position did Victoria take on how to be a successful and top notch power?	be Prepared for attacks and wars, somewhere or other, CONTINUALLY
Who won the 1880 general election?	Gladstone
What conflicts can be attributed to Disraeli's stance on foreign policy?	Anglo-Zulu War and the Second Anglo-Afghan War
What did Victoria place to memorialize Disraeli?	a memorial tablet
who was britains closest ally since the Crimean war?	Napoleon III
When did Napoleon iii visit London?	April 1855
Where did Napoleon Meet Victoria and Albert?	Dunkirk
Napoleon accompanied Victoria and Alber to what city diring the visit?	Paris
Victoria and Albert were the guests of honor at a large ball that took place where?	the Palace of Versailles
Who was Britains's closest ally following the Crimean War?	Napoleon III
What did Napoleon III and the royal couple visit?	Exposition Universelle
When were Napoleon I remains returned to their resting place at Les Invalides?	1840
How many guests attented a ball at the Palace of Versaille with Napoleon III and the royal couple in attendence?	1,200
Where did Napoleon III meet Victoria and Albert, before accompanying them to Paris?	Dunkirk
When were Napoleon I's remains interred in his mausoleum?	1840
Who was Britian's closest ally after the Crimean War?	Napoleon III
Where were Victoria and Albert honored guests at ball thrown by Napoleon III?	Palace of Versailles
When did Napoleon III visit London?	April 1855
What was the name of the manservent that Victoria had in the 1860's?	John Brown
Where was John brown, Victorias manservant, from?	Scotland
What kind of a connection was rumored to exist between Victoria and John Brown?	a romantic connection
What was the nickname given to Queen Victoria when rumors of a relationship with John Brown arose?	Mrs. Brown
What was the name of the 1997 movie depicting the relationship between Victoria and John brown?	Mrs. Brown
What country was Queen Victoria's manservant with whom she was rumored to have a romantic interest?	Scotland
What was the name of the movie that told the story of Queen Victoria's romance with John Brown?	Mrs. Brown
What artist painted the Queen and Brown which hung in the Royal Academy?	Sir Edwin Henry Landseer
In what memior written by Queen Victoria was John Brown praised?	Leaves from the Journal of Our Life in the Highlands
Which manservent was Victoria's most trusted ally?	John Brown
Which movie was made about the scandalous affair that Victoria was believed to have had with John Brown?	Mrs. Brown
Which book did Victoria publish that did nothing to take away from the rumors about her and John Brown?	Leaves from the Journal of Our Life in the Highlands
Who did the Queen feature in her book that drew so much criticism?	John Brown
Where did Victoria spend the Christmas of 1900?	Osborne House
Where was osborne House that Victoria spent christmas at located?	on the Isle of Wight
What had caused Victoria to be lame?	Rheumatism in her legs
Why was Victorias eyesight clouded?	cataracts
What was the date of Queen Victorias death?	22 January 1901
Where was Osborne House located?	Isle of Wight
When did Queen Victoria die?	Tuesday, 22 January 1901
How old was Queen Victoria upon her death?	81
Who was Queen Victoria's successor after her death?	King Edward VII
Who did she wish to see on her deathbed, making it her last request?	pet Pomeranian, Turri
Where did Victoria usually spend Christmases?	Osborne House on the Isle of Wight
What caused Victoria limited mobility later in life?	Rheumatism
Whaen did Queen Victoria die?	Tuesday, 22 January 1901
How old was Victoria when she died?	81
Who was Queen Victoria's successor?	King Edward VII
What Act did Disraeli push through Parliment in 1876?	Royal Titles Act 1876
In 1876 Victoria held what title?	Empress of India
What year was the Public Worship Regulation Act passed?	1874
What Church did Victoria consider herself aligned with?	presbyterian Church of Scotland
In a general election of what year was Disraeli returned to power?	1874
What removed Catholic Rituals from Anglican services?	Public Worship Regulation Act 1874
Which church did Queen Victoria consider her favorite?	presbyterian Church of Scotland
Who published the Royal Titles Act of 1876?	Disraeli
When was Queen Victoria named the Empress of India?	1 May 1876
Where was the new title of Empress of India proclaimed?	Delhi Durbar
When was Disraeli returned to office?	1874
What change, supported by Victoria, did Disraeli make to the Anglician liturgy?	removed Catholic rituals
Where did Victoria really align herself when it came to religion?	presbyterian Church of Scotland
What allowed Victoria to become the Empress of India?	Royal Titles Act 1876
Whic act, passed by Disraeli, allowed him to alter the Anglician liturgy?	Public Worship Regulation Act 1874
What kind of monarchy was formed under Queen Victoria?	modern constitutional monarchy
Reforms to what system increased the power of the house fo commons?	the voting system
As Victorias rule became less polital, what values were emphasized?	morality and family values
What type of monarchy was established as time went on in Victorias rule?	family monarchy
How did the reforms of Britains voting system affect the House of Commons?	increased the power
What was most important as the monarchy under Queen Victoria shifted from political to symbolic?	emphasis on morality and family values
What idea was solidified to which the increasing middle classes in Britain could identify with?	family monarchy
What was Queen Victoria's reign considered?	modern constitutional monarchy
What kind of government was Victoria's reign leaning towards?	modern constitutional monarchy
What increased the power in the House of Commons?	Reforms of the voting system
Who paid the price for the reforms of the voting system?	House of Lords and the monarch
Rather than political, what was Victoria's monarchy seen as?	symbolic
What was a monarchy that the more middle clas could get behind and support?	family
What year did Gladstone resign?	1885
Gladstone resigned after what was defeted?	his budget
Victoria blamed Gladstone for the death of who?	General Gordon at Khartoum.
Who replaced Gladstone after he resigned?	Lord Salisbury
How long did Lord Salisburys government last?	a few months
What man was Gladstone blamed for after his death at Khartoum?	General Gordon
Who replaced Gladstone for only a few short months?	Lord Salisbury
What did the bill Gladstone failed to pass state, much to Queen Victoria's pleasure?	granting Ireland home rule
Who defeated Gladstone yet again in the general elction?	Salisbury
Why did Gladstone resign in 1885?	his budget was defeated
When did Gladstone resign?	1885
Why did Gladstone resign?	his budget was defeated
How did Victoria feel about the resignation of Gladstone?	pleased
Who's death did Victoria blame on Gladstone?	General Gordon
Who replaced Gladstone?	Lord Salisbury
How many words a day did Victoria write?	average of 2,500
What year did Victoria begin keeping a journal?	1832
How many volumes was Queen Victorias journal?	122
Who was Victorias youngest daughter?	Princess Beatrice
What did Beatrice do to her mothers diaries after her death?	transcribed and edited
How many journals did Queen Victoria write in her lifetime?	122
What did Beatrice do with the journals after she transcribed and edited them?	burned the originals
Who was appointed as Queen Victoria's literary executor upon her death?	Princess Beatrice
Who transcribed Queen Victoria's journals from 1832 to 1861?	Lord Esher
What biographer said Queen Victoria wrote an average of 2500 words a day in her journals?	Giles St Aubyn
How avid of a writer was the Queen?	Victoria wrote an average of 2,500 words a day
How many volumes did her journal span?	122 volumes
What did Beatrice do with her mother's journals?	transcribed and edited
Who was Victoria's literary executer?	her youngest daughter, Princess Beatrice
What did Beatrice do with the origional volumes of her mother's diaries?	burned
What concept determines relationships between Grand Lodges?	Recognition
What must two lodges be in, in order to inter-visit?	amity
What, besides Recognition, must happen between two Grand Lodges in order for them to be considered in amity?	Masonic communication
What can be causes of one Grand Lodge withdrawing Recognition from another?	Exclusive Jurisdiction and Regularity
What are the members of a Grand Lodge called?	brethren
Gran Lodges are in what when they are in Masonic Communication with each other?	amity
What concept is used to determine relations between Grand Lodges?	Recognition
What does each Grand Lodge maintain?	a list
What is not allowed when Grand Lodges are not in amity?	inter-visitation
What are the two most common reasons one Grand Lodge will withhold recognition from another?	Exclusive Jurisdiction and Regularity
When did ceremonial regalia first appear in the Masonic culture?	The fifteenth century
How long have historians been seeking information about the Masonic movement?	middle of the 19th century
What kind of an oath do Masons take when they join?	fidelity
What is the oldest written document about Freemasonary?	Regius Poem
When was the Regius Poem written?	1425
When did Masonic historians star seeking the origins of the Masonic Movement?	middle of the 19th century
What are the old Masonic document referred as?	Old Charges
The Old Charges are dated from when to when?	about 1425 to the beginning of the 18th century
The fifteenth century also shows evidence of what in Masonic history?	ceremonial regalia.
The duties of its grades is an example of what historic documents?	Old Charges
Why did the Grand Orient de France conclude that Freemasonry shouldn't require religious belief?	Freemasonry was not a religion
What was removed from the Freemasonry constitution?	existence of God and the immortality of the soul
Who withdrew recognition from the Grand Orient de France?	United Grand Lodge of England
What was a possible condition that made the United Grand Lodge of England withdraw it's recognition of the Grand Orient de France?	political tension between France and Britain
How was the belief of the existance of God and the immortal soul replaced in the constitution?	Its principles are absolute liberty of conscience and human solidarity
What year was it ruled that Freemasonry was not a religion?	1875
What Grand Lodge had a withdrawal of recognition by the United Grand Lodge of England?	Grand Orient of France
What was a motivation of the Grand Lodge of England's objection?	political tension between France and Britain
Who disputed the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils?	Grand Orient de France
When were the first constitutions for Freemasonry printed?	during the 1720s
Who composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasonry?	James Anderson
Which group was specifically excluded from Freemasonry in the printed constitutions?	women
What was created for women as Freemasonry began to spread?	Lodges of Adoption
When was the idea of the Lodges for Adoption abandoned?	early 19th century
When was the dawn of the Grand Lodge era?	during the 1720s
Who composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons?	James Anderson
Who is excluded from Freemasonry?	women
What were lodges called that included women?	Lodges of Adoption
Who abandoned the including of women in Freemasonry experiment in the early 19'th century?	The French
What are some Protestant objections to Freemasonry?	mysticism, occultism, and even Satanism
What are Catholic objections to Freemasonry?	rationalism and naturalism
Who is generally accepted as the voice of Freemasonry?	No one voice
Who do the Protestant anti-Masons believe is the absolute authority on the use of mysticism, Satanism and occultism in Freemasonry?	Albert Pike
What was Albert Pike actually more of an expert in?	late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the USA
What religion alleged Freemasons as Satanic?	Protestant
What religion alleged Freemasons as unnatural and irrational?	Catholic
Who was controversial among Freemasons?	Albert Pike
Who has spoke for all Freemasons?	No one
Albert Pike's opinions were grounded in what?	late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the USA
What put English Freemasonry at risk?	Parliamentary proclamation
What did the Unlawful Socities Act ban?	meetings of groups that required their members to take an oath or obligation
When was the Unlawful Socities Act implemented?	1799
What was each private lodge required to provide to the Clerk of Peace every year?	a list of the members of his lodge
Who did the Grand Masters call upon to explain that Freemasonry was not an unlawful society?	Prime Minister William Pitt
English Freemasonry almost came to a halt in what year?	1799
Why did English Freemasonry almost come to a halt in 1799?	Parliamentary proclamation
What act was made in 1799 banning any meeting of groups that had to take an oath or obligation?	the Unlawful Societies Act 1799
Who gave the Freemasons an exemption of the Act of 1799?	Prime Minister William Pitt
What year did parliament rescind the exemption of 1799 given to the Freemasons?	1967
What are two things that anit-masonry usually associated with?	antisemitism and anti-Zionism
What year did the Ba'ath Party make Freemasonry a felony?	1980
Who wrote that it was not suprising that the blame for 9/11 was trying to be blamed on a masonic world order?	Professor Andrew Prescott
According to  Professor Andrew Prescott, how long has antisemitism gone together with anti-masonry?	Since at least the time of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion
In some countries, anti-Masonry is related to what?	antisemitism and anti-Zionism
Who change the Iraqi legal and penal code in 1980?	Saddam Hussein's ruling Ba'ath Party
Who suggested the September 11 attacks on the United States were inspired by a masonic world order?	Professor Andrew Prescott
What do most masonic rituals consist of?	degree ceremonies
What is the first degree of Masonry?	Entered Apprentice
What is the second degree of Masonry?	Fellowcraft
What is the final degree of Masonry?	Master Mason
What things come with each new degree in Freemasonry?	passwords, signs and grips
The bulk of Masonic rituals consist of what?	degree ceremonies
What comes after the degree of Entered Apprentice?	the degree of Fellowcraft
What is the first of degree ceremonies?	the degree of Entered Apprentice
What is the final degree in the Freemasons?	the degree of Master Mason
What annual ceremony do Freemasons have?	the annual installation of the Master and officers of the Lodge
When did English Freemasonry arrive in France?	the 1720s
Who were the first English Freemasons in France?	lodges of expatriates and exiled Jacobites
When did Freemasonry begin to spread to continental Europe?	18th century
Who formed the Grand Loge de France?	Duke of Clermont
Who was the successor to the Duke of Clermont?	Duke of Orléans
When did English Freemasonry spread to France?	the 1720s
When did Freemasonry spread to most of the Continental Europe?	the 18th century
The Grand Loge de France formed under who?	the Grand Mastership of the Duke of Clermont
Who was the successor to the Grand Mastership of The Duke of Clermont?	the Duke of Orléans
When was the central body of the Grand Orient de France reconstituted?	1773
Why was the Centre de Liasion et d'information des Puissances maconniques signataires de l'Appel de Strasbourg set up?	provides a forum for most of these Grand Lodges and Grand Orients worldwide
When was CLIPSAS set up?	1961
What are two major sections of Freemasonry?	Anglo-American and Continental
What is the Continental Strand consideres to be by most of Freemasonry?	Irregular
What strand is considered to be irregular by the majority of Freemasons?	the Liberal (Continental) strand
The CLIPSAS Organization was formed in what year?	1961
How many Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are listed in the CLIPSAS list?	70
Does the United Grand Lodge of England communicate with any of the 70 lodges on the CLIPSAS list?	does not communicate
Whao has always opposed Freemasonry?	the Roman Catholic Church
Why does the Catholic Church oppose the Freemasons so strongly?	teaches a naturalistic deistic religion
Who issued the first Papal prounouncement against Freemasonry?	Pope Clement XII
When was the first Papal prounouncement against Freemasonry made?	28 April 1738
What was the most recent Papal prounouncement agasnst Freemasonry?	Pope Leo XIII's Ab apostolici, 15 October 1890
Who has the longest history of objection to Freemasonry?	the Roman Catholic Church
What law banned books favoring Freemasonry?	The 1917 Code of Canon Law
The Roman Catholic Church objection to Freemasons are based on what?	Masonry teaches a naturalistic deistic religion
What pope first issued Papal pronouncements against Freemasons?	Pope Clement XII
What pope most recently issued Papal pronouncements against Freemasons?	Pope Leo XIII
What action is forbid by the Orthodox Greek Church to Freemasons?	cannot partake of the Eucharist
What is the official stance on Freemasonry by the Greek Orthodox Church?	cannot be at all compatible with Christianity
What would happen if someone in the Greek Orthodox Church became a Freemason?	constitutes an act of apostasy
When did the Orthodox Church of Greece proclaim being a Freemason was an act of apostacy?	1933
Which other major religions hold the same beliefs, on Freemasonry, as the Orthodox Church of Greece?	Roman Catholic and Protestant
In what year did the Orthodox Church of Greece declare that being a Freemason constituted an act of apostasy?	1933
Freemasonry cannot be compatible with what according to the Orthodox Church?	Christianity
Freemason cannot partake in what until they repent according to the Orthodox Church of Greece?	the Eucharist
What belief is required of a candidate by the Grand Lodge?	belief in a Supreme Being
Are candadites required to express belief in a specific religion?	few cases
Which branch of Freemasonry does not require a belief in a supreme being?	Continental Freemasonry
Which branch of Freemasonry accepts atheists?	"Liberal" or Continental
Which branch of Freemasonry only accepts Christians?	Swedish Rite
Most Grand Lodges require a candidate to declare a belief in what?	a Supreme Being
Freemasons most common in Scandinavia only accept who as members?	Christians
What Freemason group accept atheists?	the Grand Orient de France
The Grand Orient de France is considered what type of Freemasonry?	Liberal" or Continental Freemasonry
What is Exclusive Jurisdiction?	only one Grand Lodge will be recognised in any geographical area
What happens if two Grand Lodges try to establish themselves in the same area?	the other Grand Lodges will have to choose between them
What can happen if two over-lapping Grand Lodges are in Amity and decide to share jurisdiction?	Exclusive Jurisdiction can be waived
If two over-lapping Grand Lodges are in Amity and decide to waive Exclusive Jurisdiction, who must the other Grand Lodges recognize?	recognise both
What must other Grand Lodges do if two over-lapping Grand Lodges cannot agree to share the territory?	choose between them
What concept only recognizes one Grand Lodge in a given geographical area?	Exclusive Jurisdiction
In what year did the Grand Lodge of New York Split into two separate rival factions?	1849
When can Exclusive Jurisdiction be waived?	when the two over-lapping Grand Lodges are themselves in Amity and agree to share jurisdiction
From what centuries are the earliest passwords and rituals of Freemasonry known?	17th–18th
What is the oldest Masonic lodge in the world?	Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary's Chapel) No. 1 in Scotland
What were members who did not practice the physical craft known as?	accepted or speculative Masons
When compared, how similar are the rituals and passwords from the turn of the 17 - 18 centuries to the ones from the later 18th century?	show continuity
What is the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world?	the Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary's Chapel) No. 1
When was the Lodge of Edinburgh started?	1598
When did rituals become similar between different Masonic Lodges?	in the later 18th century
Why was Prince Hall Freemasonry formed?	refusal of early American lodges to admit African-Americans
When was Prince Hall Freemasonry formed?	1775
What happened when the UGLE was formed in 1813?	U.S.-based Lodges were stricken from their rolls
What did Africian Lodge, Number 459 become after they were removed from the UGLE?	African Lodge, Number 1
What was Africian Lodge, Number 1 considered after they changed from Africian Lodge, Number 459?	became a de facto "Grand Lodge"
What exists today because of the refusal of early American lodges to admit African Americans?	Prince Hall Freemasonry
In what year was Prince Hall admitted into the British military lodge?	1775
When was the African Lodge, number 459, formed?	1784
When was the UGLE formed?	1813
The African Lodge re-titled itself what?	the African Lodge, Number 1
When was Maria Deraismes initiated into Freemasonry?	1882
Why did Deraismes resign from Freemasonry?	allow her lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge
What led to exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England?	Disagreements over ritual
Who, along with Maria Dersaismes, started a mixed gender masonic lodge?	Georges Martin
Who brought the message of mixed gender, practicing masonic lodges to the English speaking?	Annie Besant
Who resigned from the Freemasons for their lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge?	Maria Deraismes
Maria Deraismes and who else started a mixed masonic lodge?	Georges Martin
What year was Maria Deraismes initiated into the Freemasons?	1882
What year was an all-female masonic lodge created?	1901
What year was the all-female masonic lodge cast aside?	1935
What do Islamic anti-masonics link Freemasonry to?	al-Masih ad-Dajjal (the false Messiah
Why do muslim anti-masonics believe that the Freemasons want to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque?	rebuild the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem
What is another group that anti-masonic muslims link to zionism?	Rotary
What are most of the arguements by anti-masonic muslims centered on?	antisemitism and Anti-Zionism
Who's interests are the muslin anti-masonics afraid that the Freemasons are protecting?	Jews
What do many Islamic and anti-Masonic argue about Freemasonry?	linking Freemasonry to al-Masih ad-Dajjal (the false Messiah)
Some Muslims argue that Freemasonry promotes what?	the interests of the Jews
What article states that Freemasonry work in the interest of Zionism?	article 28
How many Freemasons are believed to have been killed under Hitler's Nazi Regime?	between 80,000 and 200,000
What kind of prisioner was a Freemason considered to be?	political prisoners
What identifier did the Nazis make the Freemason prisioners wear?	inverted red triangle
Who was responsible for creating antisemetic and anti-masonic propaganda?	Professor Franz Six
Where is most of the informaton about Freemasons persecuted in the Holocaust located?	The preserved records of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt (the Reich Security Main Office)
What is the Relch Security Main Office also called?	Reichssicherheitshauptamt
Who was responsible for ideological tasks of the written records?	Professor Franz Six
How many Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime?	between 80,000 and 200,000
What did Masonic concentration camp inmates have to wear?	an inverted red triangle.
Where are the origins of Freemasonry?	local fraternities of stonemasons
What were the fraternaties of stonemasons origionally responsible for?	regulated the qualifications of stonemasons and their interaction with authorities and clients
Where did the degrees of Freemasonry derived from?	the three grades of medieval craft guilds
What are the degrees of Freemasonry?	Apprentice, Journeyman or fellow (now called Fellowcraft), and Master Mason
Freemasons trace their origins to what?	the local fraternities of stonemasons
How many grades are there in medieval craft guilds?	three grades
Craft Freemasonry is also known as what?	Blue Lodge
Members of Craft Masonry are called what?	Freemasons or Masons
How are Freemasons invited to join a lodge?	they are never invited
How does one become a Freemason?	The onus is on candidates to ask to join
Can women ask to be a member of the Masonic Lodge?	depending on the Masonic Jurisdiction
How can you find a lodge to ask to be a member of?	track down a local Lodge through the Internet
Candidates for Freemasonry must do what before being initiated?	will have met most active members of the Lodge they are joining
Candidates are normally introduced to the lodge by whom?	a friend
Now days, many interested people find a Masonic Lodge using what?	the Internet
Candidates are never what to a Masonic lodge?	never invited
What usually follows an initial inquiry of a candidate?	an interview
How large is the membership of Freemasonry?	around six million worldwide
What is the largest single jurisdiction of Freemasonry?	United Grand Lodge of England
How many members does the UGLE have?	around a quarter million
What are the membership numbers of the United States?	just under two million
How many members does the Grand Lodge of Scotland and the Grand Lodge of Ireland have, together?	150,000
How many members are in Freemasonry?	around six million worldwide
What lodge has the single largest single jurisdiction of Freemasonry?	the United Grand Lodge of England
How many members are in the Grand Lodge of England?	around a quarter million
The Grand Lodges of Scotland and Ireland have how many member?	approximately 150,000 members
The United States has how many Freemason members?	just under two million
Are masons allowed to divulge the secrets of each degree?	Masons swear at each degree to keep the contents of that degree secret
How are oaths taken?	on a Volume of Sacred Law
In what branch can books, other than scripture, be used for the purpose of oath taking?	Progressive continental Freemasonry
What can be considered a Volume of Sacred Law?	whichever book of divine revelation is appropriate to the religious beliefs of the individual brother
Masons swear to protect their brethren unless they what?	have broken the law
Most lodges have the oath taken on what?	Volume of Sacred Law
Mason swear at each degree to do what?	keep the contents of that degree secret
Where were the earliest known American Logdes located?	Pennsylvania
What is the earliest that lodges appeared in America?	1715
When was a Provincial Grand Master for North America appointed?	1731
Where did other American Lodges obtain their authoriisations from?	Antient Grand Lodge of England, the Grand Lodge of Scotland, and the Grand Lodge of Ireland
When did the lodges without prior authorisations apply to be recognized?	after they were confident of their own survival
Where were the earliest lodges in America?	Pennsylvania
Who was the Collector for the port of Pennsylvania in 1715?	John Moore
A Provincial Grand Master for North America was first appointed when?	1731
The Provincial Grand Master for North America was base where?	Pennsylvania
How long have Masonic Lodges been in Iraq?	as early as 1917
How many lodges existed in Iraq in the 1950s?	Nine
What is the greatest penalty that a Freemason in Iraq could face now?	the death penalty
When were all the lodges in Iraq forced to close?	1965
When was a Scottish Lodge formed in Iraq?	1923
When did Masonic lodges start in Iraq?	1917
Who opened the first Lodge in Iraq?	the United Grand Lodge of England
When was the first Scottish Masonic lodge opened in Iraq?	1923
All Masonic lodges were forced to close in Iraq in what year?	1965
Who introduced the death penalty to Freemasons living in Iraq?	Saddam Hussein
When was the United Grand Lodge of England Formed?	1813
The Grand Orient de France and the United Grand Lodge of England continued in amity until when?	the 1860s and 1870s
What year did the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Louisiana appear in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana?	1868
In what year was a new code to the Canon Law issued by the church?	1983
Who clarified the new code of Canon law of 1983?	Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger
Do Freemasons allow Catholics into their fraternity?	Freemasonry has never objected to Catholics joining their fraternity
Judges and police officers had to disclose their Freemason membership in what years in England?	from 1999 to 2009
Who ended the English Masonic disclosure policy in 2009?	Justice Secretary Jack Straw
Justice Secretary Jack Straw ended the Masonic disclosure law on what grounds?	the rule was considered disproportionate
What is the basic organizational unit of Freemasonry?	The Masonic Lodge
Name examples of usual formal business that Freemasons have at their lodge.	pay bills, organise social and charitable events, elect new members
What usually happens at the conclusion of a lodge meeting?	a formal dinner
When does a candidate swear to fullfil his obligations as a Mason?	During the ceremony of initiation
What does a candidate swear on?	usually on a volume of sacred text
How many degrees must a Mason swear to keep the secrets from outsiders?	three degrees
Are Freemasons free to explore the craft?	Freemasons are left to explore the craft in the manner they find most satisfying
What concept is based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, basic membership requirements, and tenets and rituals of the craft?	Regularity
Is each definition of regularity the same throughout all Masonic Lodges?	Each Grand Lodge sets its own definition
When can a Grand Lodge declare another lodge as irregular?	If the differences are significant
All Freemasons are progressively initiated, passed, and raised in three degrees of what?	Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry
The initiations are part allegory and part what?	lecture
What is the final of the three steps of Freemasonry?	Master Mason
Who was the chief architect of the Temple of Solomon?	Hiram Abiff
How many versions of the Hiram myth are there?	at least two
The Grand Lodge of England is also know as what?	GLE
When was the Grand Lodge of England founded?	24 June 1717
The Ancient Grand Lodge of England was formed on what date?	17 July 1751
The United Grand Lodge of England was formed on what date?	27 December 1813
Lodges that could not endorse the GLE were later called what?	the Moderns
When did North American Masonic lodges recognize members of the Prince Hall Lodge?	By the 1980s
Who is the Prince Hall Lodge open to?	Prince Hall is open to all men
Does the United Grand Lodge of England recognize Prince Hall Lodges?	The United Grand Lodge of England has no problem with recognising Prince Hall Grand Lodges
When did the French try to create co-masonic lodges?	the 1890s
When did the United Grand Lodge of England recognize the two female Masonic lodges?	1999
What did the french lodges promote to try to get women accepted into the Freemasons?	the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite
Do Anglo-American grand lodges accept women as members today?	most regular Anglo-American grand lodges remains that women Freemasons are not legitimate Masons
What English Archbishop was a member of the Freemasons?	Geoffrey Fisher
What former Archbishop of Canterbury has reservations about the Freemasons?	Dr Rowan Williams
What year did Dr. Rowan Williams apologize to the Freemasons?	2003
Dr. Rowan Williams was also Bishop of what?	Bishop of Monmouth
Freemasonry was linked to scandal in Italy due to what?	Propaganda Due lodge
The Propaganda Due Lodge was chartered by who?	Grande Oriente d'Italia
When did the Grande Oriente d'italia charter the Propaganda Due Lodge?	1877
The Propaganda Due Lodge was also know as what?	P2
When did the Grand Orient d'italia expel Licio Gelli and revoked the charter of P2?	1976
When did the UN recommend the Partition Plan?	29 November 1947
When was the end of the British Mandate set?	midnight on 14 May 1948
Who was the executive head of the Zionist Organization?	David Ben-Gurion
What is the official State of Israel?	Israel
Where is Israel located?	Middle East
What's Israel's financial and technology center?	Tel Aviv
What was the population of Israel in 2016?	8,476,600
How many citizens in Israel are Jewish?	6,345,400
How many citizens in Israel are Arab?	1,760,400
Israel defines itself as what?	Jewish and democratic state
Where is Israel's economy ranked?	35th
Where is Israel's standard of living ranked in Asia?	fourth
Who was Moses?	a great-great grandson of Jacob
Who led the Israelites back into Canaan during the "Exodus?"	Moses
What does the word "Israel" refer to?	Jacob
What is the "Land of Israel" known as in Hebrew?	Eretz Yisrael
According to the Torah, God promised the land to how many people?	three
When was the first Kingdom of Israel established?	early 2nd millennium BCE
When does the first record of the name Israel occurs?	Merneptah stele
Who did the ancestors of Israelites include?	Semites
What did Canaanites prohibit?	intermarriage
When did the kingdom split?	930 BCE
What was the name of the destroyed capital?	Samaria
Who captured Samaria?	Assyrian king Sargon II
Who conquered Judah?	King Nebuchadnezzar II
How many Judeans did Zerubabel return to Judah?	50,000
How many Judeans did Ezra lead?	5,000
When did the conflict between Judeans and Greeks erupt?	167 BCE
What was established in the Maccabean Revolt?	Hasmonean Kingdom
Who dominated the society?	Judeans
When did the Jewish presence dwindle in the region?	132 CE
Who conquered the country in 628?	Byzantine Empire
What was evolving over Roman paganism?	Christianity
Who did the Jewish inhabitants fight side by side with?	Fatimid garrison
How many people were massacred when the city fell?	60,000
How many Jews were seeking refuge?	6,000
When did Maimonides visit Jerusalem?	1165
Who issued a call to the Jews to emigrate to the Land of Israel?	Yehuda Halevi
Who was the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty?	Sultan Saladin
When was the Jewish community strengthened by rabbis?	1211
Who was the 13th-century Spanish rabbi and recognised leader of Jewry?	Nachmanides
What did Nachmanides write?	"If the gentiles wish to make peace, we shall make peace and leave them on clear terms
When was control passed to the Mamluk sultans of Egypt?	1260
What two centres of Mamluk power was the country located?	Cairo and Damascus
When did the Mamluk Sultan Baybars convert to the Cave of Patriarchs?	1266
Many Jews have aspired to return to where?	Zion
Where did some Jewish communities settle after they were expelled from Spain?	Palestine
Rabbi Yehuda Hachasid led a group of how many Jews into Jerusalem?	1,500
What was the first wave of modern Jewish migration to Ottoman-ruled Palestine known as?	First Aliyah
When did the First Aliyah begin?	1881
Who is credited as founding political Zionism?	Theodor Herzl
When did the Second Aliyah begin?	after the Kishinev pogrom
How many Jews settled into Palestine?	40,000
The first and second wave of migrants were mainly who?	Orthodox Jews
What is the Jewish Legion?	a group primarily of Zionist volunteers
When did the League of Nations grant Britain a mandate over Palestine?	1922
What does Haganah mean in Hebrew?	The Defense
How many Jews did the Third and Fourth Aliyahs bring to Palestine?	100,000
When did Irgun attack the British administrative headquarters?	July 22, 1946
What was the Jewish population in Palestine by the end of World War II?	33%
What country experienced conflict with the Jewish community after World War II?	Britain
When was the King David Hotel bombing?	1946
When did the British government announce it would withdraw from Mandatory Palestine?	1947
What is the UNSCOP?	United Nations Special Committee on Palestine
When was the UNSCOP formed?	15 May 1947
What was the last to be under an International Trusteeship System?	City of Jerusalem
What four Arab countries entered British Mandatory Palestine?	Egypt, Syria, Transjordan and Iraq
When was the Arab-Israeli War launched?	1948
What were the invading Arab armies aim?	slaughter the Jews
Who aided the immigration to Israel?	Israeli Immigration Department
The immigration was in accordance to what?	One Million Plan
When did the Mossad LeAliyah Bet disband?	1953
The population of Israel rose from 800,000 to what between 1948 and 1958?	two million
What ideology did some immigrants believe in?	Zionist
Between 1948 and 1970, how many Jewish refugees relocated to Israel?	1,150,000
What were temporary camps known as?	ma'abarot
How many immigrants lived in these tent cities?	over 200,000
Who signed a reparations agreement with West Germany?	Ben-Gurion
When did Egypt close the Suez Canal to Israel?	1950
Who was Israel frequently attacked by?	Palestinian fedayeen
What did the war result in?	significant reduction of Israeli border infiltration
Who refused toe recognize Israel?	Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser
When did Egypt mass it's army near the border with Israel?	1967
What became the administrative boundary between Israel and occupied territories?	Green Line
Where was the massacre of the Israeli athletes?	1972 Summer Olympics in Munich
What was the resolution of the Arab league?	three nos
What did the ELO commit itself on?	armed struggle as the only way to liberate the homeland
When did the Egyptian and Syrian armies launch a surprise attack against Israeli forces?	6 October 1973
How many lives were lost?	10–35,000
Who was forced to resign?	Prime Minister Golda Meir
Where did Anwar El Sadat make a trip to?	Israel
What did Sadat and Begin sign?	Camp David Accords
Israel withdrew from where?	Sinai Peninsula
When did the Coastal Road Massacre occur?	11 March 1978
Who secured southern Lebanon?	Israel
Where were the PLO bases located?	south of the Litani River
When did Israel annex the Golan Heights?	1981
What is the Capital of Israel?	Jerusalem
Who provided incentives for Israelis to settle in the occupied West Bank?	Begin's government
When did the Israeli air force destroy Iraq's sole nuclear reactor?	7 June 1981
Why did they destroy the nuclear reactor?	impede Iraq's nuclear weapons program
What government inquiry held Begin?	Kahan Commission
When did the First Intifada break out?	1987
How many people were killed in the violence?	More than a thousand people
PLO supported who during the Gulf War?	Saddam Hussein
Who became the Prime Minister in 1992?	Yitzhak Rabin
When was the Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace signed?	1994
When was Yitzhak Rabin assassinated?	November 1995
Who led Israel in the 1990s?	Benjamin Netanyahu
What did Benjamin Netanyahu sign?	Wye River Memorandum
Who was elected Prime Minister in 1999?	Ehud Barak
Who visited the Temple Mount?	Ariel Sharon
When did Ariel Sharon become prime minister?	2001
How many Palestinian fatalities were they by 30 April 2008?	4,745
When did the Israeli Air Force destroy a nuclear reactor in Syria?	6 September 2007
Who announced its own ceasefire?	Hamas
How long did the operation in Gaza in November last?	eight days
Where does the Jordan Rift Valley lie?	East of the central highlands
What's home to 57% of the nation's population?	Israeli Coastal Plain
How big is the sovereign territory of Israel?	20,770 square kilometers
What river runs along the Jordan Rift Valley?	Jordan River
What is the largest makhtesh in the world?	Ramon Crater
Israel has the largest number of what per square meter in the basin?	plant species
What is the result of tectonic movements within the Dead Sea Transform?	Jordan Rift Valley
What does the tectonic disposition lead to?	high seismic activity in the region
The deficit can cause an earthquake of what magnitude to occur?	Mw~7.4.
When did the most catastrophic earthquakes occur?	31 BCE, 363, 749, and 1033 CE
How many residential buildings did not meet construction standards?	50,000
How often do earthquakes that lead to serious loss of life occur?	every 80 years
What kind of climate does Tel Aviv have?	Mediterranean
What kind of climate does Arava have?	desert
What was the highest recorded temperature in Tirat Zvi?	54.0 °C
Israel developed what?	various water-saving technologies
What does Israelis take advantage of?	sunlight
Who leads the nation in solar energy use?	Israel
What was Israel's population in 2016?	8,476,600
How many African migrants entered Israel by June 2012?	60,000
How many Israelis live in urban areas?	92%
How many Israeli citizens lived in West Bank settlements?	over 300,000
How many Israelis lived in Golan Heights settlements?	20,000
When were Israelis evacuated from Gaza Strip?	2005
What's the homeland for Jewish people?	Israel
Approximately how many Israeli Jews are born in Israel?	75%
What percent are Jewish intermarriage rates at?	35%
What are the two official languages of Israel?	Hebrew and Arabic
How many Israelis speak French?	700,000
How many Russian immigrants arrived in Israel?	one million
Muslims make up how much of the Israel's population?	16%
Druze makes up what percent?	1.5%
2% of the population in Israel are what?	Christian
What incorporates the Western Wall and the Temple Mount?	Old City
Where is Rachel's Tomb?	Bethlehem
Who do not teach their faith to Israelis?	Bahá'í staff
What was Israel ranked among OECD countries?	second
What did it rank in the number of academic degrees per capita?	third
Who praised Israel for its high quality education?	Bill Gates
What is the school expectancy in Israel?	15.5 years
What is the literacy rate in Israel?	97.1%
What is necessary to receive a Bagrut certificate?	Biblical scripture and civics
How many public universities does Israel have?	Israel
How many private colleges does Israel have?	49
What is the oldest university in Israel?	Technion
Israel operates under what kind of system?	parliamentary
How many members are in the Knesset?	120
Knesset member is based on what?	proportional representation of political parties
What kind of court system does Israel have?	three-tier
Where is the Supreme Court located?	Jerusalem
What is the highest tier?	Supreme Court
What legal traditions does Israel combine?	English common law, civil law, and Jewish law
What principle is it based on?	stare decisis
What is Israel's Basic Law?	Human Dignity
The State of Israel is divided into how many administrative districts?	six
What are these districts known as?	mehozot
How many sub-districts are there?	fifteen
How many metropolitan areas are there?	three
What metropolitan area has the largest population?	Tel Aviv
What is the population of Beer Sheva?	559,700
Who declared the annexation of the Golan Heights and East Jerusalem?	UN Security Council
What was captured by Israel in the Six-Day War?	Israeli West Bank
Where did Israel withdraw and disband its military forces?	Gaza Strip
Israel views East Jerusalem as what?	sovereign territory
What emphasises the inadmissability of the acquisition of territory by war?	United Nations Security Council Resolution 242
What is the principle of normalization of relations with Arab states?	Land for peace
When was the West Bank annexed by Jordan?	1950
What was the majority of the population in the West Bank?	Palestinians
What percentage of the barrier will be constructed on the Green Line?	13%
The Gaza Strip was occupied by who from 1948 to 1967?	Egypt
Who occupied the Gaza Strip after 1967?	Israel
When did Hamas assume it's power in the Gaza Strip?	June 2007
How many countries does Israel maintain diplomatic relations?	158
How many diplomatic missions do they have?	107
How many Arab League members have relations with Israel?	three
Who were the first two countries to recognize the State of Israel?	United States and the Soviet Union
Who regards Israel as it's most reliable partner in the Middle East?	The United States
How much did the United States provide in military assistance?	$68 billion
How much did Germany pay in reparations to the Israeli state?	25 billion euros
What prime minister helped relations?	Tony Blair
What aims at bringing EU and its neighbours closer?	European Neighbourhood Policy
When did Turkey and Israel establish full diplomatic relations?	1991
Who organized the flotilla?	IHH
When did Israel and Turkey's relations take a downturn?	after the 2008–09 Gaza War
When did India establish full diplomatic ties with Israel?	1992
Who's the most pro-Israel country in the world?	India
Israel is the second-largest military trading partner of India after who?	Russian Federation
How much does Israel spend on foreign aid?	less than 0.1%
When was MASHAV established?	1958
Israel has a history of providing what?	emergency aid
How many delegations of IDF search and rescue units between 1985 and 2015?	24
How many doctors did Israel send to Haiti?	over 200
How many patients did Israeli doctors treat in Japan?	200
What is the sole military wing of the Israeli security forces?	Israel Defense Forces
Who is the head of the IDF?	Ramatkal
When was the IDF founded?	1948
What age are most Israelis drafted into the military?	18
How long do women serve in the military?	two years
What citizens are exempt from military service?	Arab citizens
The military relies on what?	high-tech weapons systems
What is one of the most crucial weapons in Israel's military history?	Python air-to-air missile series
The success of what program has made Israel one of seven countries capable of launching satellites?	Ofeq
Israel is widely believed to possess what?	nuclear weapons
What is armed with nuclear Popeye Turbo missiles?	Israeli Navy's Dolphin submarines
All homes in Israel are required to have a room called what?	Merkhav Mugan
What two countries have a higher defense spending to GDP ratio than Israel?	Oman and Saudi Arabia
What percentage of it's GDP was spent on defense in 1984?	24%
What was Israel's Global Peace Index rank in 2015?	148th
Who is considered the most advanced country in Southwest Asia?	Israel
When did Israel join the OECD?	2010
Where does Israel rank in number of startup companies in the world?	second
Imports to Israel totaled what in 2012?	$77.59 billion
Israeli exports reached what in 2012?	$64.74 billion
What are the leading exports in Israel?	electronics, software, computerized systems
Israel is a leading country of what development?	solar energy
Israel is ranked 1st in the world in what?	expenditure on Research and Development
What companies built their first overseas research and development centers in Israel?	Intel and Microsoft
What investor bought Iscar?	Warren Buffett
When did United States begin to provide foreign aid to Israel?	1970s
What was Israel's debt surplus in December 2015?	US$118 billion
What are the days of working in Israel?	Sunday through Thursday
Friday is considered what?	short day
Several proposals have been raised to do what?	make Sunday a non-working day
Israeli universities rank where in mathematics?	100
How many Nobel Prize-winning scientists has Israel produced?	six
Israel leads the world in what research papers per capita?	stem-cell research
How much is Israel's water technology industry worth?	$2 billion a year
What's the largest desalination plant in the world?	The Ashkelon seawater reverse osmosis
How much drinking water is produced by Israel's desalination programs?	35%
How many homes in Israel use solar energy for hot water?	Over 90%
How much electricity does the country save per year?	8%
When did Better Place shut down?	2013
What coordinates with all Israeli space research programs?	Israeli Space Agency
Futron's Space Competitiveness Index ranked Israel what in 2012?	ninth in the world
When did Israel launch it's first satellite?	1988
How many kilometers of paved roads does Israel have?	18,096
How many buses have scheduled routes in Israel?	5,715
How much cargo do railways transport per year?	6.8 million tons
What is the country's main hub for international air travel?	Ben Gurion International Airport
What is the country's oldest and largest port?	Haifa Port
How many international airports are in Israel?	two
What is an important industry in Israel?	Tourism
How many tourists visited Israel in 2013?	3.54 million
What is the most popular tourist attraction in Israel?	Western Wall
Where does Israel's diverse culture stem from?	diversity of its population
Life revolves around what in Israel?	Hebrew calendar
Work and school holidays are determined by what?	Jewish holidays
Israeli literature is primarily written in what?	Hebrew
When is the Hebrew Book Week held?	June
What is Israel's top literary reward?	the Sapir Prize
Shmuel Yosef Agnon shared the Nobel Prize with who in 1966?	Nelly Sachs
What Israel-Arab satirist is internationally known?	Sayed Kashua
Who wrote the novel The Secret Life of Saeed the Pessoptimist?	Emile Habibi
What Israeli orchestra has been in operation for more than seventy years?	Israel Philharmonic Orchestra
What three internationally acclaimed musicians were born in Israel?	Itzhak Perlman, Pinchas Zukerman and Ofra Haza
Who hosts its own international music festival every summer?	Eilat
What the nation's canonical folk songs known as?	Songs of the Land of Israel
What became a symbol of the Zionist reconstruction?	Hora circle dance
What's a flourishing field in Israel?	Modern dance
What internationally acclaimed violin virtuoso is from Israel?	Taiseer Elias
Who was awarded first prize in the all-Arab oud contest in Egypt in 2003?	Darwish Darwish
Who is the head of the advanced degree program in Arabic music?	Taiseer Elias
What is one of Israel's most important culturural institutions?	The Israel Museum in Jerusalem
What is an interactive museum on the campus of Tel Aviv University?	Beth Hatefutsoth
What is the largest art museum in the north of the country?	Mishkan Le'Omanut on Kibbutz Ein Harod Meuhad
When was Israeli fusion cuisine first developed?	1948
Kosher restaurants make up what percent of total restaurants?	25%
What is pork often called in Israel?	white meat
What styles of cooking has Israeli cuisine adopted?	Mizrahi, Sephardic, and Ashkenazi
What common ingredients are in Israeli cuisine?	falafel, hummus, shakshouka, couscous, and za'atar
Schnitzel, pizza, hamburgers, French fries, rice and salad are also very common where?	Israel
What are the most popular spectator sports in Israel?	association football and basketball
What is the country's premier football league?	Israeli Premier League
What is the premier basketball league?	Israeli Basketball Super League
When did Israel host and win the Asian Nations Cup?	1964
When did the Israel national football team qualify to the FIFA World Cup?	1970
What were the last Asian Games that Israel participated in?	1974 Asian Games
What's a leading sport in Israel?	Chess
What city has become a national chess center?	Beersheba
Who won the Chess Cup in 2009?	Boris Gelfand
What mathematician advance Greek Science?	Greek Science
What period saw the rise of New Comedy?	Hellenistic
When was the Battle of Actium?	31 BC
When did Alexander the Great die?	323 BC
What period saw the rise of the Septuagint?	Hellenistic
dd	yptian Se
dd	Buddh
dd	m and E
dd	Buddhism
d	the Gre
What ruler's death in 323 BC marks the beginning of the Hellenistic period?	Alexander the Great
In what year did the Battle of Actium take place?	31 BC
What kingdom did the Romans take over the year after the Battle of Actium?	Ptolemaic Egypt
What type of poetry debuted in the Hellenistic period?	Alexandrian poetry
What ancient religion did Greece embrace during the Hellenistic period?	Buddhism
What signified the emergence of the Roman Empire?	Battle of Actium
What event is the recognized beginning of the Hellenistic Period?	death of Alexander the Great
Who advanced Greek Science?	the mathematician Euclid and the polymath Archimedes
What is a common Attic-based dialect?	Koine Greek
Where is the Ptolemaic Kingdom?	north-east Africa
Where is the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom?	South Asia
Where is the Indo-Greek Kingdom?	South Asia
Where is the Kingdom of Pergamon?	south-west Asia
Where was the Ptolemaic Kingdom located?	north-east Africa
Alexander the Great was the emperor of what?	Persian Empire
The Hellenistic Period expanded the Greek Empire into what 2 continents?	Asia and Africa
What was the new, Attic-based dialect called?	Koine Greek
When was the final defeat of the Ptolemaic Kingdom?	31 BC
Who was the Roman emporer?	Constantine the Great
Where did the Roman Empire move to in 330 AD?	Constantinople
What term defines the influence of Greek culture?	Hellenistic
When did the capital of the Roman Empire move to Constantinople?	330 AD
Which era refers primarily to just Greece?	Hellenic
Who moved the Roman Empire capital in 330 AD?	Constantine
Rome's final conquest of Greek lands followed which war?	Achean War
What is the period called that comprises all Greek influence?	Hellenistic
Who wrote Geschichte des Hellenismus?	J. G. Droysen
What does Geschichte des Hellenismus mean?	History of Hellenism
Who wrote Culture and Anarchy?	Matthew Arnold
What century did Hellenistic become a concept?	19th
In Culture and Anarchy, Hebraism is contrasted with what?	Hellenism
The word "Hellenistic" was derived in what time period?	19th-century
Who coined the term "Hellenistic?"	J. G. Droysen
What was Droysen's work called that explained the era?	Geschichte des Hellenismus
Who wrote Culture and Anarchy?	Matthew Arnold
Hellenism contrasts with what other similar concept of era?	Hebraism
How much of the conquered world was affected by Greek influences?	Some
How often did Greek population and natives mix?	not always
What term implies that Greek populations were a majority in the regions they settled?	Hellenistic
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	moved
What is the earliest, most credible source of the Hellenistic period?	Polybius
Where was Polybius from?	Megalopolis
Where was Polybius forced to go as hostage?	Rome
What years do Polybius books cover?	220 to 167 BCE
What League was Polybius a statesman?	Achaean
When did Diodorus Siculus write Bibliotheca historica?	60 and 30 BCE
What battle marks the end of Diodorus Siculus' work?	battle of Ipsus
Who wrote Parallel Lives?	Plutarch
Where was Apprian from?	Alexandria
Which writer outlined the history of important Hellenistic figures?	Plutarch
When was the Peloponnesian War?	431–404 BC
What hegemoney replaced Sparta after the Battle of Leuctra?	Theban
When was the Battle of Leuctra?	371 BC
When was the Battle of Mantinea?	362 BC
Which king lend the rise of Macedon?	Philip II
When did King Philip the II annex Thessaly and Magnesia?	352 BC
Who annexed Thessaly and Magnesia?	Philip II
When was the Battle of Chaeronea?	338 BC
Who formed the League of Corinth?	Philip
Who was Philip II planning a campaign against when he was assasinated?	Achaemenid Empire of Persia
Who was Philip Arrhidaues' half brother?	Alexander
Who was the leading calvary commander?	Perdiccas
Who order the death of Meleager?	Perdiccas
What city was partitioned to the generals who supported Perdiccas?	Babylon
Who documented that Perdiccas' was under suspicion?	Arrian
Who did Diadochi plan to marry?	Cleopatra
Who was Alexander's sister?	Cleopatra
Who was the leader in Asia Minor?	Antigonus I Monophthalmus
Along with Antipater and Craterus, Antigonus I Monophthalmus invaded which region?	Anatolia
Peithon, Seleucus, and Antigenes murdered whom?	Perdiccas
When did Antipater die?	319 BC
Who did Antipater declar as his successor?	Polyperchon
When did Cassander invade Macedonia?	317
Who ordered Eumenes' execution?	Antigonus
Who sentenced Olympias to death?	Cassander
How many talents did Diadochi steal from Ectabana, Persepolis and Susa?	25,000
Who defeated Demetrius Poliorcetes?	Ptolemy
When was the Battle of Gaza?	312 BC
Who ordered the death of King Alexander IV?	Cassander
What year did the Argead Dynasty end?	310
Which son did Antigonus send to regain control of Greece?	Demetrius
When did Demetrius take control of Athens?	307
Who bestowed the title of king to Demetrius Poliorcetes?	Antigonus
What battle did Demetrius Poliorcetes defeat the fleet of Ptolemy?	Battle of Salamis
What region was fought over in the Battle of Salamis?	Cyprus
Who saved Lysimachus in Phrygia?	Seleucus
Who lost in the Battle of Ipsus?	Antigonus
When was the Battle of Ipsus?	301 BCE
After Antigonus was killed, what region did Seleucus take over?	Cilicia
After Antigonus was killed, what region did Ptolemy take over?	Cyprus
When did Cassander die?	298 BCE
When did Demetrius seize the Macedonian throne?	294
Who captured Demetrius?	Seleucus
What year was Seleucus killed?	281 BCE
At what battle was Seleucus killed ?	Battle of Corupedium
What was the capital of the Ptolemaic Egypt?	Alexandria
What was the capital of Seleucid Syria?	Antioch
Alexander and Antioch were centers of what culture?	Hellenistic
What leaders conquests widened the horizons of the Greek world?	Alexander
What particular demographic emigrated to the new Greek empires?	young and ambitious
When was the Lamian war?	323-322
When did Demetrius Poliorcetes capture Athens?	307
Who was Demetrius Poliorcetes' father?	Antigonus
Athens allied with what region to eliminate Macedonian rule?	Ptolemaic Egypt
When was the Chremonidean War?	267-61
What years did Cleomenes III rule?	235–222 BCE
In 222 BCE, Sparta lost what Battle?	Battle of Sellasia
Who was defeated at the Battle of Sellasia?	Sparta
What was Sparta's afilliation in the Peloponnese?	independent
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	refor
When was the Aetolian League formed?	370 BCE
When was the Achaean League formed?	280 BCE
Byzantium, Chalcedon, Heraclea Pontica and Tium formed what league?	Northern League
What system delegates military and foreign affairs to the central government and local affairs to the city states?	sympoliteia
What league freed Corinth?	Achean
What did Rhodians build to commemorate their victory over Demetrius Poliorcetes?	Colossus of Rhodes
What period did Rhodes prosper?	Hellenistic
What military force helped Rhodes maintain their independence?	navy
What years were Rhodes under attack by Demetrius Poliorcetes?	304-305 BCE
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	tes (3
What war did Antigonus II fight Athenians?	Chremonidean War
What mines decreased in production under the Antigonids?	Pangaeum
How large was the Macedonian army under the Antigonids?	25,000 men
Who taught Antigonus II?	Zeno of Citium
Who did Antigonus II defend against?	Epirus
When did Doson die?	221 BC
Who took control when Doson died?	Philip V
Which ruler had the last, best chance of uniting Greece?	Philip V
What was Philip V known as?	the darling of Hellas
When was the Peace of Naupactus?	217 BC
When did Philip form and alliance with Hannibal of Carthage?	215 BC
When did the First Macedonian War begin?	212 BC
When did the First Macedonian War end?	205 BC
How did the First Macedonian War end?	inconclusively
Who defeated Philip?	Titus Quinctius Flamininus
What years did Queen Teutra reign?	231 BC to 227 BCE
From where did Illyrians import there weapons and armor?	Ancient Greeks
What type or ornamentation was featured on the Illyrians shilds and war belts?	Ancient Macedon
What tribes inhabited the Balkan Coast?	Illyrian
What tribe covered most of the republic of Macedonia?	Agrianes
What region was the center of the Odrysian Kingdom?	Thrace
Who used Thracians and Agrianes as light cavalry?	Alexander
What fraction of Alexander's army was made up of Thracians and Agrianes?	one fifth
What language was spoken by the Odrysians?	Greek
Which kings wre among the first to be Hellenized?	Thracian
What was Southern Italy refered to as?	Magna Graecia
Southern Italy and south-eastern Sicily were colonized by the Greeks in what century?	8th
In 310 Agathocles invaded Tunisia and defeated what army?	Carthaginian
Who was the leading figure in Sicily during the Hellenistic period?	Agathocles of Syracuse
In defense of Tarentum, when did Agathocles attack Italy?	300 BCE
What was the first Greek colony in the Mediterranean?	Massalia
How many inhabitants were in Massalia?	6,000
Who controlled Nice and Agde?	Massalia
Massalia was the center of education according to whom?	Strabo
When did Massalia side with Pompey?	49 BCE
Who ran the Hellenistic states of Asia and Egypt?	Greco-Macedonian administrators and governors
Where did Hellenistic monarchs put most of the tax revenues?	military and paramilitary forces
Who handed out gifts in the promotion of Greek culture and religion?	the monarch
What type of estates did Hellenistic monarchs run their kingdoms?	royal estates
Who were the small core in the Hellenistic states of Asia and Egypt?	Greco-Macedonian settlers
Who was appointed satrap of Egypt after Alexander's death?	Ptolemy
When did Alexander die and Ptolemy assume his position?	323 BC
When did Ptolemy declare himself King Ptolemy I?	305 BC
What nickname did Rhodians give Ptolemy?	Soter
Where did Ptolemy settle his most of his veterans?	Faiyum
Whose tradition did Ptolemy take on as leader of Egypt?	Egyptian Pharaohs
What god did Ptolemy I create?	Serapis
Cyprus and Cyrene were run by whom?	strategoi
By using a central government that taxes heavily, Ptolemy ran his country akin to which bureaucracy?	Ancient Egyptian
Apis and Osiris combined to make which god?	Serapis
The Syrian was were fought between Ptolemy II and whom?	the Seleucids
What region was fought for during the Syrian wars?	Coele-Syria
Who won the great battle of Raphia?	Ptolemy IV
When was the great battle of Raphia?	217 BCE
Who did Ptolemy IV defeat in the great battle of Raphia?	Seleucids
Till what year did Ptolemy's family rule Egypt?	30 BC
All the male rulers of Egypt took what name during the Ptolemy dynasty?	Ptolemy
Cleopatra, Arsinoe or Berenice were common names for whom?	Ptolemaic queens
Who was the last and most famous queen of the Ptolemy dynasty?	Cleopatra VII
How did Cleoptra die?	suicide
After Alexander's empire was split, what region did Seleucus I Nicator receive?	Babylonia
Pergamum was led by whom when they defeated a Seleucid army?	Eumenes I
Who defied his father Seleucus I, and set up a religous cult?	Antiochus I
What was the name of Seleucus II brother, whom he fought in civil war?	Antiochus Hierax
Who ultimately defeated Seleucid Anatolia?	Attalus I
The Seleucid Empire was mostly dominated by whom?	Greco-Macedonian political elite
What are Seleucid garrisons called?	choria
What are Seleucid military colonies called?	katoikiai
Who defeated Antiochus III at Raphia?	Ptolemy IV
What year did Ptolemy IV die?	204
Which officer took control of Pergamum in 282 BC?	Philetaerus
Who did Philetaerus declare himself loyal to?	Seleucus I
Attalus I was a strong ally of Rome and which ruler?	Philip V of Macedon
Where was the library of Pergamum located?	Pergamon
What depicts the Gigantomachy on the acropolis of the city?	Pergamum Altar
Where did the Celts who settled in Galatia pass through?	Thrace
What battle did the Celts lose to Seleucus I?	battle of the Elephants
What famous statue signified the victory of the Greeks over a worthy enemy?	Dying Gaul
What century did the Galatians become allies of Antiochus the Great?	2nd century BC
Who sent Gnaeus Manlius Vulso on an expedition against the Galatians?	Rome
Who were a Thracian people living in northwest Anatolia?	The Bithynians
King Bas defeated which general of Alexander?	Calas
Who assumed the title of king from Bas?	Zipoetes I
When did Zipoetes I assume the role of king?	297 BCE
Who founded Nicomedia?	Nicomedes I
Who married Stratonice?	Ariarathes III
When did Stratonice marry Ariarathes III?	255 B.C.
Who was Stratonice's father?	Antiochus II
Cappadocia began it's realtionship with Rome under whom?	Ariarathes IV
What year was Ariarathes V defeated?	130 BCE
What kingdom was Hellenistic and on the southern coast of the Black Sea?	Pontus
Who founded the Kingdom of Pontus?	Mithridates I
When was the Kingdom of Pontus founded?	291 BC
When was the Kingdom of Pontus taken over by the Roman Republic?	63 BC
What was the official language of the Kingdom of Pontus during the reign of Mithridates VI Eupator?	Greek
Who ruled when the Kingdom of Pontus' was at it's biggest?	Mithridates VI
Who called themselves King Mithridates Eupator Dionysus?	Mithridates VI
What hairstyle did Mithridates IV copy from Alexander?	anastole
Who did the Macedoniankings claim Mithridates IV descended from?	Herakles
Pontus was defeated in what wars?	Mithridatic
Orontid Armenia was given to Alexander the Great after he took control of what area?	Persia
Who did Alexander apoint to govern Armenia?	Mithranes
Armenia became a vassal state of what Empire?	Seleucid
What year did Armenia split into Greater Armenia and Armenia Sophene?	212 BC
Who attacked Armenia when they became too distant from Seleucid rule?	Antiochus III the Great
When did the Seleucid defeat the Battle of Magnesia?	190 BC
Who was the first king of Artaxiad dynasty of Armenia?	Artaxias
Artaxian coins called some Armenian kings what?	Philhellenes
What years did Tigranes the Great reign?	95–55 BC
Which Tigranes successor composed Greek tragedies?	Artavasdes II
When did Andragoras proclaim his independence?	247 BC
When did Andragoras' reign end?	238 BCE
Who killed Andragoras?	Arsaces
What tribe was Arsaces the leader of?	Parni
When did Antiochus III regain territory from Arsaces II?	209 BC
The Seleucids invaded Mesopotamia under whose guidance?	Antiochus VII Sidetes
Who was Antiochus VII Sidetes killed by which army?	Parthian
What years were the Roman–Parthian Wars?	66 BC – 217 AD
What was the currency in the Parthian Empire?	Greek drachmas
The Parthian Empire worshipped Greek Gods and what other cultures deities?	Iranian
What Arab State lied between the Sinai Peninsula and the Arabian Peninsula?	Nabatean Kingdom
What was the capital of the Nabatean Kingdom?	Petra
Who allied with the Nabatean Kingdom to fight against the Seleucids?	Hasmoneans
Under whose reign did Nabatean culture begin to show Greek influence?	Aretas III Philhellene
What century did Aretas III Philhellene reign?	1st
What are was in between the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Egypt during Hellenistic times?	Judea
What religion rose in Judea durring the Hellenistic period?	Judaism
Hellenistic Judaism was developed in Alexandria and what other region?	Antioch
Judea was ruled by whom during the Hellenistic period?	High Priest of Israel
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	y of
What was the Jewish elite class called?	the Tobiads
Judea was brought into the Seleucid empire by which leader?	Antiochus III
When did Jerusalem fall to Antiochus III?	198
What victorious uprising is celebrated in the Jewish festival Hanukkah?	Maccabean Revolt of Judas Maccabeus
What years were the Maccabean Revolt of Judas Maccabeus?	174–135 BCE
What independent kingdom was formed out of the Maccabean Revolt of Judas Maccabeus?	Hasmonaean Dynasty
What years did the Hasmonaean Dynasty exist?	165 BCE to 63 BCE
Who was the last Hasmonean ruler?	Antigonus II Mattathias
Who was Antigonus II Mattathias captured by?	Herod
When was Antigonus II Mattathias executed?	37 BCE
Bactria was led by what king from 255-246 BCE?	Diodotus
When was Diodotus II overthrown?	230 BC
What leader overthrew Diodotus II?	Euthydemus
The Greco-Bactrian kingdom was invaded by what Seleucid leader?	Antiochus III
Antiochus III married his daughter off to whose son?	Euthydemus
Who stated that the Greco-Bactrians had connections through the silk road?	Strabo
When did Demetrius, son of Euthydemus invade north-western India?	180 BC
Whose death signifies the beginning of confusing documentation of Greco-Bactrian history?	Demetrius
Who was the last Greek to clearly rule Bactria?	Heliocles
Who was the first Indo-Greek king who did not rule from Bactria?	Apollodotus I
Who succeeded or ruled alongside Apollodotus I?	Antimachus II
Who succeeded Antimachus II?	Menander I
What religion did Menander I convert to?	Buddhism
What was Menander I refered to by in Buddhist texts?	Milinda
When did Menander die?	130 BC
What kingdom forced the Indo-Greek kingdom to the east?	Indo-Scythian
Around 70 BC, Arachosia and what other region where taken over by tribal invasion?	Paropamisadae
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	dom. The resulting Indo-Scythian kingdom seems to have gradually pushed the remaining Indo-Greek
I couldn't could up with another question. But i need to fill this space because I can't submit the hit.	in
What does "sarvajnaa yavanaa" mean?	the all-knowing Yavanas
Who said "The Yavanas, O king, are all-knowing; the Suras are particularly so."?	The Mahabharata
Who wrote the Brihat-Samhita?	Varahamihira
Who said "The mlecchas are wedded to the creations of their own fancy."	The Mahabharata
Who said "The Greeks, though impure, must be honored since they were trained in sciences and therein, excelled others...."	Varahamihira
What period was Hellenistic culture at it's height?	Hellenistic
Even though some regions were not ruled by Greeks, they still were influenced by which culture?	Hellenistic
Hellenism or Philhellenism reached the frontiers of what kingdom?	Hellenistic
Before Hellenestic influence, Greek colonies were on the shores of the Taman and what other peninsula?	Crimean
What kingdom under the Spartocid dynasty consisted of Maeotians, Thracians, Crimean Scythians and Cimmerians?	Bosporan
Which Scythian people with the Bosporans have strong trade contacts with?	Pontic-Caspian steppe
From whom did the Scythians of Central Asia discover Hellenistic culture?	Greeks of Bactria
Hellenized Scythians were known as?	young Scythians
What did the Greeks call Bahrain?	Tylos
Where was the central point of pearl trading?	Bahrain
Which of Alexanders commanders were the first to visit Bahrain?	Nearchus
Alexander planned to colonized the eastern bank of the Persian Gulf with what ethnicity of colonist?	Greek
Tylos worshipped Zeus in the form of what Arabian sun-god?	Shams
Carthage was on the coast of what country?	Tunisia
What Hellenistic practices heavily influenced Carthaginian culture?	military
Who reformed the military in Carthage in 550 BCE?	Mago I of Carthage
What Greek style was the core of Carthage's military?	phalanx
What Spartan mercenary helped reform Carthage's military?	Xanthippus of Carthage
Rome dominated what peninsula?	Italian
Greek cities were absorbed by what republic?	Roman
Rome fought against the Carthaginians in what war?	First Punic War
Sicily was won by whom in the First Punic war?	Romans
Illyrian pirates caused two wars in the Balkans with what Empire?	Roman
What king of Macedon aided the pirate Demetrius of Pharos?	Philip V
Hannibal defeated whom at the Battle of Cannae?	the Romans
When was the Battle of Cannae?	216 BC
In what war was the Battle of Cannae?	Second Punic War
In what region did the Romans aim to re-bolster the influence after the Second Punic war?	the Balkans
Whose refusal to end wars with Attalid Pergamum and Rhodes led to the Second Macedonian War?	Philip
What year did the Second Macedonian War begin?	200 BC
What battle signaled the end to the Second Macedonian War?	Battle of Cynoscephalae
What empire won the Second Macedonian War?	Roman
Antiochus III allied with what king in 203 BC?	Philip V
Who defeated Ptolemy?	Antiochus
In what war was Ptolemy defeated?	Fifth Syrian War
What war bgean when Antiochus III invaded Greece?	Roman-Syrian War
What years did the Roman-Syrian war take place?	192–188 BC
What was the name of Philip V's son who wanted to bring back Greek independence?	Perseus
Perseus fought the Romans in what war?	Third Macedonian War
When was Macedonia annexed by the Romans?	146 BC
Which Roman consul defeated the Greeks at Corinth?	Lucius Mummius
When did the Greek peninsula become a Roman protectorate?	146 BC
Who was the final king of the Attalid dynasty?	Attalus III
When did Attalus III die?	133 BC
Who willed Pergamum to the Roman Republic?	Attalus III
In what year was the final Greek resistance?	88 BC
Who led the final Greek resistance?	Mithridates of Pontus
Who tried to invade Egypt in the famous line-in-the-sand incident?	Antiochus IV Epiphanes
Which Roman proconsul ablished the Seleucid rump state?	Pompey the Great
Who was the last Ptolemaic monarch?	Cleopatra VII
At what battle was Mark Anthony defeated?	Battle of Actium
What region did Augustus take on as his personal fiefdom?	Egypt
Who is most responsible for the preservation of Hellenistic culture?	Hellenistic Greeks
What museum and ilbrary was the center of Hellenistic culture conservation?	Alexandria
Where did most of the great literary figures of the Hellenistic period study?	Alexandria
Which city held the most prestigious seat of higher education?	Athens
What library was estimated to have 700,000 volumes?	Library of Alexandria
Which city became a major center of book production?	Pergamon
What island has a famous finishing school for diplomacy and politics?	Rhodes
What replaced Babylon as the metropolis of the lower Tigris?	Seleucia
Philip II and Alexander's court army spoke a version of what language?	Attic Greek
Attic Greek developed into what lingua franca?	Koine
Ai-Khanoum was situated on what kind of routes?	trade
The practice of identifying local gods with Greek deities is called what?	Interpretatio graeca
Who wrote the story of Crassus?	Plutarch
Crassus' head is used a prop in what performance?	The Bacchae
A 35 row theater at the edge of Bactria was found in what region?	Ai-Khanoum
Who led Hellenization practices by founding new Greek cities and colonies?	Alexander
Susa weddings were an example of how Alexander mixed Greek culture with what other culture?	Persian
Who bitterly resented Alexander's pragmatic approach of selecting his military?	the Macedonians
Alexander suffered from what mental disorder?	megalomania
Native populations in the Hellenistic world were discriminated by what peoples?	Greek
Hellinistic Gymnasiums could only be used by whom?	Greeks
What are the areas of concentration from where Greek culture eminates?	highly localized
What percent of the Seleucid empire were comprised of native elites?	2.5
Menander converted to what religion?	Buddhism
Egyptianized Greeks in the Ptolemaic kingdom started to exist by which century?	2nd
Greeks adopted what from local cultures?	customs
A colonist far from the Mediterranean and low in social rank would be more likely to do what?	adopt local ways
Greco-Macedonian elites remained commited to what culture?	Greek
Who did Greeks look down upon?	non-Greeks
Who was the first Ptolemaic ruler to learn the Egyptian language?	Cleopatra VII
What Egyptian god was worshipped in Athens?	Isis
Zeus was paired with which local god?	Ammon
Aphrodite was paired with which local god?	Hagne
Isis was paired with what local god?	Demeter
What practice did the Ptolemies adopt in which they dubbed themselves god-kings?	Pharaonic
What theism is practice of putting your self on the level of gods?	isotheism
A long lived cult in Erythrae worshiped which dead leader?	Alexander
Where was Alexander's tomb located?	Alexandria
The Hellinistic age marked the rise in what type of religion?	traditional
Who declared the centrality of humanity and agnosticism?	Sophists
What is the view "that the gods were simply ancient kings and heroes" called?	Euhemerism
Who thought that gods were distant and uninterested?	Epicurus
Rulers brought the concept of divinity to where?	down to earth
How would people ward off misfortune in Hellenistic times?	charms
What is the complex system based on the sun, moon, and planets movements that determine your personality?	astrology
Astrology was associated with which cult?	Tyche
What does Tyche mean?	luck
What was the trajectory of Astrology during Hellenistic times?	grew
Menander is one of the few remaining pieces of what time of liteary work?	New Comedy
What is the only play that remains in it's entirety from the New Comedy era?	Dyskolos
What is the name of the collection that holds fragments of works from 150 authors?	The Supplementum Hellenisticum
What two years are debated as the date in which Menander was born?	342/1 BCE
Who did Hellenistic poets wish to court?	kings
Who wrote hymns equating Ptolemy II to Zeus and Apollo?	Callimachus
Who said "Big book, big evil"?	Callimachus
What was the name of Callimachus' catalog at the library of Alexandria?	Pinakes
Who wrote Argonautica?	Apollonius of Rhodes
What city remained the center of philosophical thought?	Athens
What does ataraxia mean?	un-disturbedness
What does autarky mean?	self-sufficiency
What does apatheia mean?	freedom from suffering
Who promoted freedom from pain as the ultimate goal?	Epicurus
Who said social norms and material possesions were unnatural and useless?	Diogenes of Sinope
Which group embraced hedonism?	Cyrenaics
Who founded Stoicism?	Zeno of Citium
Who rejected Academic Skepticism in favor of Neoplatonism?	Antiochus of Ascalon
The Royal patrons of Alexander's successors supported what type of science?	Hellenistic
What city was especially important to Hellinistic science?	Alexandria
What century did Alexandria become scientific research hub?	3rd
When did Archimedes die?	212 BC
When was Euclid born?	325
Who worked on the five Platonic solids?	Euclid
Who measured the circumference of the Earth?	Eratosthenes
Who was the Father of Geomtery?	Eratosthenes
When was Hipparchus born?	190
Hipparchus measured the precession of what?	Earth
Who stated that Hipparchus created the first systematic star map?	Pliny
Hipparchus' star may be depicted in a statue called what?	Farnese Atlas
Whch astronomer developed a heliocentric system?	Aristarchos of Samos
What is the name of the 37 gear computer which noted the motions of the Sun and Moon?	Antikythera mechanism
Until what century were similar devices like the Antikythera mechanism found?	10th
What Persian scholar noted the 10th century calculator similar to the Antikythera mechanism?	Al-Biruni
What range of years is the Antikythera mechanism thought to have been created?	150–100 BC
Who theorized that blood traveled through the veins?	Praxagoras of Kos
Who was the first to finalize his conclusions with dissections of cadevers?	Herophilos
Which school of medicine was based on strict observation?	Empiric
Who was the first to provide accurate descriptions of the nervous system?	Herophilos
Philip II used a dense military formation called what?	Macedonian Phalanx
Were Hellenistic armies smaller or larger than traditional Greek armies?	larger
The Thorakitai used what type of oval shield?	Thureos
From whom did Seleucus receive war elephants?	Mauryan empire
What kind of elephant did the Ptolemies use?	African elephant
What was the largest ship constructed in Antiquity?	Ptolemaic Tessarakonteres
Who invented the Polybolos?	Dionysios of Alexandria
What type of weapon is the Polybolos?	ballista
Who heavy was the Helepolis siege tower?	160 ton
How long was Demetrius Poliorcetes siege of Rhodes?	12-month
Emotion is called what in Hellenistic art?	pathos
Character is called what in Hellenistic art?	ethos
Who is the artist that drew grapes so lifelike, birds flew up and pecked at them?	Zeuxis
The ideals of Hellenistic art are sensuality and what?	passion
What painting epitomized the female nude?	Aphrodite of Cnidos of Praxiteles
Which artist chose mundane and low class subjects?	Peiraikos
Which barbarians were depicted in heroic form?	Galatians
All of the diadochi painted themselves to look like what leader?	Alexander the Great
Venus de Milo belongs to which period?	Hellenistic
Which Greek painter experimented in chiaroscuro?	Zeuxis
Were Greek temples built in the Hellenistic period larger or smaller than classical temples?	larger
Who rebuilt the Apollo at Didyma in 300 BCE?	Seleucus
What is a Greek royal palace called?	basileion
What is the first example of Hellenistic period royal palace?	villa of Cassander at Vergina
Who said "then art dissapeared"?	Pliny the Elder
The discovery of what tombs raised the profile of Hellenistic art?	Vergina
Hellenistic art is describe as decadent mainly due to it following which style  period?	Golden Age of Classical Athens
What century do the terms Baroque and Rococo come from?	18th
What century of scholars considered the Hellenistic period a decline in culture from classic Greece?	19th
How did 19th century scholars view the Hellenistic period?	a mirror
The viewpoint that the Hellenistic period represented a decline in culture was proven to be meaningless and what?	unfair
Who focused on the issue of racial and cultural confrontation?	William Woodthorpe Tarn
Which organization did Michael Rostovtzeff flee from?	Russian Revolution
Who studied the problem mutual understanding between races in conquered areas?	Arnaldo Momigliano
Frank William Walbank mainly focused on which relations in his depictions of Hellinistic culture?	class
Whish Hellinistic historian focused primarely on the economic system?	C. Préaux
Napoleon spent ten years as emperor of what people?	the French
When did Napoleon's empire collapse?	1815
Where are Napoleon's campaigns still studied today?	military schools
What did Napoleon bring civilly to his territories?	liberal reforms
What is Napoleon's legal achievement, still reaching a quarter of the world's legal systems?	the Napoleonic Code
When was Napoleon Bonaparte born?	15 August 1769
When did Napoleon Bonaparte die?	5 May 1821
What was Napoleon Bonaparte's nationality?	French
During what historical event did Napoleon rise to prominence?	the French Revolution
When did Napoleon Bonaparte's empire finally collapse?	1815
When did Napoleon Bonaparte die?	5 May 1821
During what historical event did Napoleon rise to prominence?	the French Revolution
Of what ancestry was Napoleon?	Tuscan
How did Napoleon save the French government in 1795?	by firing on the Parisian mobs with cannons
How old was Napoleon when he was given command of the Army of Italy?	26
Where did Napoleon lead his troops in 1798?	Egypt
Against whom was Napoleon's first military campaign waged?	the Austrians
Where was Napoleon born?	Corsica
When was Napoleon banished from Corsica?	1793
At what age did Napoleon receive command of the Army of Italy?	26
Who did Napoleon fight his first military campaign against?	the Austrians and their Italian allies
When did Napoleon command his military expedition to Egypt?	1798
When did Napoleon engineer a coup?	November 1799
What victory in 1800 secured Napoleon's political power?	Battle of Marengo
What document restored the religious privileges of the Catholic Church?	Concordat of 1801
When was Napoleon named Emperor of the French?	1804
What did Napoleon eliminate in October 1805?	Holy Roman Empire
Napoleon's political power was secured by his victory at which 1800 battle?	the Battle of Marengo
At the Concordat of 1801, Napoleon restored the religious privileges of what entity?	the Catholic Church
When did the French Senate declare Napoleon Emperor?	1804
Napoleon's victory at which battle led to the end of the Holy Roman Empire?	the Battle of Austerlitz
The results of which battle allowed the British to blockade French coasts?	the Battle of Trafalgar
What country did Napoleon invade to extend the Continental System?	Iberia
How long did the Peninsular War last?	six years
With what victory did Napoleon dissolve the Fifth Coalition against France?	Battle of Wagram
How many people did Napoleon rule by 1811?	over 70 million
When, before Napoleon, had Europe last seen the same level of political consolidation?	the Roman Empire
What region did Napoleon invade in an effort to extend the Continental System?	Iberia
Who did Napoleon declare King of Spain in 1808?	his brother Joseph
How long did the Peninsular War last?	six years
Napoleon's victory at which battle resulted in the destruction of the Fifth Coalition?	the Battle of Wagram
By 1811, what was the population of Napoleon's Empire?	over 70 million people
What nation did Napoleon invade in 1812 to enforce his blockade?	Russia
The 1812 invasion of Russia resulted in the collapse of which military unit?	the Grand Army
In what year was the Sixth Coalition formed?	1813
In addition to Russia, the Sixth Coalition consisted of forces from which two nations?	Prussia and Austria
In what year did the Allies capture Paris and force Napoleon's abdication?	1814
Who was Napoleon's father?	Carlo Maria di Buonaparte
Who was Napoleon's mother?	Maria Letizia Ramolino
On what island was the Bonaparte ancestral home located?	Corsica
What was the name of Napoleon's family home?	Casa Buonaparte
Napoleon was most likely named after what family relation?	an uncle
When did Napoleon begin religious schooling in Autun?	January 1779
Where was the first military academy Napoleon attended located?	Brienne-le-Château
What was Napoleon's first language?	Corsican
Why did other students often tease Napoleon?	his accent
According to a school examiner, Napoleon was best at which academic subject?	mathematics
When did Napoleon graduate?	September 1785
What commission did Napoleon receive upon his graduation?	second lieutenant
What military unit did Napoleon first serve in after his graduation?	La Fère artillery regiment
What Corsican leader did Napoleon write in 1789 expressing his nationalist sentiments?	Pasquale Paoli
When did the Revolution begin?	1789
Where was Napoleon put under house arrest?	Nice
What historical event brought about the fall of the Robespierres?	the Thermidorian Reaction
When did the Thermidorian Reaction take place?	July 1794
At the time of his house arrest, Napoleon was serving with what military entity?	the Army of Italy
After his house arrest, who was the commissar that Napoleon sent a letter to protesting innocence?	Salicetti
Who did Napoleon become engaged to in 1795?	Désirée Clary
In April 1795, what military organization was Napoleon assigned to?	the Army of the West
At the time of Napoleon's assignment, what military struggle was the Army of the West engaged in?	the War in the Vendée
Which older brother of Napoleon's did Désirée Clary's sister Julie marry?	Joseph
What excuse did Napoleon use to avoid being assigned to an infantry command?	poor health
After his move to the Committee of Public Safety, where did Napoleon unsuccessfully attempt to be transferred to?	Constantinople
Inspired by his own relationship, what romantic tale did Napoleon author?	Clisson et Eugénie
On what date was Napoleon taken off the list of generals in service due to his refusal to serve in Vendée?	15 September
In which department of the Committee of Public Safety did Napoleon serve?	the Bureau of Topography
Napoleon's novella "Clisson et Eugénie" was based on his relationship with whom?	Désirée
After his marriage, Napoleon left Paris to lead what army?	the Army of Italy
In which series of battles did Napoleon eliminate the forces of Piedmont from the war?	the Montenotte Campaign
When did the French victory at Rivoli occur?	January 1797
Up to how many Austrian soldiers died at Rivoli?	14,000
Around how many casualties did the French suffer at Rivoli?	5,000
In what year were the French defeated in Southern Germany by the Archduke Charles?	1796
After Napoleon's attack, the Archduke pulled back his forces to defend which city?	Vienna
What was the first noteworthy confrontation between Napoleon and the Archduke Charles?	the Battle of Tarvis
When did the Battle of Tarvis take place?	March 1797
Approximately how close did the French incursion into Leoben come to reaching Vienna?	100 km
What was Napoleon's favorite strategy?	envelopment
How many prisoners did Napoleon's army capture in the Italian campaign?	150,000
How many cannons did Napoleon's army capture in the Italian campaign?	540
In what area did the French army display superior technology to its opponents?	artillery
How many standards did Napoleon's army capture in the Italian campaign?	170
For what action during the Italian campaign did the royalists condemn Bonaparte?	looting
About how much money did Napoleon's army take from Italy during the conflict there?	$45 million
Approximately how many valuable paintings and sculpture's did Napoleon's forces loot from Italy during the campaign there?	three-hundred
What was the name of the general sent to Paris by Napoleon to organize a coup against the royalists there?	Pierre Augereau
Napoleon's peace negotiations with Austria brought about what treaty?	the Treaty of Campo Formio
Before landing at Alexandria, Napoleon succeeded in evading what military entity?	the Royal Navy
On what date did Napoleon land at Alexandria?	1 July
What battle did Napoleon fight against the Mamluks?	the Battle of Shubra Khit
What was the name of Egypt's dominant military class?	the Mamluks
Roughly how many Egyptians lost their lives in the Battle of the Pyramids?	2,000
In what battle did the British fleet seize or destroy most of the French vessels in Egypt?	the Battle of the Nile
Who led the British during the Battle of the Nile?	Horatio Nelson
In what year did Napoleon lead his army into Damascus?	1799
During the battles in Damascus, the attack on which city was know for its brutality?	Jaffa
Approximately how many troops were in the army Napoleon led into Damascus?	13,000
How many men were in Napoleon's army when the battle began?	13,000
How many soldiers in Napoleon's army died in combat?	1,200
How many soldiers from Napoleon's army were reported missing?	1,500
What disease took the heaviest toll on Napoleon's army?	bubonic plague
To speed his retreat to Egypt, Napoleon ordered the poisoning of sick men with what substance?	opium
Napoleon's ally Roger Ducos was the speaker for what organization?	the Council of Five Hundred
On what date did Napoleon's alliance overthrow the Directory?	9 November 1799
Napoleon's successful coup against the directory resulted in the closure of what organization?	the council of five hundred
After his successful coup against the Directory, what political office did Napoleon assume?	"first consul"
What was the count of the popular vote in favor of the "Constitution of the Year VIII"?	3,000,000
What was historian Martin Lyons' term for the political system created by Napoleon?	"dictatorship by plebiscite."
 What was the name of the constitution drafted by Napoleon?	the Constitution of the Year VIII
  After his election to First Consul, where did Napoleon take up residence?	the Tuileries.
 What percentage of the vote was recorded as approving Napoleon's constitution?	99.94
 What was the real number of people that took part in the plebiscite that passed Napoleon's constitution?	1.5 million
In what year did Napoleon and his troops cross the Swiss Alps and enter Italy?	1800
Who led the French army defending Genoa against the Austrian siege?	André Masséna
 What was the date of the Battle of Marengo?	June 14
Who led the Austrian forces at the Battle of Marengo?	General Melas
How many troops did Napoleon field at the Battle of Marengo?	24,000
From what direction did Napoleon elect to invade Italy?	the north
 What direction did French invasions of Italy normally come from?	the west
Around how long did it take Napoleon to push Austria out of Italy in his first experiences there?	a year
How long did it take Napoleon to drive Austria from Italy in 1800?	a month
According to Alfred von Shlieffen, what was the object of Napoleon's 1800 Italian campaign?	the conquest of North Italy
Where did the victory for Napoleon that secured his political power and increased his popularity in France occur?	Marengo
Where did the negotiations with Austria led by Napoleon's brother take place?	Lunéville
What was the name of the general ordered by Napoleon to launch another attack against Austria?	Moreau
What was the name of the treaty signed by the Austrians as a result of their defeat at Hohenlinden?	the Treaty of Lunéville
Where did Moreau achieve his major victory against Austria in December 1800?	Hohenlinden
What 1802 treaty between Britain and France ended the Revolutionary Wars?	the Treaty of Amiens
What year was the Treaty of Amiens signed?	1802
In what year did French voters approve a constitution making the Consulate permanent?	1802
What percentage of the French vote approved Napoleon's new constitution?	over 99%
What position was Napoleon granted in Article 1 of the new French constitution?	First Consul for Life
During the short peace in Europe, where did Napoleon turn his focus?	the French colonies abroad
During the Revolutionary War, which French colony had moved towards political independence?	Saint-Domingue
 Who was the de facto ruler of Saint-Domingue in 1801?	Toussaint Louverture
In February of what year did the national Convention vote to get rid of slavery?	1794
What was the name of the French general who led the forces that attempted to regain control of Sainte-Domingue?	Leclerc
What was the name of the assassination plot against Napoleon also known as the Infernal Machine?	the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise
 When did the Conspiration des poignards take place?	October 1800
What  family was supposed to have supported the January 1804 assassination plot targeting Napoleon?	the Bourbon family
 What was another name for the Conspiration des poignards?	Dagger plot
The kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien violated the sovereignty of what locale?	Baden
The imperial system Napoleon created was based on what model?	the Roman
What did Napoleon use to justify his creation of an imperial system?	assassination plots
Napoleon wrote his family's succession into the constitution in an attempt to prevent the restoration of what former ruling family?	Bourbon
Napoleon was elected Emperor of the French by more than what percentage of voters?	99%
About how many voters participated in the election that made Napoleon Emperor of the French?	3.6 million
On what date did Napoleon's coronation occur?	December 2, 1804
How many crowns were used in Napoleon's coronation ceremony?	Two
Other than France, what country was Napoleon crowned king of?	Italy
When was Napoleon crowned King of Italy?	May 26, 1805
Where was Napoleon crowned King of Italy?	at the Cathedral of Milan
What was the name of the invasion force Napoleon assembled before the creation of the Third Coalition?	the Armée d'Angleterre
Where in Northern France were the camps of the Armée d'Angleterre located?	Boulogne
What country was the Armée d'Angleterre intended to strike at?	England
What was the name of the later military organization that the Armée d'Angleterre formed the foundation of?	La Grande Armée.
How many men were in the Grande Armée by 1805?	350,000
Napoleon acknowledged that the fleet of France was no match for what rival fleet in direct combat?	the Royal Navy
 Napoleon's plan to divert the British involved a French Navy attack on what islands?	the West Indies.
 Napoleon hoped an attack on the West Indies would cause the British to lessen their defenses where?	the Western Approaches
 Napoleon's naval plan came apart after British triumph at which Battle?	the Battle of Cape Finisterre
When did the Battle of Cape Finisterre occur?	July 1805
By August 1805, Napoleon changed the primary target of his army's efforts from the English Channel to what area?	the Rhine
 On what date did French troops begin to cross the Rhine?	25 September
How many French troops were involved in the crossing of the Rhine?	200,000
Who was the Austrian commander who led the army at the fortress of Ulm?	Karl Mack
How many casualties did the French suffer at the Battle of Ulm?	2000
In November, after the Ulm Campaign, what city was captured by French forces?	Vienna
 How many muskets did the French capture in the fall of Vienna?	100,000
How many cannons did the French capture when Vienna fell?	500
When was the Battle of Austerlitz fought?	2 December
In what country was the Battle of Austerlitz fought?	Moravia
The Allied defeat at what location caused Emperor Francis to doubt the chances of the war effort?	Austerlitz
What was the name of the treaty signed by France and Austria on 26 December?	the Treaty of Pressburg
On what date was the Treaty of Pressburg signed?	26 December
The Treaty of Pressburg resulted in which country leaving the war?	Austria
How much did the Habsburgs have to pay as a result of the Treaty of Pressburg?	40 million francs
Napoleon's master plan was to establish a French presence in what part of the world?	the Middle East
In 1806, what Ottoman ruler recognized Napoleon as Emperor?	Selim III
In what year did Ottoman Emperor Selim III recognize Napoleon as Emperor?	1806
Napoleon formed an alliance with the empire of which Persian ruler?	Fat′h-Ali Shah Qajar
In what year did Napoleon's Franco-Persian alliance end?	1807
What is the name of the political body composed of German states established by Napoleon in 1806?	the Confederation of the Rhine
When was the Confederation of the Rhine formed?	1806
The existence of the Confederation of the Rhine brought about the end of which imperial power?	the Holy Roman Empire
 Which Prussian ruler chose to go to war with France for control of Central Europe?	Frederick William III
What other royal figure strongly influenced Frederick William III's decision to go to war with France?	Queen Louise
How many troops did Napoleon use for the invasion of Prussia?	180,000
 What river did the French cross to engage the Prussian army?	the Saale
To whom did Napoleon send a letter detailing his plans for the campaign with Prussia?	Marshal Soult
 On what date were the battles of Jena and Auerstedt fought?	14 October
How many Prussian soldiers were captured at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt?	140,000
In what 1806 proclamation did Napoleon begin to impose the Continental System?	the Berlin Decree
 What was the system Napoleon imposed though the Berlin Decree?	The Continental System
When was the Berlin Decree issued?	November 1806
In what year was the Battle of Eylau?	1807
In what 14 June conflict did Napoleon win a decisive victory over the Russians?	the Battle of Friedland
What is the name of the Duke who pressured Alexander to make peace with Napoleon?	Constantine
 Which ocean territories did Napoleon demand Russia cede to France as part of the terms for peace?	the Ionian Islands
What was the name of the new kingdom Napoleon created from Prussian territories?	Westphalia
What was the name of the younger brother who Napoleon appointed as the ruler of Westphalia?	Jérôme
 What was the name of the series of agreements that ended war for a time and allowed Napoleon to return to France?	the Treaties of Tilsit
Where did the agreements that gave Napoleon time to structure his empire take place?	Tilsit
One of Napoleon's primary goals was to enforce the Continental System against whom?	the British
Napoleon chose to focus his attention on which country that flouted his trade restrictions?	the Kingdom of Portugal
In what year did Portugal experience defeat in the War of the Oranges?	1801
After the Franco-Spanish loss at Trafalgar, John VI resumed relations with what nation?	Britain
When did Napoleon's invasion of Portugal begin?	17 October 1807
How many troops did Napoleon send to begin the invasion of Portugal?	24,000
Who did Napoleon select to lead the troops sent to invade Portugal?	General Junot
The invasion of Portugal was the beginning of what six-year conflict?	the Peninsular War
How many troops did Marshal Murat lead into Spain?	120,000
At which 1808 meeting did Napoleon attempt to keep the Russians on his side for future conflicts?	the Congress of Erfurt
In what year was the Congress of Erfurt held?	1808
The Erfurt Convention insisted that Britain stop war against which nation?	France
The Erfurt Convention recognized the Russian takeover of which formerly Swedish possession?	Finland
When was the Battle of Corunna fought?	January 1809
Napoleon left Iberia for Central Europe to deal with whom?	the Austrians
Approximately how many French troops were kept in Iberia during the Peninsular War?	300,000
During the Peninsular War, in what country did guerrilla warfare frequently occur?	Spain
By what year did the Allies force the French out of the Iberian peninsula?	1814
 In what year did the invasion of Russia take place?	1812
Who was the Prussian ruler who at first  claimed he would help Austria in its battle with France, but later refused to?	Frederick William
The finance minister of Austria predicted that if the country kept its large army mobilized, the national treasury would be bankrupt by the middle of what year?	1809
 Which Archduke warned that Austria wasn't prepared for an additional conflict with Napoleon?	Charles
On what date did the Austrian government secretly decide on going to war with France?	8 February 1809
On what date did the Austrian army first cross the Inn River?	10 April
 Where was Napoleon when he received news of an Austrian invasion?	Paris
 When Napoleon reached Donauwörth, how much distance were the wings of the Grande Armée separated by?	75 miles (121 km)
What was the name of the plan Napoleon devised to cut off the Austrians during battle?	Landshut Maneuver
What was the name of the conflict where the French defeated Austrian forces and forced them to withdraw to Bohemia?	Battle of Eckmühl
On what date did the main Austrian army arrive at the Marchfield?	17 May
 Who led the main Austrian army?	Charles
On what date did French forces make their first significant attempt to cross the Danube?	21 May
How many soldiers did Charles initially lead against the French at the Battle of Aspern-Essling?	110,000
Around how many casualties did the French experience at the Battle of Aspern-Essling?	23,000
Approximately how long did Napoleon take to prepare another Danube crossing after his defeat at Aspern-Essling?	six weeks
On what date did the French begin the re-crossing of the Danube?	30 June
 Approximately how many French troops met Charles at the Battle of Wagram?	180,000
How many Austrian troops did Charles lead at the Battle of Wagram?	150,000
How long did the Battle of Wagram last?	two days
What was the name of the campaign by the British in Holland that created a second front in the war?	the Walcheren Campaign
The Walcheren Campaign was intended to relieve the military pressure on whom?	the Austrians
 On what date did the British army arrive on Walcheren?	30 July
What was the popular name of the disease that caused many casualties during the Walcheren Campaign?	"Walcheren Fever."
When did the British withdraw from Walcheren?	December 1809
When was the Treaty of Schönbrunn signed?	October 1809
The goal of Metternich and Archduke Charles regarding the Treaty of Schönbrunn was to attempt the preservation of what?	the Habsburg Empire
In the Treaty of Schönbrunn, what territory was given to the Poles?	Galicia
In the Treaty of Schönbrunn, who received the Salzburg area of the Tyrol?	the Bavarians
Approximately how many subjects did Austria lose as the result of the changes brought about by the Treaty of Schönbrunn?	three million
After the war, what did Napoleon focus on?	domestic affairs
 When did Napoleon divorce Josephine?	January 1810
After his divorce from Josephine, who did Napoleon marry?	Archduchess Marie Louise
How old was Archduchess Marie Louise when she married Napoleon?	18
 When did Marie Louise give birth?	20 March 1811
What meeting did Napoleon and Czar Alexander participate in in 1808?	the Congress of Erfurt
In what year did the Congress of Erfurt take place?	1808
 Where did Napoleon and Czar Alexander first meet?	Tilsit
In what year did Napoleon and Czar Alexander first meet?	1807
Violations of what Napoleonic policy by Russia led to tensions between Russia and France?	the Continental System
What did Napoleon name the war with Russia in an effort to garner support from Poland?	the Second Polish War
What was the name of the 1768 war that involved the Bar Confederation uprising against Russia?	the First Polish War
Polish nationalists wanted Russian territories in Poland to be joined with which national entity?	the Duchy of Warsaw
Napoleon rejected Polish demands for an independent state because of prior promises to which ally?	Austria
During France's retreat, atrocities were committed against French soldiers by which Russian subjects?	serfs
To avoid direct fighting with Napoleon, the Russians retreated into which country?	Russia
Where did the Russians try to resist Napoleon and get defeated?	Smolensk
In what month were the Russians defeated at Smolensk?	August
What methods used by the Russian army made it hard for the French to find food?	scorched earth tactics
Outside what city did the Battle of Borodino occur?	Moscow
On what date did the Battle of Borodino take place?	7 September
Approximately how many Russians were hurt, killed, or captured in the Battle of Borodino?	44,000
 Around how many French were killed, injured, or taken prisoner in the Battle of Borodino?	35,000
Who won the Battle of Borodino?	the French
When Napoleon entered Moscow, he expected an offer of peace from whom?	Alexander
What was the name of the governor who ordered the burning of Moscow?	Feodor Rostopchin
How long did Napoleon stay in Moscow before leaving?	five weeks
What 1812 event turned Napoleon's attention back to France?	the Malet coup
Approximately how many French men and horses froze to death on the night of 8/9 November?	10,000
The Allies suggested peace terms in which set of proposals?	the Frankfurt proposals
When were the Frankfurt proposals made?	November 1813
The Frankfurt proposals allowed Napoleon to retain what position in France?	Emperor
The Frankfurt proposals sought to reduce France to what?	its "natural frontiers."
 Who told Napoleon that the Frankfurt proposals were probably the best terms the Allies would offer?	Metternich
The Allies took back their offer to Napoleon in what month?	December
In what year did Napoleon attempt to resume peace talks?	1814
Which peace initiative did Napoleon refer to when he attempted to make peace in 1814?	the Frankfurt proposals
The new Allied demands for peace insisted France return to its boundaries of what year?	1791
In the new Allied peace proposal, what territory would France have been forced to surrender?	Belgium
On what date did Alexander speak to the Sénat conservateur?	1 April
 The Sénat conservateur became hostile to Napoleon due to whose efforts?	Talleyrand's
What was the act passed by the Sénat conservateur that deposed Napoleon?	the Acte de déchéance de l'Empereur
Where had Napoleon advanced to when he received word that Paris was lost?	Fontainebleau
What did Napoleon's senior officers and marshals do when he suggested they march on Paris?	mutinied
In which treaty was Napoleon exiled?	the Treaty of Fontainebleau
What is the name of the island Napoleon was exiled to?	Elba
In what sea is Elba located?	the Mediterranean
The allies permitted Napoleon to keep what title?	Emperor
When Napoleon was exiled, where did his wife and son go for shelter?	Austria
What military unit was charged with intercepting Napoleon?	The 5th Regiment
On what date was Napoleon contacted by the 5th Regiment?	March 7, 1815
 When Napoleon suggested to the 5th Regiment that they kill him, how did they respond?	"Vive L'Empereur!"
 Ney had told Louis XVIII that he would carry Napoleon to Paris in what kind of container?	an iron cage
 After fleeing France, where did Louis XVIII go?	Belgium
Where did Napoleon return and find that the populace and government had turned against him?	Paris
 On what date did Napoleon abdicate?	22 June
 How many days after his abdication did Napoleon leave Paris?	three days
 On what date did the Coalition forces arrive near Paris?	29 June
 When Napoleon left Paris, he went to the palace formerly belonging to whom?	Josephine
In what year did Louis Philippe I get permission to return Napoleon's remains to France?	1840
 On what date was a state funeral held for Napoleon?	15 December 1840
At what location did the hearse carrying Napoleon's remains begin its procession?	the Arc de Triomphe
 In what building was the cupola where Napoleon's remains were first placed located?	St Jérôme's Chapel
In what year was Napoleon's final tomb completed?	1861
When were the diaries of Napoleon's valet published?	1955
What was the name of Napoleon's valet?	Louis Marchand
 What was the possible cause for Napoleon's death suggested in a 1961 Nature paper?	arsenic poisoning
In 1961, who suggested the possibility that Napoleon died from ingestion of arsenic?	Sten Forshufvud
What condition was Napoleon's body in when it was moved in 1840?	well preserved
What substance used in Napoleon's treatment is it suggested prevented his stomach from expelling arsenic compounds?	potassium tartrate
What do those who think Napoleon was poisoned cite as a symptom that would suggest this?	his thirst
According to Patrick Knize, what conclusion does the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts suggest?	that he was murdered
In what year was the article describing the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair published?	2007
Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismiss what possible cause of Napoleon's death?	arsenic poisoning
Studies published in 2007 and 2008 support what possible causes of Napoleon's death?	peptic ulcer and gastric cancer
 A 2008 study supporting the original autopsy findings related to Napoleon's death analyzed samples of what substance taken from Napoleon and his family?	hair
The 2008 study related to Napoleon's death found that hair collected from Napoleon's hair as well as that of his family and contemporaries, had arsenic levels approximately how many times higher than current averages?	100 times
What type of marriage did Napoleon have with Joséphine de Beauharnais?	civil
What did Napoleon display tolerance related to during his time in Egypt?	religion
General Dupuy revealed the motives for Napoleon's religious tolerance after the death of which religious figure?	Pope Pius VI
Who argued that Bonaparte's admiration for Muhammad was sincere?	Juan Cole
Napoleon's marriage to Joséphine de Beauharnais lacked what kind of ceremony?	religious
When was Napoleon crowned Emperor?	2 December 1804
 Where was Napoleon crowned Emperor?	Notre Dame de Paris
Who crowned Napoleon Emperor?	Pope Pius VII
When did Napoleon marry Marie Louise?	1 April 1810
What did Napoleon abolish in Spain in 1813, during his brother's rule there?	the Spanish Inquisition
What is the name of the 1801 document that aimed for reconcilliation between revolutionaries and Catholics?	the Concordat of 1801
Along with Napoleon, who signed the Concordat of 1801?	Pope Pius VII
The Concordat of 1801 strengthened the position of which church as the majority church of France?	the Roman Catholic Church
 What is the exact date on which the Concordat of 1801 was signed?	15 July 1801
What were the Organic Articles a part of?	the Concordat
The Concodat restored significant power to what position?	the papacy
Despite the Concordat, the balance of the relationship between the church and state had swung in whose favor?	Napoleon's
Other than Napoleon, who else found the Concordat to be of use?	the pope
 The children of France were given a catechism that taught them to love and respect whom?	Napoleon
In what year did Napoleon say that skilled rulers were able to both control and use priests?	1801
How tall was Napoleon, in feet and inches?	5 ft 6 in
How tall was Napoleon in centimeters?	168 cm
How do historians describe Napoleon in his use of France's financial, bureaucratic, and diplomatic systems?	an innovator
What is the name of the historian who stresses Napoleon's "rare combination of will, intellect, and physical vigour?"	George F. E. Rudé
How do historians describe Napoleon's impact on people in one-on-one encounters?	hypnotic
According to critics, what was the reason Napoleon won many battles?	luck
 When did Napoleon win victories at Austerlitz and Jena?	1805-06
 In what year did the Russian campaign take place?	1812
Who argues that Napoleon's triumphs at Austerlitz and Jena increased his self-grandiosity?	Dwyer
What did Napoleon do at cards, though he repaid losses?	cheated
What did Napoleon reorganize to supply the personnel and money required to fight great wars?	France
How many soldiers did Wellington believe Napoleon's presence on the field was worth?	40,000
Who said that Napoleon's presence on the battlefield was worth 40,000 soldiers?	Wellington
In what year did the Battle of Auerstadt take place?	1806
Who led the Prussian forces that outnumbered Napoleon at the Battle of Auerstadt?	King Frederick William III
Which foreign news service viewed Napoleon as a dangerous tyrant?	the British press
What abbreviated term did the British often use to refer to Napoleon?	Boney
Which segment of the British press often showed Napoleon as being much shorter than average?	Tory
What height was Napoleon incorrectly listed as at his time of death?	5 feet 2 inches
What was Napoleon's actual height, in feet and inches?	5 ft 6 in
After becoming First Consul, Napoleon typically wore the uniform of which rank, rather than general?	colonel
 What is the name of the regiment that frequently served as Napoleon's escort?	the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard
What color was the uniform that Napoleon usually wore on Sundays?	blue
What color stockings did Napoleon usually wear?	white
 What color culottes did Napoleon typically wear?	white
What was the name of the first central bank in France, that Napoleon established?	the Banque de France
What was the name of the agreement that Napoleon arrived at with the Catholic Church?	the Concordat of 1801
What other document was presented along with the Concordat of 1801?	the Organic Articles
What did the Organic Articles regulate in France?	public worship
What is the name of the empire Napoleon dissolved that later led to unification in Germany?	the Holy Roman Empire
What was the contemporary term for the set of civil laws created by Napoleon?	the Code Civil
What is the Code Civil frequently referred to as now?	the Napoleonic Code
What is the name of the person who supervised the preparation of the Code Civil?	Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès
What was a code published under Napoleon that enacted rules related to due process?	Code of Criminal Instruction
Who learned from Napoleon's innovations?	His opponents
 Napoleon's use of artillery led to its increased importance after what year?	1807
Who rejects the theory that the increased use of artillery by the French was due to declining quality of infantry and numbers of cavalry?	McConachy
What did Napoleon use as the initial means of breaking down enemy defenses, rather than the traditional reliance on infantry?	artillery
When was the metric system officially introduced?	September 1799
What system, introduced in September 1799, was unpopular among much of French society?	the metric system
What year did Napoleon pass legislation that introduced traditional units of measurement for retail trade?	1812
 How many grams were in the livre metrique?	500
How many grams were in the livre du roi?	489.5
What acts by Napoleon laid the groundwork for modernized Education in France and much of Europe?	Napoleon's educational reforms
What language did Napoleon make the only official one?	French
What did Napoleon offer to secondary education?	public support
What is the name for the state secondary schools begun by Napoleon that were intended to standardize education across France?	lycées
Along with modern and classical languages, what were all students in the lycées taught?	the sciences
How have many historians described Napoleon's foreign policy ambitions?	grandiose
As late as what year were the Continental powers willing to give Napoleon most of the gains and titles he had acquired?	1808
Who continue to debate whether Napoleon was an enlightened despot, or a megalomaniac?	historians
Some scholars maintain Napoleon's excessive aggression and pushing caused what to collapse?	his empire
Who put a stop to the lack of law and presence of disorder in post-Revolutionary France?	Napoleon
Napoleon's decision to reinstate what practice in France's overseas colonies has caused controversy regarding his reputation?	slavery
Who considered Napoleon to be a tyrant and a usurper?	his opponents
Napoleon's role in which revolution has caused controversy regarding his reputation?	the Haitian Revolution
Who charge that Napoleon was untroubled by the prospect of war and death for thousands?	His critics
What practice in defeated territories became institutionalized under Napoleon?	plunder
Where in France were plundered artifacts brought in an effort to create a great central museum?	the Musée du Louvre
Who compared Napoleon to Hitler in 1947?	Pieter Geyl
Who compared Napoleon to Hitler in 2005?	Claude Ribbe
In 1973, which historian objected to comparisons between Napoleon and Hitler?	David G. Chandler
Which historian describes Napoleon's legacy in terms of years spent at war, numbers of European dead, and France's bankruptcy and loss of colonies?	Victor Davis Hanson
Which historian views Napoleon's legacy as one of having set back the European economy for a generation through war?	McLynn
Which historian counters criticism of Napoleon by suggesting that the wars he fought were the responsibility of enemies of the Revolution, rather than that of Napoleon?	Vincent Cronin
How many years of wars does Victor Davis Hanson claim are part of Napoleon's military record?	17
Approximately how many Europeans dead does Victor Davis Hanson assert are part of Napoleon's military record?	six million
Napoleon's skillful employment of what technique aided his rise to power, legitimized his rule, and improved his posthumous reputation?	propaganda
Napoleon employed what practice in controlling aspects of the media, books, and the arts?	censorship
Napoleon's propaganda plan was aimed at showing him as attempting to bring peace and stability to what country?	France
Napoleon created a relationship with the art community to commission work specifically targeting what segment of his audience?	civilian
Rumors of Napoleon's return from what location were often used as an inspiration for his followers?	St. Helena
Anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign were sometimes celebrated in an effort to disrupt what?	royal celebrations
Destabilization of what regime was the main goal of Napoleon's followers?	the Bourbon regime
Seditious material distributed by Napoleon's followers often displayed the tricolor, and what other design?	rosettes
When did militaristic Boulangism collapse?	the late 1880s
What year was Victorien Sardou's Madame Sans-Gêne written?	1893
What year was Maurice Barrès's Les Déracinés written?	1897
In what year was Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon written?	1900
In what year was André de Lorde and Gyp's Napoléonette written?	1913
After the fall of Napoleon, many countries retained what system of law?	Napoleonic Code
Outside Europe, Napoleonic Code has been used as the basis for certain parts of what?	law
How can the memory of Napoleon in Poland be characterized as?	favorable
Poland views Napoleon in a positive light partially based on his opposition to what country?	Russia
One reason Poland views Napoleon favorably is due to his abolition of what form of indentured servitude?	serfdom
Napoleon is viewed by some as a founder of what modern nation?	Germany
What is the name of the empire Napoleon dissolved?	the Holy Roman Empire
How many German states were there before Napoleon began to reduce their numbers?	300
How many German states remained after Napoleon reduced their numbers?	less than 50
How much did Napoleon sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States for?	15 million dollars
Who did Napoleon marry in 1796?	Joséphine de Beauharnais
In what year did Napoleon marry Joséphine de Beauharnais?	1796
How old was Napoleon when he married Joséphine de Beauharnais?	26
How old was Joséphine de Beauharnais when she was married to Napoleon?	32
What was the disliked name Joséphine de Beauharnais was known as before she met Napoleon?	Rose
What was the name of the illegitimate son acknowledged by Napoleon?	Charles Léon
Who was the mother of Charles Léon?	Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne
Who was Napoleon's illegitimate son by his mistress, Maria Walewska?	Alexandre Colonna-Walewski
 DNA from Alexandre Colonna-Walewski's descendants has been used to confirm what attribute of Napoleon's?	Napoleon's Y-chromosome haplotype
Who was the child of Emilie Victoria Kraus who might have been another of Napoleon's illegitimate children?	Eugen Megerle von Mühlfeld
What is the largest private foundation in the world?	Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (or the Gates Foundation, abbreviated as BMGF) is the largest private foundation in the world
Where is the Bill and Melinda gates foundation based?	The foundation, based in Seattle, Washington
What was warren Buffett's estimated net worth in 2008	Warren Buffett (then the world's richest person, estimated worth of US$62 billion as of April 16, 2008)
How many shares of berkshire hathway was pledged as a donation	pledged to give the foundation approximately 10 million Berkshire Hathaway Class B shares
In 2013 Buffett announced another donation to the foundation for how much	In July 2013, Buffet announced another donation of his company's Class B, this time in the amount worth $2 billion
What did the foundation announce in November 2014	In November 2014, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation announced that they are adopting an open access (OA) policy for publications and data
What does the OA policy for publications and data do ?	open access (OA) policy for publications and data, "to enable the unrestricted access and reuse of all peer-reviewed published research funded by the foundation
What does the OA policy cover ?	As of January 1, 2015 their Open Access policy is effective for all new agreements.
What two entities was the foundation divided into	trustees divided the organization into two entities: the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (foundation) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust
What does the foundation entity focus on	The foundation section, based in Seattle, US, "focuses on improving health and alleviating extreme poverty
What does the Trust entity focus on	The trust section manages "the investment assets and transfer proceeds to the foundation as necessary to achieve the foundation's charitable goals
What is held in the trust entity	it holds the assets of Bill and Melinda Gates, who are the sole trustees, and receives contributions from Buffett
What does the Trust invest	The foundation trust invests undistributed assets
What is the goal of the Trust investments	exclusive goal of maximizing the return on investment
What are some of the negatives of the investments	its investments include companies that have been criticized for worsening poverty in the same developing countries
What type of company's are  critiscized	These include companies that pollute heavily and pharmaceutical companies that do not sell into the developing world
As a result of the critics what did the company announce	the foundation announced in 2007 a review of its investments to assess social responsibility. It subsequently cancelled the review
What did the foundation announce in March 2006	n March 2006, the foundation announced a US$5 million grant for the International Justice Mission (IJM)
What is the International Justice Mission	a human rights organization based in Washington, D.C., US to work in the area of sex trafficking.
What would the grant allow the IJM to do	the grant would allow the IJM to "create a replicable model for combating sex trafficking and slavery
What did the office that ijm opened do specifically	conducting undercover investigations, training law enforcement, rescuing victims, ensuring appropriate aftercare, and seeking perpetrator accountability".
What was the name of the project founded by the IJM	The IJM used the grant money to found "Project Lantern
Where did project lantern open an office	"Project Lantern" and established an office in the Philippines city of Cebu.
What did project lantern announce in 2010	IJM stated that Project Lantern had led to "an increase in law enforcement activity in sex trafficking cases
What services were also increased by project lantern	increase in services – like shelter, counseling and career training – provided to trafficking survivors"
What was project Lantern exploring	the IJM was exploring opportunities to replicate the model in other regions.
What was the WSH program launched in 2005	The Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WSH) program of the Gates Foundation was launched in mid-2005
When did the WSH become a full fledeged program	and became a full-fledged program under the Global Development Division in early 2010
What efforts have the WSH taken	since 2005 undertaken a wide range of efforts in the WASH sector involving research, experimentation, reflection, advocacy, and field implementation
What did the foundation decide in 2009	In 2009, the Foundation decided to refocus its WASH effort mainly on sustainable sanitation services for the poor, using non-piped sanitation services
WHy did the foundation make the switch	This was because the sanitation sector was generally receiving less attention from other donors and from governments
What has been the focus since 2011	Their grant-making focus has been since 2011 on sanitation science and technology ("transformative technologies")
What models have been delivered	delivery models at scale, urban sanitation markets, building demand for sanitation, measurement and evaluation as well as policy, advocacy and communications
What is the purpose of the new overview	funding now focuses primarily on sanitation, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, because access to improved sanitation is lowest in those regions
What did the foundation announce in 2011	In mid 2011, the Foundation announced in its new "Water, Sanitation, Hygiene Strategy Overview"
What is need in the developing world	Improved sanitation in the developing world is a global need
What does data collected by unicef and Who show	Improved sanitation in the developing world is a global need, but a neglected priority as shown by the data collected
How many people have no sanatation facilities	About one billion people have no sanitation facility whatsoever and continue to defecate in gutters, behind bushes or in open water bodies
What country is the worst violator	India is the country with the highest number of people practicing open defecation: around 600 million people
India is host to what activity	"Reinvent the Toilet Fair" in Delhi, India in March 2014.
When was reinvent the toilet launched	In 2011, the foundation launched a program called "Reinvent the Toilet Challenge
What is the aim of reinvent the toilet	to promote the development of innovations in toilet design to benefit the 2.5 billion people that do not have access to safe and effective sanitation
WHat program compliment reinvent the toilet	It was complemented by a program called "Grand Challenges Explorations" (2011 to 2013 with some follow-up grants reaching until 2015)
What was excluded by the funding schemes	Both funding schemes explicitly excluded project ideas that relied on centralized sewerage systems or are not compatible with development country contexts
What countries have received grants	universities in the U.S., Europe, India, China and South Africa, have received grants to develop innovative on-site and off-site waste treatment solutions
How much were the grants for	The grants were in the order of 400,000 USD for their first phase, followed by typically 1-3 million USD for their second phase
What did many investigate	many of them investigated resource recovery or processing technologies for excreta or fecal sludge.
What is reinvent the toilet trying to develop	The Reinvent the Toilet Challenge is a long-term research and development effort to develop a hygienic, stand-alone toilet
What compliments the challenge	This challenge is being complemented by another investment program to develop new technologies for improved pit latrine emptying
What does the Omni processor do	The aim of the "Omni Processor" is to convert excreta (for example fecal sludge) into beneficial products such as energy and soil nutrients
The foundation has donated billions to sufferers of	The foundation has donated billions of dollars to help sufferers of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
How many children were protected from death	protecting millions of children from death at the hands of preventable diseases
What are some consequences of the investments	Gates grantees have increased the demand for specially trained, higher-paid clinicians, diverting staff from basic care" in sub-Saharan Africa
What has the focus on a few diseases caused	"the focus on a few diseases has shortchanged basic needs such as nutrition and transportation
Vaccinations programs encouraged what	discourage patients from discussing – ailments that the vaccinations cannot prevent".
What did the foundation decide not to fund	has decided not to fund abortion"
WHy did they decide not to fund abortion	the emotional and personal debate about abortion is threatening to get in the way of the lifesaving consensus regarding basic family planning
Before 2013 the foundation gave how how much to planned parenthood	Up to 2013, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation provided $71 million to Planned Parenthood
what is the US libraries initiative	U.S. Libraries initiative with a goal of "ensuring that if you can get to a public library, you can reach the internet
How much of the worlds population can reach the internet	Only 35% of the world's population has access to the Internet
what have the grants provided public libraries	The foundation has given grants, installed computers and software, and provided training and technical support in partnership with public libraries nationwide
What has the grant enabled	this foundation helps move public libraries into the digital age.
what is a key aspect of the gates foundation in the US	A key aspect of the Gates Foundation's U.S. efforts involves an overhaul of the country's education policies at both the K-12 and college levels
What do these efforts include	including support for teacher evaluations and charter schools and opposition to seniority-based layoffs
how much did it spend in 2009	It spent $373 million on education in 2009.
It was an early backer of what	The foundation was the biggest early backer of the Common Core State Standards Initiative.
What is 1 foundation goal	One of the foundation's goals is to lower poverty by increasing the number of college graduates in the United States
One way to increase college graduation by the foundation is	One of the ways the foundation has sought to increase the number of college graduates is to get them through college faster
how did they work on college financing	Reimagining Aid Design and Delivery" grants to think tanks and advocacy organizations
What has been funded as part of the education initiatives	As part of its education-related initiatives, the foundation has funded journalists, think tanks, lobbying organizations and governments
what do the millions in grants given to news agencies do	Millions of dollars of grants to news organizations have funded reporting on education and higher education
Critics don't like the foundations use of media why	critics have feared the foundation for directing the conversation on education or pushing its point of view through news coverage
Where does the foundation list grants	the foundation has said it lists all its grants publicly
who founded teach plus	Teach Plus, which was founded by new teachers and advocates against seniority-based layoffs
Why were the gates foundation educational reforms critcized	they may marginalize researchers who do not support Gates' predetermined policy preferences
What are several of the gates backed policies	Several Gates-backed policies such as small schools, charter schools, and increasing class sizes
Have the policies been criticized	but some studies indicate they have not improved educational outcomes and may have caused harm
What does 1 specific study of charter schools show	Peer reviewed scientific studies at Stanford find that Charter Schools do not systematically improve student performance
What two entities was the foundation split into in october 2016	the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust, which manages the endowment assets and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
When must the trust resources be spent	spend all of [the Trust's] resources within 20 years after Bill's and Melinda's deaths
What does warren Buffet stipulate his berkshire hathaway  shares be used for in the 10 year period after his death	the proceeds from the Berkshire Hathaway shares he still owns at death are to be used for philanthropic purposes within 10 years
Who founded Northwestern University?	John Evans
What year was Northwestern founded?	1851
In what year did Northwestern University began teaching?	1855
What year were women allowed to attend Northwestern University?	1869
Where did Northwestern University opened an additional campus at in 2008?	Education City, Doha, Qatar
What was Northwestern's founding purpose in 1851?	to serve the Northwest Territory
When did instruction begin at Northwestern?	1855
When were women first admitted to Northwestern?	1869
How many acres is the modern-day Northwestern campus in Evanston?	240
What programs are offered at Northwestern's Quatar campus?	journalism and communication
Which great lake is Northwestern located along?	Lake Michigan
What is the name of the city located 12 miles north of Northwestern?	Chicago
How many founders did Northwestern University have?	nine
What type of church is Northwestern University associated with?	Methodist Episcopal Church
What was the date that lay down the foundation for Northwestern University?	May 31, 1850
How many ministers founded Northwestern University?	three
What denomination did the all of the founders associated with?	Methodists
In what environment was the foundation for Northwestern University planned on May 31, 1850?	a meeting
Who granted a charter to the Trustees of the North-Western University in January of 1851?	the Illinois General Assembly
What was the religious affiliation of all 9 founding members of Northwestern?	Methodists
How many of Northwestern's 9 founders were ministers?	three
Which church did the 9 founders of Northwestern affiliate the university with?	Methodist Episcopal
What was the name of the first building opened in 1855?	Old College
What did Northwestern sell to raise funds for it's first building?	$100 "perpetual scholarships"
Who received free tuition after buying the $100 perpetual scholarships?	the purchaser and his heirs
Who did Northwestern merge with in 1873?	Evanston College for Ladies
Who was Northwestern's first dean of women?	Frances Willard
What sports team did Northwestern field its first of in 1882?	intercollegiate football
Which already existing schools did Northwestern affiliate itself with in the 1870's and 1880's?	schools of law, medicine, and dentistry in Chicago
What is the oldest law school in Chicago?	Northwestern University School of Law
What organization invited Northwestern to become a member in 1917?	The Association of American Universities
What type of member was Northwestern of the Big Ten Conference?	a founding member
What type of campus did Northwestern begin construction of during Walter Dill Scott's presidency?	integrated
What was the orginal name for Northwestern's Ryan Field?	Dyche Stadium
What merger was proposed and rejected in 1933?	Northwestern with the University of Chicago
What was Northwestern one of the first six universities in the U.S. to establish in the 1920's?	a Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC)
What first-ever game did Northwestern host in 1939?	NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship
Which war transformed many colleges, including Northwestern?	World War II
Between 1939 and 1949, how many military officers and personnel were trained on the Evanston and Chicago campuses?	nearly 50,000
Under what Bill did enrollments surge after the war?	G.I. Bill
What center was founded by Melville J. Herskovits in 1948?	Program of African Studies at Northwestern
In 1978, what famous attacks occured at Northwestern?	first and second Unabomber
In 1999, who uncovered information that exonerated death row inmate Anthony Porter only 2 days before his scheduled death?	Northwestern student journalists
What Northwestern program is responsible for exonerating more than 10 men?	the Innocence Project
In 2003, where did Governor George Ryan announce that the sentences of more than 150 death row inmates would be commuted?	Northwestern School of Law's Lincoln Hall
What was President Arnold R. Weber able to do with Northwestern's finances as the government's support of universities declined in the 70's and 80's?	stabilize
What has been Northwestern's official color since 1892?	Purple
Why did Northwestern replace it's original official colors of black and gold?	too many other universities had used these colors
What is the meaning of the Latin phrase on Northwestern's seal?	Whatsoever things are true
What does the Greek phrase that is inscribed on the pages of an open book on the seal mean?	The Word full of grace and truth
What color besides purple is often considered an official color of Northwestern?	white
How did Northwestern create 84 additional acres in the 1960's?	by means of a lakefill in Lake Michigan
Which campus holds the undergraduate schools, the Graduate school, and the Kellogg school of Management?	Evanston
What is noticably different between Northwestern's North and South Campuses?	atmospheres
Which campus is home to the fraternity quads?	North Campus
Which campus is home to the music and art buildings?	South Campus
What is the name of the Chicago Transit Authority's elevated train through Evanston?	the Purple Line
What was Chicago's Purple Line train route named after?	Northwestern's school color
Which train stations are within walking distance of the southern end of campus?	Foster and Davis
Which train station is close to the northern end of campus?	Noyes
What is the name of Northwestern's football stadium?	Ryan Field
In 1920, how many acres were purchased for $8 million for a new central Chicago campus?	8.5
What style did architect James Gamble Rogers use for the principal buildings on the new Chicago campus?	collegiate gothic
Who donated $8 million in 1923 for the construction of the Montgomery Ward Memorial Building?	Mrs. Montgomery Ward
What two schools were housed in the Montgomery Ward Memorial Building?	medical and dental
Which building became the first university skyscraper in the U.S.?	Montgomery Ward Memorial Building
What branch did Northwestern open in Education City, Doha, Qatar?	NU-Q
What bachelor's degree is offered at NU-Q through the Medill School of Journalism?	journalism
Who provided the funding for the construction and administrative costs for NU-Q?	The Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development
How long is the NU-Q branch of Northwestern scheduled to operate through an agreement in 2016?	through the 2027-2028 academic year
What bachelor's degree is offered at NU-Q through the School of Communication?	journalism
In 2009, who named Northwestern as one of the top 10 universities in the country in purchasing renewable energy?	Green Power Partnership
How much of the university's total annual electric bill is represented by the green power commitment?	30 percent
What grade was given to Northwestern on the 2010 College Sustainability Report Card  by The Sustainable Endowments Institute?	B-
Which EPA club is Northwestern University included in?	Green Power Leadership Club
Who sponsored the Green Power Partnership?	the EPA
What is the required certification for all Northwestern buildings?	LEED
What percentage of improvement over energy code requirements will be the goal of all new construction and renovations?	at least a 20%
How many tons of waste are recycled at Northwestern yearly?	1,500
How is all university landscape waste used?	composted
What does the Evanston Campus Framework Plan outline?	future development of the Evanston Campus
Who governs Northwestern?	an appointed Board of Trustees
How many members are on Northwestern's Board of Trustees?	70
Who does the Board of Trustees delegate it's power to?	an elected president
How many presidents, excluding interrims, has Northwestern had?	sixteen
Who has a staff of vice-presidents, directors, and other administrative assistants?	the president
How many undergraduate programs are offered by Northwestern?	124
How many graduate and professional programs are offered by Northwestern?	145
How many master's degrees did Northwestern confer during the 2012-2013 school term?	3,272
How many doctoral degrees did Northwestern confer during the 2012-2013 school term?	565
How many bachelor's degrees did Northwestern confer during the 2012-2013 school term?	2,190
Which 4-year program comprises the majority of enrollments at Northwestern?	full-time undergraduate
Who sets individual degree requirements at Northwestern?	the faculty of each school
How many quarters are undergraduates required to complete on campus to graduate?	at least twelve
How many courses do undergrads typically take each quarter?	four
How many weeks is one academic quarter at Northwestern?	approximately 10
What was the total undergrad tuition for the 2012/2013 school year?	$61,240
On what basis does Northwestern award financial aid?	need
What percentage of the June 2010 graduates received federal or private loans?	Approximately 44
What was the average debt for the June 2010 graduates?	$17,200
How much financial aid did Northwestern process for the 2009-2010 academic year?	in excess of $472 million
In the fall of 2014, which school did 40.6% of undergraduates enroll in?	Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences
In the fall of 2014, which school did 21.3% of undergraduates enroll in?	McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science
In the fall of 2014, which school did 14.3% of undergraduates enroll in?	School of Communication
In the fall of 2014, which school did 11.7% of undergraduates enroll in?	Medill School of Journalism
In the fall of 2014, which school did 5.7% of undergraduates enroll in?	Bienen School of Music
How selective are admissions at Northwestern characterized by U.S. News & World Report?	most selective
What percentage of applications were admitted for the undergraduate class entering in 2016?	10.7%
What percentage of freshman students enrolling in the class of 2019 ranked in the top 10% of their high school class?	91%
For freshman enrolling in the class of 2019, what was the interquartile range on the SAT for critical reading?	690–760
For freshman enrolling in the class of 2019, what was the interquartile range on the SAT for math?	710-800
What City College initiative did Northwestern announce signing on with in 2016?	the Chicago Star Partnership
Who encouraged local universities to increase opportunities for students in the public school districts?	Mayor Rahm Emanuel
Through the Chicago Star Partnership, what is provided to students from Chicago public schools that meet further educational criteria?	scholarships
Which mayor influenced the Chicago Star Partnership?	Rahm Emanuel
How many libraries are on the Evanston campus?	four
How many volumes does the University Library contain?	over 4.9 million
How does the University Library rank among North American university libraries?	the 30th-largest
What does the Google Book Search project help libraries with?	digitizing its collections
What is the largest African collection in the world that is part of the Northwesern library system?	Melville J. Herskovits Library of African Studies
When was Northwestern elected to the Association of American Universities?	1917
Which of Northwestern's schools are among the most academically productive in the nation?	management, engineering, and communication
In 2014, how much research funding did Northwestern receive?	$550 million
Who discovered the drug that was ultimately marketed as Lyrica?	chemistry professor Richard Silverman
How many companies were started through Northwestern's Innovations and New Ventures Office?	12
Where is the home of the Center for Catalysis and Surface Science?	Northwestern
Where is the home of the International Institute for Nanotechnology?	Northwestern
Where is the home of the Materials Research Center?	Northwestern
Where is the home for the Institute for Policy Research?	Northwestern
Where is the home of the Buffet Center for International and Comparative Studies?	Northwestern
How much money has the traditional Northwestern Dance Marathon raised for children's charities?	more than 13 million dollars
What do students do during the traditional Primal Scream event held before finals week every quarter?	scream
What is the popular name for Northwestern's traditional Armadillo Day?	Dillo Day
When is Armadillo Day held every year?	on the weekend after Memorial Day
What name is freshman orientation known as?	Wildcat Welcome
What do students traditionally do at the beginning of each football game kickoff?	jingle keys
What football game tradition has since been discontinued?	students would throw marshmallows during games
What color does the Clock Tower glow after a winning football game?	purple
What noise do students make when the opposing team has control of the football?	growl
How long does the Clock Tower remain purple after a winning game?	until a loss or until the end of the sports season
What are the two most notable productions each year at Northwestern?	the Waa-Mu show, and the Dolphin show
Who is the Waa-Muu show primarily written and produced by?	students
What does StuCo stand for?	Student Theatre Coalition
How many student theatre companies does StuCo organize?	nine
Which theater company was founded by several Northwestern alumni in 1988?	Chicago's Lookingglass
What 30 hour event raised more than a million dollars for charity in 2011?	Dance Marathon
What is the name of the Halloween celebration to which over 800 local children are invited?	Project Pumpkin
What is the name of the Northwestern program for students interested in community service?	Freshman Urban Program
What is the name of the university's group service-learning expedition in Asia, Africa or Latin America?	Global Engagement Summer Institute
What does NCDC stand for?	Northwestern Community Development Corps
What percentage of undergraduates were affiliated with a fraternity or sorority in Winter 2013?	39%
How many fraternities does Northwestern recognize?	21
How many sororities does Northwestern recognize?	18
What is the name of the Residential College that houses students with an interest in science and engineering?	Slivka
Which dorms are commonly referred to as Plex?	Foster-Walker complex
What is the name of Northwestern's main student newspaper?	The Daily Northwestern
Who is The Daily Northwestern entirely directed by?	undergraduates
What is the name of Northwestern's undergraduate yearbook?	Syllabus
Who owns The Daily Northwestern?	the Students Publishing Company
What undergraduate satirical magazine was founded in 2009?	Northwestern Flipside
What is the name of the scholarly legal publication at Northwestern School of Law?	The Northwestern University Law Review
What type of journal does the Law Review strive to publish?	a journal of broad legal scholarship
How many issues does the Law Review publish each year?	four
Who publishes the Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property?	an independent student organization at Northwestern University School of Law
Who makes the editorial decisions for The Northwestern University Law Review?	Student editors
What journal was founded in 2008 that features articles by professors and law students?	The Northwestern Interdisciplinary Law Review
Who funds The Northwestern Interdisciplinary Law Review?	Buffett Center for International and Comparative Studies and the Office of the Provost
How often is The Northwestern Interdisciplinary Law Review published?	annually
Who publishes The Northwestern Interdisciplinary Law Review?	an editorial board of Northwestern University undergraduates
What is the name Northwestern's humor website formed in 2011?	Sherman Ave
What do many of the writers staffed by Sherman Ave write under?	pseudonyms
Which website publishes the well known "Freshman Guide"?	Sherman Ave
What is the publication that is dedicated to the analysis of current events and public policy?	Politics & Policy
How many college campuses does Politics & Policy reach worldwide?	250
Who completely runs Politics and Policy?	undergraduates
Who partially funds Politics and Policy?	the Buffett Center
How often is Politics & Policy published?	several times a week
How many men's intercollegiate athletic teams are fielded by Northwestern?	8
How many women's intercollegiate athletic teams are fielded by Northwestern?	11
How many consecutive NCAA championships did the women's larcrosse team win between 2005 and 2009?	five
Who recognized the men's basketball team as the 1931 National Champion?	Helms Athletic Foundation
How many of Northwestern's 19 varsity programs had NCAA or bowl postseason appearances?	12
Where do Northwestern's basketball, wrestling, and volleyball teams play?	Welsh-Ryan Arena
What is the nickname given to Northwestern's athletic teams?	Wildcats
What was the official nickname of Northwestern's athletic teams prior to 1924?	The Purple
What was the unofficial nickname of the Northwestern athletic teams prior to 1924?	The Fighting Methodists
What name did the student body unsuccessfully try to rename the Wildcats in 1972?	Purple Haze
Who is the mascot of Northwestern Athletics?	Willie the Wildcat
What was the first mascot of Northwestern Athletics?	a live, caged bear cub from the Lincoln Park Zoo
What was the name of Northwestern Athletics's bear cub mascot?	Furpaw
Who did the athletic team blame for it's first losing season?	Furpaw
What did the athletic team do with Furpaw after they lost the first season?	banished him from campus forever
How many appearances has Northwestern's football team made in the top 10 AP poll since 1936?	73
How many consecutive games did Northwestern lose during it's longest losing streak between 1979 and 1982?	34
What was the first bowl game Northwestern appeared in after 1949?	1996 Rose Bowl
What was the first bowl won by Northwestern after the 1949 Rose Bowl?	2013 Gator Bowl
In 2006, which Northwestern linebacker became the youngest Division/FBS coach at the time?	Pat Fitzgerald
What were 2 former Northwestern basketball players charged and convicted for in 1998?	sports bribery
What did federal prosecutors indict four former players for in a separate betting scandal?	perjury related to betting on their own games
What did an autopsy reveal was in Rashidi Wheeler's system after he died during a practice?	ephedrine
In 2006, what prompted the women's soccer team coach, Jenny Haigh,  to resign?	the release of images of alleged hazing
After the death of Rashidi Wheeler in 2001, which athletic programs were investigated for stimulants and other banned substances?	all
How many full-time faculty members does Northwestern employ?	3,401
Who is Northwestern's faculty member notable for being a Holocaust denier?	Arthur Butz
Who is Northwestern's faculty member notable for winning a Pulitzer Prize?	historian Garry Wills
Who is Northwestern's faculty member notable for becoming a Tony Award-winning director?	Mary Zimmerman
Who is Northwestern's faculty member notable for winning the Nobel Prize?	chemist John Pople
Which of Northwestern's alumni is notable for becoming a U.S. Senator and presidential candidate?	George McGovern
Which of Northwestern's alumni is notable for becoming The Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey?	Ali Babacan
Which of Northwestern's alumni is notable for being the founder of the presidential prayer breakfast?	Abraham Vereide
Which of Northwestern's alumni is notable for becoming the Governor of Illinois and a presidential candidate?	Adlai Stevenson
Which of Northwestern's alumni is notable for becoming the Illinois Governor and convicted felon?	Rod Blagojevich
Who founded the Amsterdam based comedy theater Boom Chicago?	Northwestern alumni
Where did actor Warren Beatty attend school?	Northwestern's School of Communication
Where did actor Charlton Heston attend school?	Northwestern's School of Communication
Where did director Gerald Freedman attend school?	Northwestern's School of Communication
Which alumni was a co-creator of "The Young and the Restless", and "The Bold and the Beautiful"?	Lee Phillip Bell
How many Pulitzer Prize laureates attended the Medill School of Journalism?	38
Where did NBC correspondant Kelly O'Donnell attend school?	The Medill School of Journalism
Where did bestselling author George R. R. Martin earn his B.S. and M.S.?	The Medill School of Journalism
How many Emmy awards did alumni Elisabeth Leamy receive?	13
Which CBS correspondant graduated from The Medill School of Journalism?	Richard Threlkeld
Which graduate of The Feinburg School of Medicine was the Roswell Park Cancer Institute named after?	Mary Harris Thompson
Which graduate of The Feinburg School of Medicine performed the first successful American open heart surgery?	Daniel Hale Williams
Which graduate of The Feinburg School of Medicine co-founded the Mayo Clinic?	Charles Horace Mayo
Which graduate of The Feinburg School of Medicine founded the American College of Surgeons?	Allen B. Kanavel
Which graduate of The Feinburg School of Medicine was the first physician in space?	Joseph P. Kerwin
Where did Hokkien originate?	southern Fujian.
What dialect is Hokkien closely related to?	Teochew
What is Hokkien?	a group of mutually intelligible Min Nan Chinese dialects spoken throughout Southeast Asia, Taiwan, and by many other overseas Chinese.
Where is Hokkien spoken?	Southeast Asia
Where did Hokkien originate?	southern Fujian
What language is Hokkien closely related to?	Teochew
What language is Hokkien distantly related to?	Hainanese
Min and Hakka dialects are found where?	Fujian province
What at the main Hokkioen urban centers?	Quanzhou and Zhangzhou.
What dialects does Hokkien refer to?	Min-nan dialects.
Where is the term Hokkien mainly used?	South East Asia
What does Hokkien mean?	Fujian province
What division of dialects does Hokkien belong to?	Quanzhang Division (Chinese: 泉漳片; pinyin: Quánzhāng piàn) of Min Nan
In South East Asia, what term is commonly used to refer to Min-nan dialects?	Hokkien
Where are quanzhou and Zhangzhou located?	Hokkien
What percentage of Chinese Filipino are reportedly native Hokkien speakers?	98.5%
What is Hokkien known as locally in the Phillippines?	Lan-nang or Lán-lâng-oē ("Our people’s language").
Who form the largest group of Chinese in Singapore?	Hokkien speakers
Who form the largest group of Chinese in Malaysia?	Hokkien speakers
Who form the largest group of Chinese in Indonesia?	Hokkien speakers
Who brought the language Hokkien to Myanmar?	Han Chinese emigrants
What is the current name for Myanmar?	Burma
What is the former name for Indonesia?	Dutch East Indies
What percent of Chinese Filipinos in the Philippines spoeak Hokkien?	98.5%
What is the local name for Hokkien in the Philippines?	Lan-nang or Lán-lâng-oē
The Three Kings Period was a period of time in what country?	China
Where was war concentrated during the Three Kings Period?	the Central Plain of China
What disaster caused a massive migration in the Fujiian region?	the Disaster of Yongjia
What language was spoken in the central plain of China up until the 3rd century?	old Chinese
What direction did the jin court flee during the Three Kings period?	north to the south
Who was the ruler of China in 677?	Emperor Gaozong
Who led the military expedition in Fujian?	Chen Zheng
What is the name of the son of Chen Zheng?	Chen Yuanguang
Who was the ruler of China in 885?	Emperor Xizong of Tang
What was responsible for bringing the language of North middle China to the Fujian region?	two waves of migrations from the north
What is another name for Xiamen dialect?	Amoy
What is the main dialect spoken in Xiamen?	Xiamen dialect
During what dynasty did the Xiamen dialect develope?	late Ming dynasty
What city took over Quanzhou's position as the main port of trade in SE China?	Xiamen
Why did peasants from Zhangzhou travel north to Xiamen?	in search of job opportunities
What Chinese dialect has more consonants than standard Mandarin or Cantonese?	Hokkien
How do Hokkien vowels compare to Standard Mandarin vowels?	similar
What do Hokkein varieties retain that are no longer found in other Chinese varieties?	many pronunciations
Hokkien has one of the most diverse what, among Chinese varieties?	phoneme inventories
How many phonemic tones do Hokkien dialects have?	5 to 7
What is another name for phonemic tones?	tone classes
What type of variations are there between the Quanznou and Zhangzhou tone system?	minor
What patterns do Taiwanese tones follow?	Amoy or Quanzhou
What is the pattern used un Taiwanese tones determined by?	the area of Taiwan
The Amoy dialect is a hybrid of what two dialects?	Quanzhou and Zhangzhou
Besides Amoy, what is another hybrid of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou?	Taiwanese
What is Taiwanese in Northern Taiwan based on?	Quanzhou
What is Taiwanese in Southern Taiwan based on?	Zhangzhou speech
In Singapore, the varient of Hokkien has a significant amount of loanwords from where?	Malay
In Hokkien dialects, the arrangent of words is important to what?	meaning
What pattern does a basic Hokkien sentence follow?	subject–verb–object
Being topic prominant, what basic sentence pattern is often not used?	subject–verb–object
Unlike synthetic languages, what do Hokkien sentences not indicate?	time, gender and plural
What is added to sentences to specify status or tone?	Different particles
What are literary and colloquial readings called?	tha̍k-im
What is another name for colloquial?	vernacular)
Literary readings are usually used where?	formal phrases and written language
colloquial reading are usually used where?	spoken language and vulgar phrases
Colloquial stratum can be traced to several strata in what lexicon?	Min
The earliest colloquial stratum can be traced to what?	Han dynasty
When was the Han Dynasty?	206 BCE - 220 CE
When were the Southern and Northern Dynasties?	420 - 589 CE
When was the Tang Dynasty?	618–907 CE
Where did the language of Min and Wu dialects originate?	in the state of Wu
Chinese spoken in Wu was influenced by Chinese spoken where?	the state of Chu
Many middle chinese words have retained their meanings in Hokkein but not in what?	Mandarin Chinese
Where did Hokkein originate?	Quanzhou
What year was the Opium war?	1842
What is another name for Xiamen?	Amoy
What port became one of the major treaty ports after the Opium War?	Xiamen
What dialect did western diplomats learn to communicate with the Hokkien speaking people in China?	Amoy Hokkien
When did Taiwanese Hokkien have a fast change in development?	In the 1990s
What year did Taiwan begin teaching Hokkien in schools?	1993
What year did it become mandatory to teach Hokkien in Taiwan schools?	2001
What is the name of the standard Hokkien pronunciation and romanization guide?	Tai-lo
What year did the Ministry of Education develope tai-lo?	2007
Hokkien is usually written using what characters?	Chinese
Written Hokkein is based on what?	classical Chinese
What is another name for standard written chinese?	Mandarin
Approximately what percentage of Chinese morphemes lack a standard chinese character?	20 to 25%
Most Hokkein morphemes have what type of characters?	standard designated
In some cases, charcters are invented to represent what?	a particular morpheme
Hokkien morphemes are not always what?	etymological or phono-semantic
What are often borrowed to represent a particular morpheme?	Similar-sounding, similar-meaning or rare characters
Hokkien is sometimes written in what script?	Latin
What is the name of the traditional Chinese alphabet?	Pe̍h-ōe-jī
What is another name for POJ?	Pe̍h-ōe-jī
Who developed POJ?	Presbyterian missionaries in China
POJ alphabet has been used since late in what century?	19th
When can Min Nan texts be dated back to?	the 16th century
What is an example of the Min Nan Texts?	Doctrina Christiana en letra y lengua china
What year was Doctrina Christiana en letra y lengua china written?	after 1587
Who wrote Doctrina Christiana en letra y lengua china?	Spanish Dominicans in the Philippines
What is the name of the earliest Southern Min colloquial text?	Romance of the Lychee Mirror
What is another name for unicode?	the corresponding ISO/IEC 10646: Universal Character Set
Using precomposed or combining characters is called what?	diacritics
All LAtin characters required by POJ can be represented by what?	Unicode
How was the proposal taken from mainland and aboriginal groups?	This proposal encountered strong opposition
What was the fate of the proposal to make Taiwanese the second official language?	the proposal did not pass
What year was it proposed to make Taiwanese the second official language?	2002
Hoklo objected to the proposal because it would increase what tensions?	ethnic
What party wanted to make Taiwanese a second official language?	Taiwan Solidarity Union
What is Montevideo classified as?	a Beta World City
What rank did Montevideo hold in Latin America during 2013?	8th
Montevideo is the hub of commerce and higher education in what area?	Uruguay
Montevideo is the chief port of what area?	Uruguay
What is the population of Montevideo?	around 2 million
Who organized the Spanish expedition?	Bruno Mauricio de Zabala
What date did the Spanish force the Portuguese to abandon the location?	22 January 1724
Who was one significant early italian resident?	Jorge Burgues
What became the main city of the region north of the Rio de la Plata?	Montevideo
What were Buenos Aires and Montevideo fighting for dominance over?	maritime commerce
The importance of Montevideo as the main port of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata brought confrontations with what city?	Buenos Aires
When did British troops occupy the city of Montevideo?	3 February 1807
When did the Spanish recapture the city of Montevideo?	2 September
Who was forced to surrender to troops formed by forces of the Banda Oriental?	John Whitelocke
Who replaced Liniers?	Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros
After the Revolution of 1810 there was a subsequent uprising of what provinces?	Rio de la Plata
Where did the spanish colonial government move to after the uprising of the provinces of Rio de la Plata?	Montevideo
Who was the Uruguayan revolutionary that united with others from Buenos Aires?	José Gervasio Artigas
What year was the Spanish governor expelled?	1814
What year did Portugal invade the recently liberated territory?	1816
What was Juan Antonio Lavalleja's band caled?	Treinta y Tres Orientales
What year was Uruguay consolidated as an independent state?	1828
Manuel Oribe and Fructuoso Rivera fought against what empire?	Empire of Brazil
Manuel Oribe and Fructuoso Rivera fought under whose command?	Lavalleja
Who represented Oribe's Blancos?	National Party
Who represented Rivera's Colorados?	Colorado Party
What did Montevideo suffer between 1843 and 1851?	a siege
How did the British and French supply the city of Montevideo??	by sea
What year did the Colorados defeat Oribe?	1851
What year was a stagecoach bus line established in Montevideo?	1853
Between what years were the first natural gas street lights constructed?	1854 to 1861
What year was the Teatro Solis inaugurated?	1856
What year was an underwater telegraph line made that connected Montevideo with Buenos Aires?	1866
What year did Compania de Tranvias al Paso del Molino y Cerro creat the first lines connecting Montevideo with Union?	1868
What year was Mercado del Puerto inaugurated?	1868
What year was the first railway line of the company Ferrocarril Central del Uruguay inaugurated?	1869
What year was Bulevar Circunvalcion constructed?	1878
When were the first telephone lines installed?	1882
When did electric street lights replace the gas operated lights?	1886
When did the Hipodromo de Maronas start operating?	1888
When was the Central Railway Station of Montevideo inaugurated?	1897
What century did many Europeans immigrate to the city of Montevideo?	early 20th century
In 1908 what percent of the city's population was foreign-born?	30%
The Rodo Park and the Estadio Gran Parque Central serves as poles of what?	urban development
Who was the Admiral of the German pocket ship?	Admiral Graf Spee
Where did the famous incident involving the German pocket battleship take place in?	Punta del Este
When year did the Battle of the River Plate take place?	13 December 1939
Montevideo is situated on the north shore of what?	the Río de la Plata
What river forms a natural border between Montevideo and San Jose Department?	Santa Lucía River
What does the Bay of Montevideo form?	a natural harbour
The city of Montevideo has an average elevation of what?	43 metres
How far is to the neighboring capitol of San Jose de Mayo?	90 kilometres
How far is to the neighboring capitol of Canelones?	46 kilometres
The Municipality of Montevideo was first created by a legal act of what?	18 December 1908
Who was the municipality's first mayor?	Daniel Muñoz
Municipalities were abolished by what?	Uruguayan Constitution of 1918
How many political municipalities has the city of Montevideo been divided into as of 2010?	8
What is the head of each Municipio called?	an alcalde
Who elects the mayor of the political municipalities?	the citizens registered in the constituency
What had many of the city's barrios previously been?	geographically separate settlements
What is a neighborhood of great significance?	Ciudad Vieja
What surrounded the neighborhood of Ciudad Vieja?	a protective wall
How many inhabitants did Montevideo have in 1860?	57,913
The population quadrupled by 1880 due mainly to what?	the great European immigration
What happened to the population by the year 1880?	had quadrupled
What had the population grown to in 1908?	309,331 inhabitants
According to the census survey carried out between 15 June and 31 July 2004, what was Montevideo's population?	1,325,968 persons
According to the census survey carried out between 15 June and 31 July 2004, what was Uruguay's population?	3,241,003
According to the census survey carried out between 15 June and 31 July 2004, what was Montevideo's female population?	707,697
According to the census survey carried out between 15 June and 31 July 2004, what was Montevideo's male population?	618,271
What is the economic and political centre of the country?	Montevideo
What year was the World Trade Center Montevideo constructed?	1998
What year was the Telecommunications Tower constructed?	(2000
What kind of company does ANCAP run?	Energy
What kind of company does ANTEL run?	telecommunications
What has traditionally been the strongest service export sectors in Uruguay?	Banking
Uruguay was once dubbed as what?	the Switzerland of America
What is the largest bank in Uruguay?	Banco Republica
Where is Banco Republica based in?	Montevideo
What accounts for much of Uruguay's economy?	Tourism
Where is tourism in Montevideo centered in?	Ciudad Vieja area
Plaza Independencia constitutes one end of what?	18 de Julio Avenue
How many guest rooms does the Sheraton have?	207
How many suites does the Sheraton have?	10
How many rooms does The Radisson Montevideo have?	232
What is the heartland of retailing in Uruguay?	Montevideo
What city has become the centre of business and real estate?	Montevideo
What year was Montevideo Shopping  built?	1985
What style of building is the Montevideo Metropolitan Cathedral?	Neoclassical
What style of building is the World Trade Center Montevideo?	Postmodern
What is the tallest skyscraper in the country?	ANTEL Telecommunication Tower
What district has many homes built by Bello and reboratti?	Pocitos
Between what years did Bello and Reboratti built most of the homes in the Pocitos district?	1920 and 1940
Who designed the Edificio Panamericano?	Raul Sichero
What types of apartment buildings were constructed during the boom of the 1970's and 1980's?	modern apartment buildings
When did World Trade Center Montevideo officially open?	1998
What was the first building to be inaugurated?	World Trade Center 1
When was World Trade Center 2 inaugurated?	2002
When was World Trade Center 3 inaugurated?	2009
What was intended to be a platform for the development of business activities?	The Towers Square
The square contains a sculpture by what renowned Uruguayan sculptor?	Pablo Atchugarry
How much space is World Trade Center 4 projected to have?	53,500 square metres
What is Uruguay's oldest theater?	The Solís Theatre
When was The Solis Theater built?	1856
Who owns The Solis Theater?	the government of Montevideo
What year did the government of Montevideo start a major reconstruction of the Solis  Theater?	1998
What year was the reconstruction of the solis theater completed?	2004
Who designed the Palacio Salvo?	Mario Palanti
What year was the Palacio Salvo completed?	1925
How high does the Palacio Salvo stand?	100 metres (330 ft) high
What is also a major note in Ciudad Vieja?	Plaza de la Constitución
What is the Cabildo?	the seat of colonial government
What is the burial place of Fructuoso Rivera?	Montevideo Metropolitan Cathedral
Where is the equestrian statue of Bruno Mauricio de Zabala located?	Plaza Zabala
What major public central park is located south of Avenida Italia?	Parque Batlle
How many former districts does the current barrio of Parque Battle include?	four
What sub district of Parque Batlle took its name from the original villa of Don Alejo Rossell Y Rius?	Villa Dolores
Parque Batlle is named in honor of who?	José Batlle y Ordóñez
Jose Batile y Ordonez was president of where?	Uruguay
Between what years was Jose batlle y Ordonez president of Uruguay?	1911 to 1915
Parque Batlle was originally proposed by what?	an Act of March 1907
Parque Rodo belongs to who?	Punta Carretas
What does the name "Rodo" commemorate?	José Enrique Rodó
Who was an important Uruguayan writer that is commemorated by Parque Rodo?	José Enrique Rodó
Parque Rodo was originally conceived as what?	a French-style city park
What is on the east side of the park?	the National Museum of Visual Arts
What takes part on the east side of the main park every Sunday?	a very popular street market
What side has an artificial lake with a little castle?	north side
What does the little castle on the north side of the park house?	a municipal library
Who planned the first set of subsidiary forts?	Portuguese
When were the first set of subsidiary forts planned?	1701
the subsidiary forts were established to stop what?	frequent insurrections by the Spaniards
Where were the Spaniards emanating from?	Buenos Aires
What overlooks the bay of Montevideo?	Fortaleza del Cerro
What replaced the observation post in 1802?	a beacon
When did construction of the fortress begin?	1809
When did construction of the fortress finish?	1839
What avenue goes along the entire coastline of Montevideo?	The Rambla
Avenue or Watercourse is the literal meaning of what Spanish word?	rambla
In the Americas rambla is mostly used to refer to what?	"coastal avenue"
What is the largest cemetery?	Cementerio del Norte
Where is the Central Cemetery located?	Barrio Sur
What year was the Central Cemetery founded?	1835
Where is the British Cemetery Montevideo located?	Buceo neighborhood
Who purchased a plot of land in the name of the English residents?	Mr. Thomas Samuel Hood
When did Mr. Thomas Samuel Hood purchase a plot of land at the British Cemetery Montevideo?	1828
When did the government compensate the British by moving the cemetery to Buceo?	1884
What unique form of dance originated in the neighbourhods of Montevideo?	Uruguayan tango
Tango, candombe and murga are three main styles of what?	music
How many movie theater companies are there in Montevideo?	two
What is the most prominent theater in Uruguay?	The Solís Theatre
Who gave the initial donation of the private library?	Father José Manuel Pérez Castellano
When did Father Jose Manuel Perez Castellano die?	1815
Who was the promoter, director and organizer of the first public library in Montevideo?	Father Dámaso Antonio Larrañaga
Tango, milonga and vals criollo are the most popular forms of music in what region?	Rio de Plata region
When was Fun Fun Bar established?	1935
Where is El Farolito located?	the old part of the city
What suffered when the military junta took over power in Uruguay?	art
Rimer Cardillo was one of the country's leading what?	artists
Who made the National Institute of Fine Arts?	Rimer Cardillo
What was the seat of government during the colonial times of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata?	The Montevideo Cabildo
Where is the Montevideo Cabildo located?	front of Constitution Square
Between what years was the Montevideo Cabildo built?	between 1804 and 1869
What style was the Montevideo Cabildo?	Neoclassical style
When did the Montevideo Cabildo become a National Heritage Site?	1975.
Where is the Palacio Taranco located?	the heart of Ciudad Vieja
When was the Palacio Taranco erected?	early 20th century
The Palacio Taranco was erected to be the residence for whom?	Ortiz Taranco brothers
Who designed the Palacio Taranco?	French architects Charles Louis Girault and Jules Chifflot León
The National History Museum of Montevideo is located where?	the historical residence of General Fructuoso Rivera
What houses the Museo Romantico?	Antonio Montero
How many houses has the Historical Museum annexed?	eight
The Museo Torres Garcia is located where?	the Old Town
The Museo Torres Garcia exhibits whose unusual portraits?	Joaquín Torres García
Who established The Museo Torres Garcia?	Manolita Piña Torres
Manolita Pina Torres was the widow of who?	Torres Garcia
Where is the National Museum of Visual Arts located?	Parque Rodó
What does the National Museum of Visual Arts have the largest collection of in Uruguay?	paintings
When was the Juan Manuel Blanes Museum founded?	1930
Who painted Uruguayan patriotic themes?	Juan Manuel Blanes
Where is the Museo de Historia del Arte located?	the Palacio Municipal
Where is the Museo de Guacho y de la Moneda located?	the Centro
What are bombillas?	(drinking straws
Where is the Museo Naval located?	the eastern waterfront in Buceo
Where is the Museo y Parque Fernando Garcia located?	Carrasco
What is the center of traditional Uruguayan food and beverage in Montevideo?	the Mercado del Puerto
What is a torta frita?	a pan-fried cake
Where is Arcadia located?	atop the Plaza Victoria
Where is Shannon Irish pub located?	the eastern part of the Old District
What is the major annual festival in Montevideo?	the annual Montevideo Carnaval
What is the annual Montevideo Carnaval part of?	the national festival of Carnival Week
What does Tablados mean?	popular scenes
What does Desfile de las Llamadas mean?	Parade of the Calls
Church and state have been officially separated in Uruguay since what year?	1916
What religion has the most followers in Montevideo?	Roman Catholicism
When was the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Montevideo created?	1830
What does Nuestra Senora del Sagrado Corazon mean?	Our Lady of the Sacred Heart
What does Iglesia Punta Carretas mean?	Punta Carretas Church
Between what years was the Iglesia Punta Carretas built?	between 1917 and 1927
What stle was the Iglesia Punta Carretas built in?	Romanesque Revival style
What is the country's largest university?	The University of the Republic
In 2007 the University of the Republic had a student body of how many people?	81,774
When was the University of the Republic founded?	18 July 1849
Who is the current rector of The University of the Republic?	Dr. Rodrigo Arocena
When did the process of funding the country's public university begin?	11 June 1833
Who proposed the law that began the process of funding the country's public university?	Senator Dámaso Antonio Larrañaga
When was the House of General Studies formed?	1836
When did Manuel Oribe pass a decree establishing the Greater University of the Republic?	27 May 1838
What is the largest private university in Uruguay?	ORT Uruguay
When was ORT Uruguay established?	1942
When was ORT Uruguay officially certified as a private university?	September 1996
How many students does the ORT Uruguay university have?	about 8,000
What is the main methodist educational institution in Uruguay?	The Montevideo Crandon Institute
When was the Montevideo Crandon Institute founded?	1879
What is the first academic institution in South America where a home economics course was taught?	The Montevideo Crandon Institute
Where is the Christian Brothers of Ireland Stella Maris College located?	Carrasco
When was the Christian Brothers of Ireland Stella Maris College established?	1955
What is regarded as one of the best high schools in the country?	The Christian Brothers of Ireland Stella Maris College
Who is the headmaster of the Christian Brothers of Ireland Stella Maris College?	professor Juan Pedro Toni
Where is the British Schools of Montevideo located?	Carrasco
When was the British Schools of Montevideo established?	1908
What was the British Schools of Montevideo original purpose?	to give Uruguayan children a complete education
Where is St. Brendan's school located?	Cordon
What was St. Brendan's school previously named?	St.Catherine´s
What is the only school in the country implementing three international Baccalaureate Programmes?	St.Brendan´s school
What is the national football stadium in Parque Batlle?	Estadio Centenario
When was Estadio Centenario opened?	1930
How many seats does the Estadio Centenario have?	70,000
Where is the Uruguayan Basketball League headquartered?	Montevideo
When was the Golf Club of Punta Carretas founded?	1894
Equestrianism regained importance in Montevideo after what?	the Maroñas Racecourse reopened
What does DNT stand for?	Dirección Nacional de Transporte
Who is responsible for the organization and development of Montevideo's transport infrastructure?	Dirección Nacional de Transporte
Where is the Tres Cruces Bus Terminal located?	the lower level of the Tres Cruces Shopping Center
What does the AFE stand for?	The State Railways Administration of Uruguay
What neighborhood is the General Artigas Central Station located?	Aguada
When was the General Artigas Central Station abandoned?	1 March 2003
What gives natural protection to ships in Montevideo?	The port on Montevideo Bay
Between what years did the main engineering work on the port of Montevideo Bay take place?	1870 and 1930
What happened in 1923 that required repairs to many of the city's engineering works?	A major storm
What is one of the oldest hospitals in Uruguay?	Hospital Maciel
Who originally donated the land for Hospital Macie?	Francisco Antonio Maciel
When was the first building of the Hospital Maciel established?	between 1781 and 1788
What is the only psychiatric hospital in Montevideo?	Hospital Vilardebó
Who is Hospital Vilardebo named after?	Teodoro Vilardebó Matuliche
When did the Hospital Vilardebo open?	21 May 1880
How many inpatients did the the Hospital Vilardebo have in 1915?	1,500 inpatients
What is the significance of poultry in the lives of humans?	kept by humans for the eggs they produce, their meat, their feathers, or sometimes as pets.
Are all domesticated and wild birds classified as poultry  ?	but does not include similar wild birds hunted for sport or food and known as game.
What types of  birds are most commonly considered poultry?	chickens, quails and turkeys
Was the Latin word for poultry also used to decribe other small animals as opposed to any poulty?	from the Latin word pullus, which means small animal.
Are any other birds considered common in the world of poultry?	domestic ducks and domestic geese.
How long have humans used domsticated poultry ?	domestication of poultry took place several thousand years ago
What have people use domesticated poultry for besides food ?	cockfighting at first and quail kept for their songs
Why did humans feel that addtional breeding tatics were necessary in poulty?	Selective breeding for fast growth, egg-laying ability, conformation, plumage and docility took place
Has breeding changed the original characterictics of the animals ?	modern breeds often look very different from their wild ancestors.
How popular is poultry as a consumable among humans ?	Poultry is the second most widely eaten type of meat globally
What two addtional types of birds are listed in teh Encyclopedia Britanica as poultry?	guinea fowl and squabs (young pigeons)
Who is the authoor of the book Poultry Breeding and Genetics?	R. D. Crawford
What is the most likely outout for the common variety of pheasant ?	frequently being bred in captivity and released into the wild.
Edmund Dixon is most famous for what inclusions in his 1854 book on poultry ?	peafowl, guinea fowl, mute swan, turkey, various types of geese, the muscovy duck, other ducks and all types of chickens including bantams
Do all language make the distinction between poultry and fowls?	many languages do not distinguish between "poultry" and "fowl
What are male chickens called ?	cocks
How are male chickens able to be identified ?	cocks, are usually larger, more boldly coloured, and have more exaggerated plumage than females (hens).
What do chickens normally consume when in the natural wild environment?	in their natural surroundings search among the leaf litter for seeds, invertebrates, and other small animals.
Do chickens fly like other birds?	They seldom fly except as a result of perceived danger, preferring to run into the undergrowth if approached.
From what birds are chickens decended from ?	Today's domestic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) is mainly descended from the wild red junglefowl of Asia
When did the poultry business boom in the United States ?	By the mid-20th century, the poultry meat-producing industry was of greater importance than the egg-laying industry
How can you normally identify a cock when recently hatched?	can often be identified as soon as they are hatch for subsequent culling
How has breeding helped in the pultry industry?	light-framed, egg-laying birds that can produce 300 eggs a year; fast-growing, fleshy birds destined for consumption
Are there any purebreed lines for poultry today?	with the exception of the white Leghorn, most commercial birds are of hybrid origin.
What breed of chicken is named after a town in Java ?	A bantam
How are bantams different from other chickens?	A bantam is a small variety of domestic chicken, either a miniature version of a member of a standard breed, or a "true bantam" with no larger counterpart
Do bantams lay regular sized eggs ?	Bantams may be a quarter to a third of the size of standard birds and lay similarly small eggs
Where are bantams kept?	kept by small-holders and hobbyists for egg production, use as broody hens, ornamental purposes, and showing.
How long ago was the sport of fighting chickens been around?	Cockfighting is said to be the world's oldest spectator sport and may have originated in Persia 6,000 years ago.
What is the termed used to define the game of fighting chickens called?	Cockfighting
Do chickens die in the sport of cockfighting?	fight each other, and will do so with great vigour until one is critically injured or killed.
Have theere been any types of chickens who were really good at cockfighting?	Breeds such as the Aseel were developed in the Indian subcontinent for their aggressive behaviour
Do people bet on the cockfighting or is it just for entertainment?	large sums were won or lost depending on the outcome of an encounter.
How can you identify a duck from other poultry?	medium-sized aquatic birds with broad bills, eyes on the side of the head, fairly long necks, short legs set far back on the body, and webbed feet.
What do you call a male duck?	drakes
How can you identify a drake from a the female of the species?	larger than females (simply known as ducks) and are differently coloured in some breeds
What does the diet of cultivated ducks consistof ?	aquatic insects, molluscs, worms, small amphibians, waterweeds, and grasses.
Do all ducks fly south for the winter?	Most domestic ducks are too heavy to fly
How long have ducks possibly been in domesticated domicile with humans?	Clay models of ducks found in China dating back to 4000 BC may indicate the domestication of ducks took place there during the Yangshao culture
How far behind the east society was the western culture in domesticating ducks?	domestication of the duck took place in the Far East at least 1500 years earlier than in the West
How did Lucius Columella recommend that one go abbout the business of domesticating ducks.?	collect wildfowl eggs and put them under a broody hen,
When did ducks begin to appear in the books of Western Europeon Society ?	ducks did not appear in agricultural texts in Western Europe until about 810 AD
Where ducks ever used as a type of commerence in the world?	mentioned alongside geese, chickens, and peafowl as being used for rental payments made by tenants to landowners.
What breed of duck is considered the first?	mallard (Anas platyrhynchos) is the ancestor of all breeds of domestic duck (with the exception of the Muscovy duck
What are the outcomes of the breeding of ducks for humans?	various breeds have been developed, selected for egg-laying ability, fast growth, and a well-covered carcase.
What variety is the most common the the United States and the U.K.	Pekin duck
Why is the Pekin duck the favored of the western world?	can lay 200 eggs a year and can reach a weight of 3.5 kg (7.7 lb) in 44 days
Why is duck more common than other poultry in the east society ??	Ducks are more popular there than chickens and are mostly still herded in the traditional way and selected for their ability to find sufficient food in
When was the greylag goose first domesticated by humans?	The greylag goose (Anser anser) was domesticated by the Egyptians at least 3000 years ago
What other name is the swan goose know by ?	Chinese goose
Where is it believed that the greylag goose was first domesticated in theworld?	Siberia
Are geese an important part of the poultry industry?	Despite their early domestication, geese have never gained the commercial importance of chickens and ducks.
do domestic and wild geese have the same apperearance ?	Domestic geese are much larger than their wild counterparts and tend to have thick necks, an upright posture, and large bodies with broad rear ends
What types of geese are used for human consumption?	The greylag-derived birds
What types of geese are used most efficiently for their egg production?	Chinese geese
What is the down feathers of geese most commonly used for ?	use in pillows and padded garments
Why is the meat of geese considered fatty ?	they deposit fat subcutaneously, although this fat contains mostly monounsaturated fatty acids
How many species is the recent day turkey suspected to have embarked from?	descended from one of six subspecies of wild turkey
When were turkeys first used in a domestication setting?	Pre-Aztec tribes in south-central Mexico first domesticated the bird around 800 BC
What other purposes have the domesticated turkey been used for aside from food?	feathers for robes, blankets, and ceremonial purposes
When and with what culture did domesticated turkey start to appear in the United States ?	Pueblo Indians inhabiting the Colorado Plateau in the United States did likewise around 200 BC.
What type of accomidations are domesticated turkey normally grown in?	Commercial turkeys are usually reared indoors under controlled conditions
What type of conditions are used to increase the weight and profitability of commercial turkeys?	The lights can be switched on for 24-hrs/day, or a range of step-wise light regimens to encourage the birds to feed often and therefore grow rapidly
At what age is the average turkey considered ready for the initial step of the commercial food process?	Females achieve slaughter weight at about 15 weeks of age and males at about 19
How much more does a average commercial  turkey weigh in comparison to its wild turkey cousins ?	Mature commercial birds may be twice as heavy as their wild counterparts
What the average for the amount of  turkeys are consumed in the U.S on Thanksgiving Day?	60 million birds in the United States
Have quails ever been used for entertainment purposes ?	They were originally kept as songbirds, and they are thought to have been regularly used in song contests.
Where can quails typically be found in the wild?	it is found in bushy places, in rough grassland, among agricultural crops, and in other places with dense cover.
What is the typical diet consist of for qails ?	seeds, insects, and other small invertebrates.
From what country do most domesticated  quails today descend from ?	modern domesticated flocks are mostly of Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica)
Why did the Japanses begin to breed quails in teh 20th century?	Japanese breeders began to selectively breed for increased egg production.
When did the quail egg business begin to really become an economic driven industry?	By 1940, the quail egg industry was flourishing,
What caused a marked sownturn in the production of quail eggs following the industry boom?	the events of World War II led to the complete loss of quail lines bred for their song type, as well as almost all of those bred for egg production
How many eggs can be laid by the present day decendants of the Japanese quail?	Modern birds can lay upward of 300 eggs a year
Are quails used for any purpose other than human consumption ?	Japanese quail are also used in biomedical research in fields such as genetics, embryology, nutrition, physiology, pathology, and toxicity studies
What continent is the evolution of guinea fowl credited to?	Africa
Who first domesticated the guinea fowl ?	ancient Greeks and Romans.
Aside from consumption how are Guinea fowl  useful to humans.	They will keep a vegetable garden clear of pests and will eat the ticks that carry Lyme disease.
What are Guinea fowl  also praised for accomplishing for humans?	roost in trees and give a loud vocal warning of the approach of predators.
What is the gourmet title given to pigeons ?	A squab
From what variety of pigeon does the squab decen?	rock pigeon (Columba livia)
Are squabs treated differently from other piegons by humans aside from consumption?	When they hatch, the squabs are fed by both parents on "pigeon's milk", a thick secretion high in protein produced by the crop
How often are pigeons able to breed for the consumption process ?	a prolific pair should produce two squabs every four weeks during a breeding season lasting several months
What is the most popular type of poulty that is farmed?	Worldwide, more chickens are kept than any other type of poultry
How many birds are routinely raised in the world for the consumption process?	50 billion birds being raised each year as a source of meat and eggs.
How is the cost of the price for animal feed related to the poulty cost for consumers?	High feed costs could limit further development of poultry production
Before industrialization how were chickens normally cared for?	birds would have been kept extensively in small flocks, foraging during the day and housed at night.
What is the major significance of chickens to women in underdeveloped countries?	the women often make important contributions to family livelihoods through keeping poultry
What is the benefit to chickens of being in a free-range farming location?	the birds have access to natural conditions and can exhibit their normal behaviours
What is yarding in relation to the pultry industry?	birds have access to a fenced yard and poultry house at a higher stocking rate
What is the most intensive type of enclosure system used in the poultry business?	battery cages, often set in multiple tiers
How are eggs collected in teh battery cage system?	The eggs are laid on the floor of the cage and roll into troughs outside for ease of collection
What is the average size of chickens used extensively for it's meat production raised in an intensive environment?	carcass size (2 kg (4.4 lb))
How long does it take for an broiler raisedin an intensive environment very to reach optimum size?	six weeks or less
What is the death rate among chickens who are intensivley breed to be broilers?	Mortality rates at 1%
Do chicken raised in the intensive broiler method suffer from health condions?	their legs cannot always support their weight and their hearts and respiratory systems may not be able to supply enough oxygen to their developing muscles.
How long does it take for a chicken raised in a less intensive envionment to reach optimal broiler size?	18 weeks to reach similar weights
What are some of the major concerns with intensive breeding programs?	cannibalism, feather pecking and vent pecking can be common
What harsh measures do farmers use to prevent the chickens from harming themselves or others?	some farmers using beak trimming as a preventative measure
What are some of the major concerns with extensive breeding programs such as free range ?	the birds are exposed to adverse weather conditions and are vulnerable to predators and disease-carrying wild birds.
How is the spread of the avian flu related to the conditions in which chickens are kept?	In Southeast Asia, a lack of disease control in free-range farming has been associated with outbreaks of avian influenza.
What is considered the most alarming setting for chickens to be raised in?	Barn systems have been found to have the worst bird welfare.
Is there a pplace where lovers of the chicken are able to see some of its best attributes ?	In many countries, national and regional poultry shows are held where enthusiasts exhibit their birds
In such competitions what are the chickens juged on? What attibutes are considered viable?	birds which are judged on certain phenotypical breed traits as specified by their respective breed standards
Are there breed standards used for the competitions?	Breed standards were drawn up for egg-laying, meat-type, and purely ornamental birds, aiming for uniformity
What are some of the most widely known poultry tournaments?	the annual "National Championship Show" in the United Kingdom organised by the Poultry Club of Great Britain.
From where does the idea of a poultry tournament orginate?	The idea of poultry exhibition may have originated after cockfighting was made illegal, as a way of maintaining a competitive element in poultry husbandry
Jo w common is the consumtion of poultry in the world?	Poultry is the second most widely eaten type of meat in the world, accounting for about 30% of total meat production worldwide
How many animals of the poultry variety are raised for consumtion each year?	Sixteen billion birds are raised annually
What type of enviornment is poultry most commonly raised in?	more than half of these in industrialised, factory-like production units
How many industry models are followed for the production process of poultry?	There are two distinct models of production;
What is the Europeon model of the poultry business ?	the European Union supply chain model seeks to supply products which can be traced back to the farm of origin
How many ducks did China produce for consumption in 2011?	China producing two thirds of the total, some 1.7 billion birds
What other countries are important to the duck husbandry business?	Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Indonesia and South Korea (12% in total)
Who is the largest producer of duck meat among the western nations?	France (3.5%) is the largest producer in the West,
What is the market percentage held by the country that controls the biggest share of the global market for goose and guinea fowl meat	94% share
What is the most substantial part of a birds antomy as it apples to consupmtion og the meat?	The meatiest parts of a bird are the flight muscles on its chest, called "breast" meat, and the walking muscles on the legs, called the "thigh" and "drumstick"
Are certain parts of the bird used for particular reasons in relation to receipes?	wings are also eaten (Buffalo wings are a popular example in the United States) and may be split into three segments,
Is poultry available in various forms?	fresh or frozen, as whole birds or as joints (cuts), bone-in or deboned, seasoned in various ways, raw or ready cooked.
Are there reasons for the dark meat  that poultry has?	The dark colour comes from the protein myoglobin, which plays a key role in oxygen uptake and storage within cells
What is the white meat of chicken actually used for by the animal ?	White muscle, in contrast, is suitable only for short bursts of activity such as, for chickens, flying
What causes the meat of some poultry to show rainbow like colr striations?	the microscopic regular structure of intracellular muscle fibrils which can diffract light and produce iridescent colours
Do some varities of  poultry have more dark meat than others?	birds with breast muscle more suitable for sustained flight, such as ducks and geese, have red muscle (and therefore dark meat) throughout
When is it possible for baccteria is enter into poultry before you get it home?	Translational Genomics Research
What percentage of poultry is tainted with Staphylococcus bacteria?	47%
Are the bacteria that is found on poultry easy to get rid of?	Thorough cooking of the product would kill these bacteria,
What considerations do consumers need when using safe handling procedures with poultry regardless of cooking method used??	a risk of cross-contamination from improper handling of the raw product is still present
Is the Avian flu a risk only to animals?	people in contact with live poultry are at the greatest risk of becoming infected with the virus
What portion of the world is considered to be most at risk for the rapid spread of the avian flu?	areas such as Southeast Asia, where the disease is endemic in the wild bird population and domestic poultry can become infected
What is the danger to humans in regards to the spread of avian flu to humans ?	The virus possibly could mutate to become highly virulent and infectious in humans and cause an influenza pandemic.
Can the avian flu be sread from wild birds to birds kept in husbandry?	the disease is endemic in the wild bird population and domestic poultry can become infected.
What are poultry eggs used for aside from consumption?	Many vaccines to infectious diseases can be grown in fertilised chicken eggs.
What is the major difficulty faced in using poultry to cultivate vaccines?	egg allergies are unable to be immunised
How long does it take for the flu vaccine to be fully ready for deployment into the population ?	process that takes about six months
In order to make a vaccine , what do viruses require that bacteria does not?	viruses need living cells in which to replicate
What new technology is being used in teh vaccine making process that will make vaccines safer and eaier for most consumers?	. Cell-based culture
What is the nutitional value to humans of poultry and poultry products?	protein of high quality
What is the fat and protien content of a 100g ram serving of baked chicken breast contain ?	4 g of fat and 31 g of protein
How much healthy fat in in the average serving of poultry?	two to three times as much polyunsaturated fat as most types of red meat
Does chicken contain fat?	low levels of fat which have a favourable mix of fatty acids
In what year did Arsenal join The Football League?	1893
During the 1930s, Arsenal won how many League Championships?	five
When did Arsenal win their first Double Cup?	1970–71
Over a 17 year period which began in the late 80s, stretching five years into the new millenia, how many FA Cups did Arsenal win?	five
What was the first football club from southern England to join The Football League?	Arsenal
When did Arsenal join the Football League?	1893
In what year did Arsenal qualify to be in the First Division?	1904
How many league championships did Arsenal win in the 1930s?	five
What was Arsenal's league position ranking at the end of the last century?	highest average
What was the original name of the Arsenal team?	Dial Square
When was Arsenal originally formed?	1886
When did Arsenal become based in Highbury?	1913
In what year did Arsenal move to Holloway?	2006
How does Forbe's believe the Arsenal club was worth in 2015?	$1.3 billion
What group from the munitions plant in Woolwich formed the Arsenal club?	workers
By what year had Arsenal become a limited company?	1893
When did Arsenal move to Arsenal Stadium in Highbury?	1913
In which division was Arsenal ranked by the start of WWI?	second division
By 1920 where was Arsenal ranked in division?	First Division
What manager was appointed to lead Arsenal in 1925?	Herbert Chapman
What was Chapman's style of tactics that provided the basis for the Arsenal club's success?	revolutionary
In what decade did Arsenal dominate in English football?	1930s
What football club manager got an underground station renamed for Arsenal?	Chapman
What was one of Arsenal's first major wins?	1930 FA Cup Final
When was Bertie Mee become manager of Arsenal?	1966
What position did Mee hold in the Arsenal club prior to becoming manager?	physiotherapist
In which season did Arsenal win its first European trophy?	1969–70
For how long after Arsenal's first trophy win the team do poorly competitions?	decade
In what season did Arsenal win their first League and FA Cup double?	1970–71
On what date was Bertie Mee replaced by Arsenal?	9 July 1976
What Arsenal manager replaced Mee?	Terry Neill
What action brought prosperity to Arsenal?	new signings
What number of cup finals did Arsenal reach in	trio
In what years did Arsenal get into the FA Cup finals?	1978, 1979 and 1980
What former Arsenal player became manager in 1986?	George Graham
Under the direction of Graham, what trophy did Arsenal win in 1987?	League Cup
What competitor did Arsenal defeat to win a league title in the 1988-89 season?	Liverpool
In what year did Arsenal win their second European cup?	1994
What action did Graham get caught doing to get fired by Arsenal?	kickbacks
What manager in the late 1990s brought success to Arsenal?	Arsène Wenger
Besides improved tactics and training, what did Wenger add to the Arsenal team?	foreign players
In what season did Arsenal win their second League and Cup double?	1997–98
What caused Arsenal's loss to Galatasarey in the 1999-2000 season?	penalties
What trophy did Arsenal win in the 2003-2004 season without losing a match?	Premier League
Including Arsenal, how many  teams  had won the Premier League up to 2013?	five
In what year was the Premier League created?	1992
What team defeated Arsenal in the finals of the Champions League in 2005-2006 season?	Barcelona
To what stadium did Arsenal FC move in 2006?	Emirates Stadium
For how many years did Arsenal play at Highbury?	93
What famous team defeated Arsenal for the League Cup in 2007?	Chelsea
Who beat Arsenal for the 2011 League Cup>	Birmingham City
How many wins did Arsenal have to make the team the most successful in FA Cup history?	12
What team did Arsenal defeat at Wembley in 2015?	Chelsea
How Community Shield titles does Arsenal have?	14
In what year did Arsenal first create a crest for the team?	1888
What part of the Arsenal crest is sometimes mistaken for chimneys?	three cannon
After the team moved to what city were the cannon left off the crest?	Highbury
What nickname prompted a return to the canon on the club crest?	The Gunners
In what year was the canon image further refined on the Arsenal crest?	1925
What Latin motto was added to the crest in 1949?	Victoria Concordia Crescit
In 1949 what new addition was done to enhance the Arsenal club crest?	rendered in colour
What legal stance did Arsenal use to win a law suit against a merchant?	trademark
In what year did Arsenal produce a remodeled crest that could be copyrighted?	2002
 Who did Arsenal supporters think should have been consulted before announcing the new crest?	fans
What style of logo did Chapman introduce in the 1930s?	Art Deco
Of what is the early logo of Arsenal an example?	corporate logo
Where is the Art Deco style badge design used prominently?	Highbury Stadium
What Arsenal club nickname sometimes appeared on club shirts?	The Gunners
When was the white canon logo replaced with the club crest?	1990s
What celebration did Arsenal have in the 2011-12 season?	125th year anniversary
What do the 15 oak leaves on the anniversary crest indicate?	founding members
What dates are depicted on the Arsenal anniversary crest?	1886 and 2011
What motto is shown on the Arsenal club anniversary crest?	Forward
Where did the Arsenal team wear the anniversary crest?	on their jerseys
What has the color of the Arsenal  home shirts been?	bright red
In recognition of what event was the color red adopted for Arsenal shirts?	charitable donation
What was the early name for the Arsenal FC?	Dial Square
Which founding members were responsible for the red shirts?	Fred Beardsley and Morris Bates
What was the color  of the early uniforms' shorts and socks?	white
What manager updated the players uniforms in 1933?	Herbert Chapman
What brighter shade of red did Chapman adopt?	pillar box red
What distinctive change did Chapman make to the Arsenal shirts?	white sleeves
For what style of shirts Arsenal known ?	red and white
What did Arsenal want to commemorate by wearing dark red shirts in their last season at Highbury?	first season
What early team copied the Arsenal's red current color in 1909?	Sparta Prague
What team in 1938 used the same style of kit, but in green?	Hibernian
By coping the Arsenal team kit exactly, what nickname was given to Sporting Clube de Braga?	Os Arsenalistas
For how long have the Arsenal inspired copy-cat clubs worn their uniforms?	to this day
What was Sporting Clube de Braga's original color?	green
During what season were Arsenal's away colors white shirts and white or black shorts?	1969–70 season
When did Arsenal adolpt the away colors or yellow shirts and blue shorts?	1969–70 season
For what competition did Arsenal use the yellow and blue away kit?	1971 FA Cup Final
What did Arsenal consider the yellow and blue colors to be after losing a FA Cup final wearing red and white?	lucky
What is the difference in the Arsenal color of blue in the away kit after 1983?	darker shade
What manufacturer became Arsenal's uniform provider in 1994?	Nike
Which brand was the kit provider prior to 1994?	Adidas
To appeal to what are the kits changed regularly?	replica kit market
What traditional Arsenal colors have frequently been employed for away kits?	yellow and blue
Since what year has the away kit been changed every year?	2009
When did Arsenal FC leave Highbury stadium?	May 2006
When did Arsenal Stadium at Highbury first become the club's home?	September 1913
What architect designed the original stadium at Highbury?	Archibald Leitch
In what decade was Arsenal Stadium overhauled?	1930s
When was the Arsenal stadium bombed?	Second World War
What was the most people that Highbury stadium could host?	60,000
When did League regulations make Arsenal reduce the seating in Highbury?	1993–94 season
Where did Arsenal play matches because of increased seating capacity?	Wembley
During what time did Arsenal play at Wembley?	1998 to 2000
What seating capacity did Wembley offer that have to lure Arsenal to play there?	70,000
When did Arsenal offer a plan to build a new stadium at Ashburton Grove?	2000
By what name was the new Arsenal stadium finally known?	Emirates Stadium
What was the amount of the Emirates airline company deal?	£100 million
Of what facet of stadium naming do some fans disapprove?	corporate sponsorship
What type of agreement is the deal with Emirates ?	sponsorship deal
What is the common nickname of Arsenal supporters?	Gooners
From what name does Gooners come?	The Gunners
From what groups do the supporters of Arsenal come?	variety of social classes
Where did the attendance at Arsenal games rank in relation to other English clubs?	second-highest average
What aspect of the fan base is one of the  reasons for large game attendance?	location
What type of clubs does Arsenal have?	domestic supporters' clubs
Which fan club is closely allied to the Arsenal club?	Arsenal Football Supporters' Club
What supporters club is more loosely tied to Arsenal?	Arsenal Independent Supporters' Association
What fan group wants more ownership rights in the Arsenal club?	Arsenal Supporters' Trust
What is a common chant of Arsenal supporters?	One-Nil to the Arsenal
What medium has added to the fan base of Arsenal?	satellite television
How many supporter clubs outside Britain  were there in 2007 affiliated with Arsenal?	49
In 2011 what was Arsenal's estimated fan base?	113 million
What was the world ranking of Arsenal's social media in 2015-15 season?	fifth highest
In this era of satelites and social media,on what are fans now less dependent ?	geography
What football club is Arsenal's greatest rival?	Tottenham Hotspur
Since the Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspurs are geographically so close , what is the contest between them called?	North London derbies
What club has Arsenal have an increased rivalry since the 1980s?	Manchester United
What competition sparked the rivalry with Manchester?	Premier League title
What year's poll of supporters said that the Tottenham rivalry was greatest?	2008
What individual is the biggest shareholder on the Arsenal board?	Stan Kroenke
What percentage of shares in Arsenal did Kroenke own by 2011?	62.89%
Who is Arsenal's Chief Executive?	Ivan Gazidis
Who is Kroenke's chief competitor for Arsenal stock?	Red & White Securities
In what year did Kreonke achieve take over of Arsenal stock?	April 2011
By what means does Arsenal operate as a company?	non-quoted public limited
How many shares of Arsenal stock are there?	62,217
On March 10,2016 what was the value of a share of Arsenal stock?	£15,670
What value did Forbes place on Arsenal in 2015?	$1.3 billion
At what rank in value in the Premier League is Arsenal?	second highest
Where does Deloitte Football Money League rank Arsenal in the world football clubs?	seventh
What value does Deloitte place on Arsenal?	£331.3m
What is the match day earning of Emirates Stadium?	£100.4m
How does Arsenal match day revenue compare with other stadium in the world?	more
What does Arsenal report a before tax profit for 2014-15?	£24.7m
Why was Arsenal's match on 22 Jan. 1927 at Highbury a first?	broadcast live on radio
What team did Arsenal play at the time of the radio broadcast in 1927?	Sheffield United
When was Arsenal's match the first to be televised live?	16 September 1937
To what first broadcast did Arsenal provide match highlights?	BBC's Match of the Day
In what form was Arsenal's broadcast of a 2010 match against Manchester United?	3D television
In what film was Arsenal FC shown?	The Arsenal Stadium Mystery
What Arsenal manager had a speaking part in the 1939 film?	George Allison
What book by Nick Hornby has twice been adapted for film?	Fever Pitch
When was Hornby's book published?	1992
In what decade did film and literature help revive football in Britain?	1990s
How have Arsenal players portrayed in media?	defensive and "boring"
In what decades were Arsenal players stereotyped in a negative way?	1970s and 1980s
What film featured a Arsenal play in  derogatory way?	The Full Monty
Which comic made numerous jokes about Arsenal players?	Eric Morecambe
What film uses characters named after Arsenal full backs?	Plunkett & Macleane
How many League Championships has Arsenal won?	13
Where does Arsenal's total League Championships place it as compared to other English teams?	third highest
Of what type of trophies does Arsenal have the most?	FA Cup trophies
In what competition was Arsenal the first to enter the finals?	UEFA Champions League
What team beat Arsenal to win the 2006 UEFA Champions League?	Barcelona
At what stadium do Arsenal Ladies usually play?	Boreham Wood.
By 2009 what competition has Arsenal Ladies been the only ladies team to have won?	UEFA Women's Cup
When did the Arsenal Ladies team become semi-professional?	2002
How does Arsenal Ladies rank as compared with other English women's football teams?	most successful
What is the name of the football club affiliated with Arsenal?	Arsenal Ladies
In what place with the word "name" in it do most people speak Dutch?	Suriname
Islands in the Caribbean that include Dutch as an official language include Curaçao, Sint Maarten, and what other place?	Aruba
It's been estimated that up to what number of native Dutch speakers live in Australia, the U.S., and Canada?	half a million
In Southern Africa, Dutch has developed over many years into what daughter language?	Afrikaans
What the low estimate for the number of people who speak Afrikaans?	16 million
Which two languages does Dutch most closely resemble?	German and English
Which Germanic accent mark do both the English and the Dutch language not use?	umlaut
Unlike English, both German and Dutch use how many genders in their grammar?	three
Which verb tense have both English and Dutch mostly gotten rid of?	subjunctive
Does Dutch borrow more or less from Romance languages for its vocabulary than German?	more
What are variations on Dutch used in Belgium sometimes called?	Flemish
What is the Dutch language officially called in the Netherlands?	Nederlands
What would someone in Belgium call the variation of Dutch spoken in Flanders?	Vlaams
What is the Dutch name for the "Hollandish" dialect of the language?	Hollands
If "Vlaams" is "Flemish," what would English speakers call "West-Vlaams"?	Western Flemish
What Old Germanic term was used to describe the non-Romance languages that developed in Europe?	theudisk
What language was used for writing and by the Catholic Church instead of the language "of the people"?	Latin
The word "theudisk" was first found in a text from what year?	784
What year were the Oaths of Strasbourg written?	842
What word was used in the Oaths of Strasbourg for the oath's Germanic section?	teudisca
In what century was a differentiation made to clear up confusion about West Germanic languages?	16th
What West Central German dialect of Dutch contains the name of a U.S. state?	Pennsylvania Dutch
What's the native Pennsylvania Dutch word for the language?	Deitsch
In what decade did people in New Jersey stop speaking Jersey Dutch?	1950s
Dutch people didn't have an officially established word for the "Dutch" language until what century?	19th
What word meaning "Low Dutch" was sometimes used to distinguish Dutch from Germany's language?	Nederduits
Instead of "German," what word used to refer to the language of the country of Germany?	Hoogduits
What does "Hoogduits" translate to in English?	High Dutch
Now that "Nederlands" is used for Dutch in Dutch, what do Dutch speakers call German?	Duits
What was the new word for Dutch that still caused some confusion with the language spoken in Germany?	Nederduits
What does the word "Neder" translate to in English?	low
The Netherlands are "low" because of their placement near what delta by the North Sea?	Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta
What language started the trend of referring to the Netherlands as "Germania Inferior"?	Latin
"Nederduits" often caused people to mix up the language of the Netherlands with that spoken in what directional area of Germany?	north
How many different versions of a Germanic language were spoken in the Low Countries?	Three
Which Germanic dialect was spoken in the eastern region?	Saxon
Which dialects are referred to as "Old Dutch"?	Franconian
Was the transition from Old Dutch to Modern Dutch gradual, or did it happen quickly?	gradual
Which Germanic dialect was spoken in the north and west of the Low Countries?	Frisian
Which language tree groups Dutch with English?	Indo-European
What group of languages have to comply with Grimm's law?	Germanic
In what age did the sound patterns that distinguish Germanic languages develop?	Iron Age
Along with Grimm's law, what's the other rule for Germanic-sounding speech called?	Verner's law
What does a language need to share with the group in order to be classified as Germanic?	common ancestor
Into how many groups are Germanic languages usually split?	three
In what historical period did the different types of Germanic languages stop being collectively understood?	the Migration Period
What group of Germanic languages includes Dutch, English, and German?	West Germanic
What's the West Germanic dialect spoken in the North Sea region called?	Ingvaeonic
Which dialect group included most Frankish tribes?	Istvaeonic
What's another term for "Frankish"?	Franconian
What city is closest to the Bergakker inscription?	Tiel
To which century do some researchers attribute the Bergakker inscription?	5th
What word found in Roman writings became "wad" in modern Dutch?	vadam
What does the Dutch word "wad" mean in English?	mudflat
What's another name for Old Frisian?	Anglo-Frisian
What's another name for Old English?	Anglo-Saxon
What language stayed very similar to the language spoken by Franks?	Old Dutch
What period is the Bergakker inscription from that shows characteristics of the Old Dutch language?	Old Frankish
What's another name for Old Dutch that demonstrates its difference from German Franconian?	Old Low Franconian
Are written records of Old Dutch rare or common?	rare
What Frankish document contains the oldest recorded instance of Dutch?	the Salic law
What creature is swimming in the Dutch phrase "Visc flot aftar themo uuatare"?	fish
Where did the monk who wrote the most famous Old Dutch sentence live?	Rochester, England
What historically significant Dutch document begins with the phrase "Forsachistu diobolae"?	the Utrecht baptismal vow
What language did Middle Dutch come from?	Old Dutch
What year do some researchers say marked the point when Old Dutch morphed?	1150
Rather than a single language, what group sharing origins in Old Dutch does the term "Middle Dutch" refer to?	closely related dialects
Would a text written in Middle Dutch be readable or unintelligible for a Dutch speaker today?	readable
What court in Dijon prior to 1477 had a hand in standardizing Dutch?	Burgundian Ducal Court
Which two Dutch dialects had the greatest influence in the Middle Ages?	Flanders and Brabant
Which century marked great progress in Dutch standardization brought on by Antwerp?	16th
What year did the Spanish conquer Antwerp?	1585
What was the first Dutch Bible translation called?	Statenvertaling
What was the old name for the geographical region that's now Belgium and Luxembourg?	Southern Netherlands
What people ruled the Southern Netherlands after the Austrians?	French
What year did the Netherlands and Belgium agree on a treaty to accommodate each other's language?	1980
What was the name of the treaty that brought the dialects of Belgium and the Netherlands together?	Language Union Treaty
The commonality between Dutch spoken by people in the Netherlands and Dutch-speaking Belgium can be compared to the relationship between British English and what language?	American English
What's the "cheesy" name for East Low Franconian?	Limburgish
What language has the most in common with the East Low Franconian dialect of Dutch?	Afrikaans
Along with German and English, what standardized West Germanic language is similar to Dutch?	Frisian
Non-standardized languages similar to Dutch include Yiddish and what other West Germanic language?	Low German
As opposed to Dutch, what language was influenced by the High German sound shift?	German
What dialect of Dutch is spoken in Drenthe?	Dutch Low Saxon
What's the name of the river that marks a dialect divide in the Netherlands?	IJssel
Although Dutch Low Saxon is similar to Low German, it's synchronically included with which language?	Dutch
Which Dutch province is only partially comprised of speakers of Dutch low Saxon?	Gelderland
When did cities like Diventer and Zutphen start becoming more linguistically diverse?	14th to 15th century
What organization researched the use of regional Dutch dialects and found their usage declining?	Geert Driessen
What percentage of adults in the Netherlands spoke a dialect or regional language in 1995?	27
How many primary school aged children were found to speak a dialect or regional language by 2011?	4 percent
What's the most commonly spoken regional language in the Netherlands?	Limburgish
In 2011, what percentage of Dutch adults spoke Frisian?	44%
What's the Dutch word for "money"?	geld
West Flemings pronounce the Dutch "g" as a voiced glottal frivative, which would be represented by what letter in standard Dutch?	"h"
What other European language has a mute "h" like the West Flemings do?	French
What word that means "hero" would a West Fleming speaker probably pronounce the same as "geld"?	held
If a West Fleming speaker were being extra careful to avoid the silent "h," they might over-correct into what sound?	g-sound
What's the West Flemish word for "no"?	nee
How would you tell a West Flemish speaker "yes"?	ja
What piece of a sentence does West Flemish match the case of a "yes" or "no" to?	subject
Would linguistic differences make it difficult or easy to point out someone who moved from a different region of the Netherlands?	easy
Which is easier for a non-native speaker to imitate: grammar rules or sound shifts?	sound shifts
What Dutch dialect is so distinct that it's often considered a language variant?	West Flemish
What kind of governmental boundary does dialect distribution transcend, reflecting medieval divisions?	political boundaries
What province is Zeelandic Flanders in?	Zeeland
What area that abuts Belgium still has some older people who speak West Flemish?	French Flanders
Along with Limburgish, what other Dutch dialect is spoken down into a lot of the southern Netherlands?	Brabantian
What dialect is considered a sister language to Dutch?	West Frisian
Which Dutch dialect is so distinct that it's often called a daughter language?	Afrikaans
Afrikaans is mostly derived from the Dutch spoken in what century?	17th
The Dutch influence on Afrikaans was seasoned with languages from what country?	South Africa
What two-word phrase describes the relationship whereby Dutch and Afrikaans speakers can understand each other?	mutually intelligible
What percentage of people in Belgium speak Dutch?	59%
What country in Europe has the highest percentage of Dutch speakers?	the Netherlands
What region in France is experiencing Dutch language death?	French Flanders
What's the name of the institution that ensures Dutch is monocentric?	Dutch Language Union
How many different major dialects of Dutch are there?	28
What town in Germany has always had mostly Dutch speakers?	Kleve
About how many people around Calais, France speak Dutch every day?	20,000
It took until the end of what century for people in French cities like Gravelines to finally switch over to French from Dutch?	19th
Which church often preached in Flemish prior to World War I?	the Catholic Church
In what area of France is Calais located?	Northeastern France
In what country other than France did Dutch lose most of it usage in the 19th century?	Prussia
In France and Germany, what languages will often be substituted by native speakers of Dutch dialects?	German or French
In what segment of the population is the decline in usage of Dutch most prominent?	younger generations
Other than France, what country does not give Dutch legal status as a language?	Germany
What language did France and Prussia ban from use in education in the late 19th century?	Dutch
About how many students in Belgium are studying Dutch?	300,000
How many primary school students are learning Dutch in Nord-Pas-de-Calais?	4,550
What country has the most universities offering courses in neerlandistiek?	Germany
How many universities in France offer neerlandistiek courses?	20
Besides North Rhine-Westphalia, which German state has the most pupils of Dutch?	Lower Saxony
For how long have there been Dutch speakers in Indonesia?	almost 350 years
In what profession is Dutch often required in the Dutch East Indies?	the legal profession
What institution in Jakarta still teaches Dutch?	Erasmus Language Centre
About how many pupils in all of Indonesia study Dutch as part of their coursework?	35,000
In addition to students pursuing law degrees, what other course of study often includes Dutch?	history
Towards the end of what century did it become important for more people in Dutch colonies to speak Dutch?	19th
What VIP segment of the population in Dutch colonies learned Dutch to participate in business and government?	local elite
What was the Dutch government afraid of doing if they taught their colonies Dutch?	destabilising the colony
Leaders wanted to hang onto knowledge of the Dutch language because it's the language of what?	power
What became the official language of Indonesia after they declared their independence?	Malay
What's the Indonesian word for "office"?	kantor
What term describes the literally translated Indonesian versions of Dutch terms that have become standard?	calques
What is the Indonesian calque for the Dutch word that literally translates as "animal garden"?	kebun binatang
What Dutch word for a hospital was calqued into the Indonesian "rumah sakit"?	ziekenhuis
About what percentage of residents of Suriname speak Dutch?	60
What language would you hear teachers speak if you attended school in Suriname?	Dutch
When did Suriname officially become independent from the Netherlands?	1975
What year did Suriname join the Dutch Language Union?	2004
What's the common language that around 20% of Suriname's people speak?	Sranan Tongo
What's the year that Jersey Dutch was last spoken, according to records?	1921
What Dutch-based language popped up in the area of Albany, New York?	Mohawk Dutch
What's a more accurate name for Pennsylvania Dutch since it's not a Dutch dialect?	Pennsylvania German
Which Dutch dialect was once spoken in the U.S. Virgin Islands?	Negerhollands
In what country were the Berbice and Skepi dialects spoken?	Guyana
In what decade did European Dutch yield to the local dialect in South Africa?	1920s
At the high end, what percentage of Afrikaans words come from Dutch?	95%
What South African document from 1983 doesn't list Dutch as an official language?	constitution
What section of the constitution was changed by Act 8 of 1925 to include Afrikaans with Dutch?	137
What pressure influenced the shift in South Africa from the use of European Dutch in the 1920s?	Afrikaner nationalism
Who has a more difficult time understanding the other's language: Dutch speakers or Afrikaans speakers?	Afrikaans speakers
Is Afrikaans more or less complex compared to Dutch?	less complex
What's the Dutch word for "bird"?	vogel
What is the Afrikaans word for "rain"?	reën
Is it difficult or easy to estimate the number of students in South Africa who study Dutch?	difficult
Approximately what percentage of South Africans are native Afrikaans speakers?	13.5%
Which country has 11% of households who speak Afrikaans?	Namibia
How many of the South Africans surveyed in 1996 said they speak at least a little Afrikaans?	40 percent
About how many South Africans speak Afrikaans as their primary language?	6.8 million
Approximately how many people in the world speak Dutch as a second language?	5 million
What sound does Dutch still use from Proto-Germanic that was phased out in other Germanic languages?	velar fricatives
Along with English, what pronunciation shift did Dutch not undergo?	the second consonant shift
How are obstruents pronounced at the end of Dutch words?	voiceless
How would you say "good" in Dutch?	goede
What language other than Dutch also employs final-obstruent devoicing?	German
Is the voicing of pre-vocalic initial voiceless alveolar fricatives more common in Dutch or German?	German
Does the development of /ft/ to /xt/ occur more in Low German or Dutch?	Dutch
What number word is spelled the same in English and Low German?	seven
What's the German word for "seven"?	sieben
Although spelled differently, the first consonant of what Dutch word for "seven" is pronounced the same as its German counterpart?	zeven
What quality of Dutch vowels isn't usually recognized as distinctive?	length
Is it true or false that older Dutch words combine changes in vowel length and vowel quality?	true
How would you say "sons" in Dutch?	zonen
Since vowel quality changes might be very slight between dialects, what's the main vowel feature used to differentiate them?	length
What does the Dutch word "kroes" mean in English?	mug
What letter represents the sound native English speakers often use for Dutch names with "ij" or "ei" in them?	y
How many unique phenomes are usually attributed to Dutch?	three
What's the term we use for the type of sound made for two vowels in words like the Dutch "goud" or "zout"?	diphthong
What pronunciation did the older Dutch ol/ul/al + dental evolve into?	ol + dental
What linguistic event in English could we parallel with the Dutch lowering of diphthongs?	English Great Vowel Shift
In what decade did the Dutch diphthong lowering occur?	1970s
The lowering of diphthongs is intriguing partly because it's associated with what single gender?	women
What researcher posited that the lowering of diphthongs is "natural"?	Stroop
Which language, in addition to German, did Stroop use to compare Dutch with when stating that the diphthongs "should" have lowered?	English
What word did Stroop use to describe the static stage of diphthong pronunciation?	"intermediate"
What classes in the 16th century sneered at the pronunciation of Dutch by rural people?	educated classes
What distinct kind of British English does Stroop say has a similar function to Polder Dutch?	Estuary English
What phenomenon of Dutch pronunciation was brought about by the attitudes of the elite in the 16th century?	standardisation
What specific type of diphthongs were the less educated Dutch speakers in the countryside using in the 16th century?	lowered diphthongs
How many genders does standard Dutch use for both natural and grammatical gender?	three
What gender does the majority of non-Belgian Dutch speakers use instead of the masculine and feminine?	the common gender
Apart from the common gender in non-Belgian Dutch, what other gender do speakers use?	neuter
The common/neuter system used in Dutch is a lot like the system used in what other language category?	Continental Scandinavian languages
In its simplified inflectional grammar, what language is Dutch similar to?	English
What's the Dutch word for "my"?	mijn
Over what span of time have the rules for written Dutch become less complicated?	100 years
What part of speech does Dutch mostly use cases for?	pronouns
Which parts of speech aren't normally case-specific in Dutch?	Nouns and adjectives
In what century long before Dutch did most West Germanic dialects probably lose case inflection?	15th
What case no longer used in Dutch is still present in German phrases like "Der Herr des Hauses"?	genitive
How would you say "the man of the house" in Dutch?	de heer des huizes
What word described standalone expressions that retain some outdated convention as an exception?	lexicalized
Which word in the phrase "het jaar des Heren" is a weak noun with a genitive ending added?	Heren
In what type of Dutch clause does the subject usually follow the conjugated verb?	interrogative main clause
What's the English type equivalent for the Dutch word order that is an interrogative pronoun/expression, then a verb followed by a subject?	a wh-question
What type of clause has the same word order in Dutch as a tag question?	declarative clause
What never changes in a subordinate clause in Dutch?	word order
What is the literal translation of the Dutch phrase, "Kun jij je pen niet vinden?"	"Can you your pen not find?"
What word do Dutch speakers use for what we call a "shotgun marriage"?	moetje
In Dutch, what part of speech does an adjective with a diminutive ending become?	noun
When the diminutive ending "-tjes" is added to the adverb "even," as what part of speech does it function?	adverb
What's the Dutch word for "green"?	groen
With the diminutive ending "-tje" added to the Dutch word for "green," what does the new formation translate to in English?	rookie
Which diminutive of "bloem" means a "bouquet"?	bloemetje
What's the Dutch word for "seahorse" that has no non-diminutive form?	zeepaardje
What Dutch word did their word for "girl" come from that has a totally different meaning?	meid
What's the Dutch word for the items like shirts and pants that you wear that only exists in a plural form?	kleertjes
Sometimes uncountable nouns in Dutch get a diminutive ending to make them refer to what, like an ice cream cone?	a single portion
What language besides Dutch uses the dative case instead of the accusative for pronouns?	English
In the lone exception to the dative case, which pronoun is prescribed for the third person plural direct object?	hen
When did the grammarians first draw the line between third person plural pronouns for Dutch?	17th century
Since most Dutch speakers don't bother with the hen/hun rule, which of the two most often gets used?	hun
When speakers get confused about whether to use hen or hun, what interchangeable unstressed form would they probably use?	ze
How would a Dutch speaker say "doghouse"?	hondenhok
Is Dutch like or unlike English in its treatment of compound nouns?	Unlike
"Tree house," which is two words in English, would be what single word in Dutch?	boomhuis
What language is like Dutch in allowing compounds to be any length?	German
In English, what usually separates newer compound nouns written in open form?	spaces
What percentage of loanwords are present in Dutch vocabulary?	20%
What language has exerted the most influence on Dutch vocabulary since the 12th century?	French
What language does Dutch get its second highest percentage of loanwords from?	Latin
Together, what percentage of Dutch loanwords comes from High and Low German?	2.7%
In the loanword sharing between Dutch and English, which language got the higher percentage of loanwords?	Dutch
How many extra characters does Dutch have in addition to the standard alphabet?	one
What's the name for the additional character Dutch uses?	digraph
Because Dutch has many vowel sounds and compound words, what occurs frequently in Dutch spelling?	doubled letters
What is an example of a Dutch word that has double vowels or consonants five times in a row?	voorraaddoos
What's the name for the type of accent that Dutch used to mark the difference between the word for "a" or "an" and the word for "one"?	acute accent
What was Buckingham Palace orginally known as?	Buckingham House
Who was Buckingham Palace was originally built for?	Duke of Buckingham
Which king acquired the Buckingham House in 1761?	King George III
What was Buckingham House known as when Queen Charlotte resided there?	"The Queen's House"
Which two architects were commissioned to enlarge Buckingham in the 19th century?	John Nash and Edward Blore
For whom was Buckingham house originally built?	Duke of Buckingham
Who bought Buckingham House in 1761?	King George III
Who enlarged the house in the 19th century?	John Nash and Edward Blore
When did the palace become the London residence for the monarchs?	1837
What colors were added in the partial redecoration overseen by King Edward VII?	Belle Époque cream and gold
What original colors from the 19th century were used on the advice of Sir Charles Long?	brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis
How many rooms does the palace have?	775 rooms
In which style are many of the smaller reception rooms furnished in?	Chinese regency style
What house were many of the furniture and fittings brought from?	Carlton House
Who suggested the use of brightly coloured scagliola and blue and pink lapis?	Sir Charles Long
Who oversaw the redecoration that used a Belle Époque cream and gold colour scheme?	King Edward VII
Smaller reception rooms are decorated in which style?	Chinese regency style
Furniture and fittings were brought over from which house?	Carlton House
Which river runs underneath the palace?	river Tyburn
The site of the palace was once owned by which queen consort in the late Saxon times?	Edith of Wessex
Who did William the Conqueror give the site of the palace to?	Geoffrey de Mandeville
The site was passed to monks from which abbey?	Westminster Abbey
The site of the palace formed part of which Manor in the Middles ages?	Manor of Ebury
What was the name of the village that grew at Cow Ford?	Eye Cross
Who gave the site to the monks of Westminster?	Geoffrey de Mandeville
What was the name of the manor that previously existed on the site?	Manor of Ebury
Which property tycoon inherited the property in the late 17th century?	Sir Hugh Audley
Which village had fallen into decay?	Eye Cross
Who established a mulberry garden on the property?	James I
What product did the mulberry garden produce?	silk
Who suggests that the mulberry garden is likely a place for debauchery?	Clement Walker
What about the palace was subject to speculation in the 17th century?	the freehold
Which village had fallen into decay but the 17th century?	Eye Cross
Who sold off part of the Crown Freehold?	James I
What type of garden did James I create?	mulberry
What did the mulberry garden produce?	silk.
Who built the first house on the site?	Sir William Blake
Which owner developed much of the garden still seen today?	Lord Goring
What was Lord Goring's garden known as?	Goring Great Garden
Under which king did the Royal Family regain the freehold title of the property?	King George III
Which king failed to execute Goring's freehold document before fleeing to London?	King Charles I
Who owned the first house built on the site?	Sir William Blake
Who developed what is much of today's garden at Buckingham?	Lord Goring
What was the name of Lord Goring Garden?	Goring Great Garden
Which king fled to London leaving allowing the Royal family to keep it's freehold on the property?	King Charles I
In what year did William Winde design the house which forms the core of the palace?	1703
Who sold Buckingham house in 1761?	Sir Charles Sheffield
How much did George III pay for the house?	£21,000
In what year was the leasehold of the Mulberry site due to expire?	1774
How many flanking service wings did the original Buckingham House have?	two
The house which is the core of Buckingham was first built for who?	Duke of Buckingham and Normanby
Who designed the house for the Duke of Buckingham?	William Winde
How many flanking service wings did Buckingham House have?	two
Who bought Buckingham House in 1761?	George III
How much did George III pay for Buckingham House?	£21,000
What did King George IV originally want the structure to be?	a small, comfortable home
King William thought about converting the palace into what after a fire destroyed the Palace of Westminster in 1834?	new Houses of Parliament
Which architect helped modify the house into a palace?	John Nash
In what year was Nash removed as architect?	1829
Who was hired in 1830 to finish the work on the palace?	Edward Blore
What year did remodeling of Buckingham House begin?	1762
What was George IV's original plan for the house?	a small, comfortable home
What year did the king decide to make it into a palace?	1826
Who was the main architect that transformed the house into the palace?	John Nash
Who did King William IV hired to finish the work after Nash was fired?	Edward Blore
Who was the first monarch to reside at Buckingham Palace?	Queen Victoria
Who died before the palace was completed?	William IV
Buckingham became a principle residence for the Royal Family in which year?	1837
What was the problem with chimneys in the palace?	the chimneys smoked
At the end of which year were most of the design problems of the palace rectified under Prince Albert?	1840
When did Buckingham officially become the principle royal residence?	1837
Who was the first monarch to reside there?	Queen Victoria
Who died before seeing Buckingham Palace's completion?	William IV
What was the problem with the palace's chimneys?	the chimneys smoked
Who dealt with the design faults of the palace?	Prince Albert
Who designed the new wing for the palace in 1847?	Edward Blore
The new wing was built by whom?	Thomas Cubitt
What is the East front of the palace known as?	"public face" of Buckingham Palace
The East Front contains what famous feature?	the balcony
Who was the student of Nash that designed the ballroom wing?	Sir James Pennethorne.
Who designed a new wing for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert when they felt they needed more space?	Edward Blore
Who built the new wing?	Thomas Cubitt
What is considered the public face of the palace?	The large East Front
What other wing was built during this time?	The ballroom wing
Which of Nash's students designed The Ballroom?	Sir James Pennethorne
The palace frequently hosted which type of events prior to the death of Prince Albert?	musical entertainments
Which composer played at Buckingham on three occasions?	Felix Mendelssohn
Which piece of music by Johann Strauss was first performed at Buckingham in honor of Princess Alice?	Alice Polka
Queen Victoria hosted which type of balls?	lavish costume balls
Before Prince Albert died what sort of entertainment was held at Buckingham?	musical entertainments
Which composer played there on three occasions?	Felix Mendelssohn
Who performed Alice Polka in honor of Princess Alice?	Johann Strauss II
What type of balls did Queen Victoria hold?	lavish costume balls
When year did Prince Albert die?	1861
What forced the Queen to return to London?	public opinion
What was the fate of Buckingham after the left?	the palace was seldom used, even neglected.
Where were court functions held upon the Queens return to London?	Windsor Castle
When did Prince Albert die?	1861
What did Queen Victoria do in response to his death?	left Buckingham Palace
Which house did Queen Victoria stay at after she left Buckingham?	Osborne House
What happened to Buckingham after Queen Victoria left?	palace was seldom used, even neglected
Where did Queen Victoria hold court functions during this time?	Windsor Castle
How many principle bedrooms does the palace have?	52
How many bathrooms are there?	78
A large bow is a large feature of the facade in which stateroom?	the Music Room
How long is the Picture Gallery in yards?	55 yards
Which rooms has large white marble statues of Prince Albert and Queen Victoria?	The Guard Room
What is the floor space of the palace?	77,000 m2 (830,000 sq ft)
How many staterooms does the palace have?	19 state rooms
How many bathrooms does the palace have?	78 bathrooms
How many offices does the palace have?	92 offices
The 1855 Room is name for which European emperor?	Emperor Napoleon III of France
Which room is named for visit of Tsar Nicolas I of Russia?	1844 Room
Guests attending the Queen's Garden Parties will mostly likely see which room?	Bow Room
Where are the suites located that the Queen and Prince Phillip use?	the north wing
Which rooms are used for less formal entertaining such as luncheons or private audiences?	the semi-state apartments
What is the name of the slightly less luxurious staterooms located underneath the State Apartments?	semi-state apartments
What type of entertaining are the semi-state apartments used for?	less formal entertaining
Who is the 1844 Room named after?	Tsar Nicholas I of Russia
Who is the 1855 Room named after?	Emperor Napoleon III of France
Where are the Queen and Prince Phillip's apartments located?	the north wing
Where did many of the fittings for the new east wing come from?	Brighton Pavilion
When was the new east wing built?	Between 1847 and 1850
What is the theme for the new east wing?	oriental
The red and blue Chinese Luncheon Room has what as a main feature?	large oriental chimney piece
Who designed the chimney piece in The Yellow Drawing Room?	Robert Jones
What was Blore building between 1847 and 1850?	the new east wing
Many rooms in the new east wing are in what style?	oriental
Parts of the Brighton Banqueting and Music Rooms from Brighton Pavilion make up which Buckingham Room?	The red and blue Chinese Luncheon Room
Which room has the famous balcony used by the royals?	Centre Room
What is the main theme of the Centre Room?	Chinese
Which Queen enhanced the Chinese theme of the Centre Room in the 1920s?	Queen Mary
The lacquer doors in the Centre Room were brought from Brighton in which year?	1873
The Principle Corridor features which type of doors?	mirrored doors
Which room feature the famous balcony?	Centre Room
Which designer did Queen Mary work with to enhance the Centre Room?	Sir Charles Allom
The Principle Corridor has which type of doors?	mirrored doors
What year were the lacquer doors brought from Brighton?	1873
Where do foreign heads of stay usually stay in Buckingham Palace?	the Belgian Suite
What floor are the Belgian Suites located?	ground floor
The Belgian Suite is located at the foot of which staircase?	the Minister's Staircase
How are the rooms of the Belgian Suites linked?	by narrow corridors
What is the style of the saucer domes in the Belgian Suite?	the style of Soane
Where do foreign heads of stay at Buckingham Palace?	the Belgian Suite
The Belgian Suite is located at the bottom of which staircase?	Minister's Staircase
On which floor is the Belgian Suite located?	the ground floor
How are the rooms in the Belgian Suite connected?	by narrow corridors
The saucer domes are in whose style?	the style of Soane
Aside from being the home of the monarchy and a tourist attraction, what else is Buckingham Palace known for?	art gallery
Who made the palaces gilded railings and gates?	Bromsgrove Guild
How many people work at Buckingham Palace?	more than 800
Buckingham Palace is also the London Residence for which Duke?	Duke of York
Who is Buckingham palace home to?	the British monarchy
Who completed the palaces gilded railing and gates?	Bromsgrove Guild
In what year were the railings and gates completed?	1911
How many people work at Buckingham Palace?	800 people
Buckingham Palace is actually owned by whom?	Crown Estate
Where can the public view items from the Royal Collection?	Queen's Gallery
What was located on the site that is now the Queen's Gallery?	chapel
What part of the palace has been open to the public every August and September and other select dates since 1993?	The palace's state rooms
Who owns Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle?	Crown Estate
Where can the public view the Royal Collection?	at the Queen's Gallery
Since when have the palaces rooms been opened to the public?	since 1993
How many people visited the palace in the 2014.2015 fiscal year?	476,000 people
What is the official dress code today at Buckingham Palace?	there is no official dress code
Which Queen tried and failed to raise the hemline of her dress after WWI?	Queen Mary
Which King was horrified to see the Queen's hemline raised a few inches?	King George V
The hemline of daytime skirts were allowed to rise after which year?	1936
The knee breeches men formerly wore to the palace were of what era's design?	18th-century design
From what century were men's knee breeches worn at Buckingham designed in?	18th-century design
What were women obliged to wear in their hair?	tiaras or feathers
Which queen wanted to shorten her skirt's hemline?	Queen Mary
Which King was horrified to see the raised hemline on the Queen?	George V
What is the dress code today at Buckingham?	there is no official dress code
Under whose reign did court presentations of young aristocratic ladies take place?	Edward VII
What was the name for the ceremony where debutantes had their first introduction into society?	coming out
Debutantes wore the feather of which bird in their hair?	ostrich feathers
After WWII "coming out" ceremonies were replaces with what event?	less formal afternoon receptions
Under whose reign were young debutantes presented to society at Court?	Edward VII
What types of feathers did debutantes wear in their hair?	ostrich feathers
What was the occasion where debutantes were presented to society called?	"coming out"
After WWII what was the coming out ceremony replaced with?	less formal afternoon receptions
Where do Investitures take place?	in the palace's Ballroom
What year was The Ballroom built?	1854
Which room has The Ballroom replaced in terms of both use and importance?	the throne room
What is the largest room in the palace?	the palace's Ballroom
What does the Queen stand on during Investitures?	the throne dais
Knighthood is given by being dubbed with what object?	a sword
What is the largest room in the palace?	Ballroom
The Ballroom replaced which other room in terms of importance and use?	the throne room
Where do State Banquets take place?	the Ballroom
In what month does the Queen entertain the diplomatic corps?	November
What is used to set the dining table for formal dinners?	the Grand Service
When was the Grand Service made?	1811
For whom was the Grand Service made?	the Prince of Wales
Where do state banquets take place?	in the Ballroom
When are state banquets held?	the first evening of a state visit by a foreign head of state
What is the dining table laid with for state banquets?	the Grand Service
Who was the Grand Service originally made for?	Prince of Wales
Who designed the Royal Mews?	Nash
Where is the Gold State Coach housed?	the Royal Mews
Who designed the Gold State Coach?	Sir William Chambers
When was the Gold State Coach first used?	1762
The Royal Mews houses which type of animal?	horses
Who designed the Royal Mews?	Nash
Where is the Gold State Coach kept?	the Royal Mews
Who designed the Gold State Coach?	Sir William Chambers
In what year was the Gold State Coach first used?	1762
What animals are kept in the mews?	horses
In what year did Edward VII ascend to the throne?	1901
Kind Edward VII and Queen Alexandra's friends were know as what?	"the Marlborough House Set"
Some thought that King Edward VII's redecoration choices were at odds with whose prior work?	Nash's
Which king commissioned massive redecoration in the Belle Epoque cream and gold color scheme?	King Edward
What were the group of friends of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra called?	the Marlborough House Set
What was at odds with Nash's original work in the palace?	King Edward's heavy redecorations
When did King Edward VII take the throne?	1901
What colors were used in the redecorations overseen by King Edward VII?	Belle époque cream and gold
Under whose reign did the last major building works take place?	King George V
The principle facade of the East Front is made from what type of stone?	Portland stone
Which king preferred official entertaining and royal duties to lavish parties?	George V
Who added and restored furniture to The Royal Collection?	Queen Mary
Who was responsible for decorating The Blue Drawing Room?	Queen Mary
Who redesigned Blore's 1850 East Front?	Sir Aston Webb
The refaced facade was made from what type of stone?	Portland stone
Which king placed more emphasis on official entertaining and royal duties instead of lavish parties?	George V
What collection did Queen Mary take an interest in by adding and restoring pieces?	Royal Collection of furniture and art
Who decorated the Blue Drawing Room?	Queen Mary
Who lived at Buckingham Palace during WWI?	King George V and Queen Mary
Where were valuable items from Buckingham Palace taken during WWI?	Windsor
The king refrained from doing what during the war?	alcohol
In what year was the north-west pavilion turned into a swimming pool?	1938
Who persuaded the king to lock the wine cellars during WWI?	David Lloyd George
Buckingham Palace was untouched during which war?	World War I
Where were valuables evacuated to during the war?	Windsor
What did the King give up during the war?	alcohol
Who convinced the king to lock the wine cellars?	David Lloyd George
What was the north-west pavilion converted into in 1938?	swimming pool
How many times was the palace bombed in WWII?	nine times
What was destroyed in 1940?	the palace chapel
Which monarchs were in residence at Buckingham Palace during WWII?	King George VI and Queen Elizabeth
The bombing of Buckingham Palace showed what to the public?	the common suffering of rich and poor
What was destroyed in one of the bombing that hit the palace in WWII?	the chapel
The King and Queen were filmed doing what after a bombing?	inspecting their bombed home
The royal family was seen as sharing what with their subjects after the bombings?	their subjects' hardship
What is the date of the Battle of Britain Day?	15 September 1940
What did Ray Holmes think the German pilot was going to bomb?	the Palace
What type of airplane was the German craft Holmes rammed into?	Dornier Do 17 bomber
After the war what did Holmes become?	King's Messenger
What year did Ray Holmes die?	2005
What is September 15, 1940 known as?	the Battle of Britain Day
What did Ray Holmes believe the German pilot was targeting?	the Palace
What did Holmes do to stop the German Plane?	ram it
What type of aircraft was the German Plane?	Dornier Do 17 bomber
When did Holmes die?	2005
What type of energy makes an incandescent light bulb glow?	electric current
Which part of the incandescent light bulb is heated?	wire filament
What part of a halogen light bulb supplies electric current?	feed-through terminals or wires embedded in the glass
What provides the electricity to most light bulbs?	a socket
Which type of light bulb uses inert gas?	incandescent light bulb
Are incandescent bulbs more or less efficient than most electric lighting?	less efficient
What percentage of energy does a standard light bulb actually convert to visible light?	2.2%
Which is more efficient: compact fluorescent or LED lights?	LED
How long does a typical incandescent light bulb last?	1,000 hours
What happens to the energy that an incandescent bulb does not convert into light?	The remaining energy is converted into heat.
What law did Australia make about incandescent light bulbs?	prohibited them already
How is the United States treating incandescent light bulbs?	phasing out the use of incandescent light bulbs
What does the acronym CCFL refer to?	cold cathode fluorescent lamps
What does the acronym CFL refer to?	compact fluorescent lamps
What does the acronym LED refer to?	light-emitting diode
Who patented an incandescent light bulb in Russia in 1874?	Alexander Lodygin
What did Lodygin use as a burner in his lamp?	two carbon rods
In what year did Lodygin demonstrate a lamp at the World's Fair?	1900
What did Lodygin change his name to after moving to the USA?	Alexander de Lodyguine
When did Lodygin invent his first lamp?	1872
Where did Joseph Swan demonstrate his lamp in January 1879?	at a meeting of the Newcastle Chemical Society
Which vacuum pump expert helped Swan invent his lamp?	Charles Stearn
Why was Swan's first lamp not commercially viable?	'parchmentised thread'
When did Swan receive a patent for parchmentised thread?	1880
What was the first public building to install electric lighting?	the Savoy Theatre in the City of Westminster, London
When did Edison begin research into incandescent lighting?	1878
With what material did Edison make his first filament?	carbon
How long did Edison's light burn during his first successful test in 1879?	13.5 hours
What type of wood did Edison use in his improved filament?	bamboo
What was the name of the first ship to use Edison's lamp?	Columbia
Who founded Electro-Dynamic Light Company?	Albon Man
Who was the chief engineer at the United States Electric Lighting Company?	Hiram S. Maxim
Where did Electro-Dynamic Light Company install its first lights?	Mercantile Safe Deposit Company
When did Electro-Dynamic Light Company install its first lights?	fall of 1880
Which company was organized first, Electro-Dynamic Light Company or United States Electric Lighting Company?	Electro-Dynamic Light Company
Who developed a heat-treating method that allowed carbon filaments to be molded into shapes?	Lewis Latimer
When did Latimer patent his "Process of Manufacturing Carbons"?	17 January 1882
Which company purchased Latimer's patent?	United States Electric Light Company
Who employed Latimer when he developed his first patent?	Edison
Which inventors patented the tungsten filament lamp?	Hungarian Sándor Just and Croatian Franjo Hanaman
When did Just and Hanaman receive their patent for the tungsten filament lamp?	13 December 1904
Which company first marketed the tungsten filament lamp?	Tungsram
What type of gas fills a tungsten filament bulb?	argon or nitrogen
What is a common alternate name for the tungsten filament bulb in Europe?	Tungsram-bulbs
What does the acronym LER refer to?	radiant luminous efficacy
What is the maximum LER possible?	683 lm/W
In how many ways can one define luminous efficacy of a light source?	two ways
What is the definition of radiant luminous efficacy?	the ratio of the visible light flux emitted (the luminous flux) to the total power radiated over all wavelengths
What does the acronym LES refer to?	source luminous efficacy
At what temperature does a thermal radiator most efficiently produce light?	6,300 °C
What is the upper limit for LER of an incandescent lamp?	52 lumens per watt
What type of radiation makes up the majority of tungsten filament emissions?	infrared radiation
What is the flaw in the color of light produced by an incandescent bulb?	the light emitted does not appear white,
What is the theoretical LER value of tungsten at its melting point?	52 lumens per watt
What is the purpose of white-balancing?	to avoid too "warm" or "cool" colors
Of incandescent lights, fluorescent lights and LEDs, which has the best color-rendering performance?	incandescent lights
What is the color rendering index of an incandescent light?	100
Why do incandescent lights have superior color rendering?	the continuous blackbody spectrum emitted from an incandescent light-bulb filament
What is the highest possible color rendering index score?	100
Do fluorescent lights have a higher or lower luminous efficiency than incandescents?	higher
How can luminescent light sources be modified to resemble the appearance of incandescents?	By careful selection of which electron energy level transitions are used, and fluorescent coatings which modify the spectral distribution
Why are luminescent light sources not ideal for photography?	Due to the discrete spectral lines rather than a continuous spectrum
What appliance requires more energy due to the use of incandescent lighting?	a building's air conditioning system
Do incandescent lights have a longer or shorter life than other lighting sources?	shorter
What are some factors to consider in calculating operating costs of lighting?	illumination requirements, cost of the lamp and labor cost to replace lamps (taking into account effective lamp lifetime), cost of electricity used
Do incandescent lights emit more, less, or the same amount of light as they age?	less
What is more cost-effective, heat from incandescent bulbs or heat from a building's heating system?	heat from the heating system
Do incandescent light bulbs use more or less energy as compared to CFLs and LED lamps?	more
How much does the incandescent light ban in Europe contribute to the economy each year?	5 to 10 billion euros
How much energy does the incandescent light ban in Europe save each year?	40 TWh of electricity
How much CO2 emissions does the incandescent light ban in Europe save each year?	15 million tonnes
How are laws written that bring about a ban of incandescent light bulbs?	by setting minimum efficacy standards higher than can be achieved by incandescent lamps
Is the environmental performance of CFLs better or worse than that of incandescents?	better
Which type of light bulbs is considered most cost effective and robust?	LED lamps
What are some objections to banning incandescent bulbs?	higher initial cost of alternatives and lower quality of light of fluorescent lamps
What substance in CFL bulbs raises health concerns?	mercury
Do CFLs consume more, less, or the same amount of energy as incandescent bulbs?	much less
Which company introduced hybrid incandescent bulbs?	Philips
How much more efficient are Halogena Energy Saver bulbs compared to incandescents?	30 percent
What company first marketed light bulbs using the reflective capsule technique to increase energy efficiency?	Duro-Test
What is the theoretical maximum efficiency of reflective capsule bulbs?	270 lm/W
What is the maximum efficiency of reflective capsule bulbs as tested in labs?	45 lm/W
What is the name of the air-tight glass enclosure in an incandescent bulb?	the envelope
What is the filament made of?	tungsten wire
How many conductors are present in the bulb's base?	two (or more)
What prevents air or gas leaks from a light bulb?	a stem or glass mount anchored to the bulb's base
What function do small wires in a light bulb's stem perform?	Small wires embedded in the stem in turn support the filament and its lead wires
What is the powdery substance in coated glass light bulbs?	kaolin
How is kaolin placed inside a light bulb?	blown in and electrostatically deposited
What is the effect of a kaolin coating on the light cast?	a more gentle and evenly distributed light
How are Christmas colored light bulbs created?	by coloring the glass with a dopant
How does kaolin create a more gentle light?	It diffuses the light emitted from the filament
What is the name for a base with one or more contacts at the tip and one at the shell?	screw base
What is the name for a lamp base with one or more contacts on the base and a shell used as a contact or used only as a mechanical support?	bayonet base
What is the purpose of contacts in the lamp socket?	allow the electric current to pass through the base to the filament
What is the range of power ratings for incandescent bulbs?	0.1 watt to about 10,000 watts
Which types of lamps use screw terminals for connection to wires?	automotive and special purpose lamps
What is a potential problem with the use of gas in a light bulb?	introduces heat losses (and therefore efficiency loss)
What are the ideal chemical properties for the gas in a light bulb?	chemical inertness and high atomic or molecular weight
What is the purpose of the gas in a light bulb?	to prevent evaporation of the filament, without introducing significant heat losses
How do gases prevent evaporation of the filament?	The presence of gas molecules knocks the liberated tungsten atoms back to the filament
What type of machine manufactures glass light bulbs.	ribbon machine
How many bulbs does the average ribbon machine produce per hour?	50,000
How is the filament attached to the bulb?	assembled on a glass stem, which is fused to the bulb
How is the evacuation tube sealed?	by a flame
What blows the glass bulbs into their characteristic shape?	precisely aligned air nozzles
What material were the first light bulb filaments made from?	carbon
What was the primary problem with early carbon filaments?	as they got hotter, their electrical resistance decreased
What were the positive effects of the flashing process?	improved the uniformity and strength of filaments as well as their efficiency
What properties of graphite improved the filament?	further strengthened and smoothed the filament
What are the effects of giving the filament a positive temperature coefficient?	helped stabilize the lamp's power consumption, temperature and light output against minor variations in supply voltage
What company invented the tantalum light filament?	Siemens
In what year was the tantalum light filament invented?	1902
What were the major advantages of the tantalum light filament?	These lamps were more efficient than even graphitized carbon filaments and could operate at higher temperatures.
Who purchased the rights to the tantalum light filament from Siemens?	General Electric
When did GE cease production of the tantalum light filament?	1913
What was the problem with manufacturing the tungsten filament?	Tungsten metal was initially not available in a form that allowed it to be drawn into fine wires.
Who developed the ductile form of tungsten?	William D. Coolidge
When was the ductile form of tungsten invented?	1910
When was the tungsten filament introduced?	1906
What other materials were combined with tungsten?	potassium, silicon, and aluminium oxides
How long is a typical uncoiled tungsten filament for a 60-watt bulb?	22.8 inches
What is the advantage of a coiled-coil filament over a straight filament?	The coiled-coil filament evaporates more slowly
What positive effects does a slower-evaporating filament enable?	more efficient light source
What is the typical diameter of the filament on a 60-watt bulb?	0.0018 inches
What is the negative effect of "hot spots" forming on the filament?	a variation of diameter of only 1% will cause a 25% reduction in service life
Who discovered that inert gas could slow evaporation?	Irving Langmuir
Which gases are typically used in a light bulb?	argon and some nitrogen, or sometimes krypton
Which type of alloys can decrease "stairstep" irregularities in light bulb filaments?	alloys of tungsten and rhenium
Why does inert gas reduce efficiency?	conducts heat from the filament, thereby cooling the filament
What affects the thermal conductivity of a gas?	molecular weight of the gas and the cross sectional area of the gas molecules
How does the molecular weight of a gas relate to thermal conductivity?	Higher molecular weight gasses have lower thermal conductivity
Why is xenon gas not more widely used?	more expensive, so its use is limited to smaller lamps
What is the advantage of using inert gas in a light bulb?	reduces filament evaporation
What determines how fast a tungsten filament evaporates?	hotter, more-efficient filaments evaporate faster
What is the typical goal for the life of a tungsten filament bulb?	several hundred to 2,000 hours
Which types of lamps may have particularly short lives?	Theatrical, photographic, and projection lamps
What is the typical tradeoff in light bulb design?	efficiency and longevity
What darkens a conventional bulb over its lifetime?	the evaporated tungsten eventually condenses on the inner surface of the glass envelope
What is the IEC guideline for an unacceptable level of light loss?	An incandescent lamp that gives 93% or less of its initial light output at 75% of its rated life is regarded as unsatisfactory
What are the primary causes of light loss?	Light loss is due to filament evaporation and bulb blackening
Where in the bulb is evaporated tungsten deposited when inert gas is used?	on the uppermost part of the envelope
Where in the bulb is evaporated tungsten deposited when a vacuum is used?	across the entire surface of the envelope
How does water vapor inside a light bulb affect lamp darkening?	significantly increase darkening
Why does water increase lamp darkening?	The oxygen attacks the tungsten metal, and the resulting tungsten oxide particles travel to cooler parts of the lamp.
What is an example of a substance that is added to light bulbs to reduce this effect?	zirconium
How much water is necessary to result in this darkening affect?	The equivalent of a drop of water distributed over 500,000 lamps
Does the halogen bulp increase, reduce, or have no effect on filament evaporation?	reduces
How does the halogen bulb decrease darkening over time?	by redepositing tungsten from the inside of the bulb back onto the filament
Does a halogen bulb operate at a higher or lower temperature than an incandescent?	higher
How does the size of a halogen bulb compare to an incandescent?	bulbs are much smaller than normal incandescent bulbs
What is the most common situation when a halogen bulb is used?	where intense illumination is needed in a limited space
What did an alternate version of the incandescent lamp substitute for a wire filament?	an arc struck on a spherical bead electrode
What was a common application for this type of bulb?	scientific instruments such as microscopes
When was this style of lamp developed?	1915
What displaced this style of lamp?	mercury and xenon arc lamps
What does a power factor of 1 mean?	the actual power consumed (in watts) and the apparent power (in volt-amperes) are equal
What principally determines the wattage of an incandescent bulb?	the resistance of the filament
What determines the resistance of the filament?	the filament's length, thickness, and material
How close do incandescent lamps come to pure resistive loads?	Incandescent lamps are nearly pure resistive loads
All other things being equal, how does wattage affect light emitted?	the higher-powered bulb gives more light
What determines the resistance of a filament?	temperature
What does a "T" rating symbol on an electrical contact mean?	they are designed to control circuits with the high inrush current characteristic of tungsten lamps
How long does it take a typical 100-watt bulb to achieve 90% of its brightness?	0.13 seconds
How does the cold resistance of tungsten filament lamps compare to the hot resistance?	The cold resistance of tungsten-filament lamps is about 1/15 the hot-filament resistance
What is the resistance of a typical lit 100-watt incandescent bulb?	144 ohms
What do the letters identify in a bulb shape designation?	the shape of the bulb
What do the numbers identify in a bulb shape designation?	the maximum diameter
Can the name of a certain bulb shape vary?	The names of the shapes may be slightly different in some regions
What units are the bulb sizes measured in?	1⁄8 of an inch, or in millimeters
Which company introduced standard base sizes for incandescent lamps?	General Electric
In what year were standard base sizes introduced for incandescent lamps?	1909
What are some common technical standards for lamp bases?	ANSI standard C81.67 and IEC standard 60061-1
What is the typical base type for automotive lamps?	Bayonet base lamps
What is the typical base type for halogen lamps?	bipin base
What level of voltage reduction is required to double the life of an incandescent bulb?	a 5% reduction in operating voltage
When did light bulb manufacturers establish a cartel to limit bulb life?	1924
When did authorities break up the light bulb cartel?	1953
What was the artificially low limit on bulb life placed by the cartel?	1000 hours
What is an example of a good application for a long-life bulb?	difficult-to-access location (for example, traffic lights or fixtures hung from high ceilings)
When did the "Centennial Light" begin burning?	1901
How much light does the bulb emit?	the equivalent light of a four watt bulb
When did the long-lasting bulb in Texas begin continuing illumination?	21 September 1908
Where did the Texas bulb begin its life?	an opera house
At what temperature does a typical 50-hour-life projection bulb operate?	50 °C (122 °F)
Which metal has the highest melting point?	Tungsten
What is the typical life of a P1 lamp?	as short as two hours
How does the color temperature differ for photographic lighting?	higher color temperature
How many lumens per watt does a typical 100-watt, 120-volt lamp produce?	17.1 lumens per watt
How many lumens per watt does a typical train light produce?	as much as 19.8 lumens per watt
How does filament size relate to voltage level?	Lower voltage lamps have a thicker filament
What is the effect of a thicker filament on bulb temperature?	They can run hotter for the same lifetime before the filament evaporates.
What made power distribution economically viable in Edison's lamp?	high resistance
How many inventors came up with electric lamps before Thomas Edison?	22
How did Edison achieve a higher vacuum than other inventors?	by use of the Sprengel pump
Which historians wrote about the advantages of Edison's lamp over other early versions?	Robert Friedel and Paul Israel
What can clothing provide during hazardous activities?	safety
What type of surfaces can clothing protect from?	rough
What does clothing keep toxic materials away from?	body
What can insulate against cold or hot conditions?	Clothes
What type of radiation can clothing provide some protection from?	UV
What isn't it easy to determine about clothing?	when clothing was first developed
What organism has provided some information about the timeline of clothing?	lice
What habitat is the body louse specific to?	clothing
What may modern humans be the only survivor of several species of?	primates
How many thousands of years ago may have clothing been worn?	650
What obvious improvement does clothing bestow upon the wearer?	comfort
In what type of climate does clothing protect against sunburn and wind damage?	hot
What property of clothing is important in cold climates?	thermal insulation
What has seasonal and regional aspects?	clothing
What type of material tends to be worn in warmer seasons?	thinner
What variety has there been in the materials of clothing throughout history?	very wide
What is an article that is carried rather than worn that isn't regarded as clothing?	purses
Jewelry isn't considered clothing because it's usually worn purely for what reason?	adornment
What are footwear and hats both considered?	accessories
What is an example of something that serves a function other than protection?	eyeglasses
What does clothing protect from things which may injure it?	the uncovered human body
Rain, snow, and wind are what class of things clothing protects the wearer from?	elements
Clothing that is too sheer will offer less what?	protection
What type of hazard is noxious chemicals?	environmental
What type of clothing do doctors wear to protect their surroundings?	medical scrubs
What animal has shown extreme inventiveness in the clothing it has devised?	Humans
What are space suits an example of a solution to?	environmental hazards
What type of implication might a certain type of clothing have?	social
What value may clothing designed to be fashionable also have?	protective
Why are some parts of the body covered?	social norms
What century do dissertation on clothing first appear from?	19th
What year was J. C. Flügel's Psychology of Clothes published?	1930
Whose book entitled Physiology of Heat Regulation and The Science of Clothing was published in 1949?	Newburgh's
How much had the science of clothing in relation to environmental factors changed by 1968?	little
What have remained unchanged while the knowledge has grown?	the main concepts
What is an example of clothing that was once seen as exclusively for males?	Trousers
What gender's clothing is often more practical?	Male
What can males typically bare in more places?	their chests
What would be unlikely to raise eyebrows if a woman were to wear it?	male clothing
What is a common opinion about men wearing women's clothing?	unusual
Who was allowed to wear gamrents dyed with Tyrian purple in ancient Rome?	senators
Who was allowed to wear feather cloaks and palaoa in old school Hawaiian society?	high-ranking chiefs
What right were lower caste women required to pay a tax to acquire?	the right to cover their upper body
What country once only allowed their emperor to wear yellow?	China
What can peer pressure influence?	clothing choice
How was the earliest clothing kept on the body?	tied around
What does clothing materials do more quickly compared to stone and bone?	deteriorate
Who has identified needles from about 30,000 B.C.?	Archeologists
Where have flax fibers which may have been used in clothing found?	a prehistoric cave
What dates back to 36,000 BP?	Dyed flax fibers
What group of people debate when humans stated wearing clothes?	Scientists
What type of analysis has been conducted on human body lice?	genetic
What do lice require human clothing to do?	survive
What may have the invention of clothing happened with?	northward migration
What about the origin of clothing remains unanswered?	the date
Various cultures have come up with ways of making clothes from what?	cloth
Many people still wear clothes that are what shape?	rectangles
What nationality wears kilts?	Scottish
Pins or belts hold what in place?	garments
What precious material may remain uncut?	cloth
What had somewhat became an international style by the early 21st century?	western clothing styles
Cultural dissemination has continued over the what?	centuries
What have Western corporations penetrated?	markets throughout the world
Who has been spreading Western culture and styles?	Western media corporations
Who donates discard Western clothing to people in poor places?	charity organizations
Safety reasons may be why someone wears this type of clothing.	special
Leotards are an example of what type of garment?	sportswear
What does spandex soak up?	sweat
What's an example of a form fitting garment?	Spandex
What type of sport is wrestling considered?	active
Changes keep happening because new cultural stuff meets these type of innovations.	technological
What have researchers in science labs been making?	prototypes
What elementary force can some specialized fabrics generate?	electricity
What can garments made with kevlar resist?	bullets
Stain-resistant fabrics are coated with chemicals to reduce what?	absorption of liquids
What type of conditions do many garment works endure?	challenging
What type of clothing is frequently the product of sweatshops?	Mass-produced
What is a feature of sweatshops beyond lack of benefits and representation?	long work hours
Poor conditions found in developing countries may also be found in what type of nations?	industrialized
What type of immigrant often staff sweatshops?	undocumented
The abolishing of the MFA made what possible?	Outsourcing production to low wage countries
What did the MFA put quotas on?	textiles imports
What is often identified as the reason for less than ideal working conditions for garment workers?	Globalization
What treaty tries to set standards for worker safety and rights?	the International Labor Organization
What country has failed to ratify sections 87 and 92 of the ILO?	India
What have humans used for clothing since prehistoric times?	animal fur
Indigenous people in what zones use fur for warmth and protection?	arctic
Using animal fur as clothing was once considered what?	uncontroversial
Who considers animal fur to be cruel and unnecessary?	campaigners
What's the four letter name of an animal liberation group?	PETA
What's the point of ironing clothing?	to remove wrinkles
What type of clothing is believed to look neat, fresh and clean?	Ironed
What material doesn't easily wrinkle?	knit
Permanent press materials have been treated with what?	a coating
What does polytetrafluoroethylene suppress?	wrinkles
What releases formaldehyde?	A resin
What can cause contact dermatitis for some people?	formaldehyde
What government office found high levels of formaldehyde in non-wrinkle clothing in 2008?	Accountability
How many ppm is a safe limit for direct skin exposure to formaldehyde?	75
How many months of washing did a 1999 study look at?	6
What used to be considered an art, back in the day?	mending
What could an accomplished tailor or seamstress skillfully render almost invisible?	tear
Why did it make sense to spend time fixing cloth?	worth more than labor
What is clothing considered today?	a consumable item
What type of person is likely to replace zippers and buttons?	thrifty
What American professional baseball team is located on the North side of Chicago, IL?	The Chicago Cubs
What league are the Chicago Cubs in?	the National League
Where do the Chicago Cubs play their home games?	Wrigley Field
Who currently owns the  Chicago Cubs?	Joe Ricketts
When did the Chicago Cubs play their first game?	1876
What year did the Chicago Cubs' name become official?	1903 season
What other team besides the Chicago Cubs is tied for being the oldest currently active U.S. professional sports club?	Atlanta Braves
What year did the cubs record a Major League record of 116 wins?	1906
What is the winning percentage the Cubs posted that still stands today?	.763
Who was the first team to play in three consecutive Fall Classics?	The Cubs
How many world series have the Cubs appeared in?	seven
Who did the Cubs began play as?	the Chicago White Stockings
When the Cubs started playing, who was their owner?	William Hulbert
Where did the White Stockings play their home games?	West Side Grounds
Who assumed ownership of the Cubs after Hulbert died?	Spalding
What year did the White Stockings capture their third consecutive pennant?	1882
While Anson led the Chicago cubs how many National League pennants did they win?	six
What did the Chicago Cubs become know as by 1890?	Chicago Colts
Who was the first player in history credited with collecting 3,000 career hits?	Anson
Who did Spalding sell the Cubs to in 1902?	Jim Hart
Who nicknamed the franchise the Cubs in 1902?	Chicago Daily News
Who holds the longest championship drought in North American professional sports?	the Cubs
Who wrote the poem Baseball's Sad Lexicon?	Franklin P. Adams
Who obtained a large block of the Cub's shares in 1914?	Albert Lasker
Who assumed majority ownership of the Cubs franchise by the 1916 season?	Albert Lasker
Who did Albert Lasker bring in to be his partner of the Chicago Cubs?	Charles Weeghman
Where did the Cubs move to after leaving the West Side Grounds?	Weeghman Park
What year did Hack Wilson have one of the most impressive seasons in MLB history?	1930
How many games in a row did the Cubs win in a row during 1935?	21
What year did the Cubs win the NL pennant?	1929
Why were the first three games of the 1945 World Series played in Detroit?	wartime travel restrictions
Where were the final four games of the 1945 World Series played?	Wrigley
In what game was the Curse of the Billy Goat allegedly laid upon the Cubs?	Game 4 of the Series
What was ejected from Wrigley park because of it's bad odor?	goat
Who had been a key player in the 1945 season?	Phil Cavarretta
What season was Phil Cavarretta a key player for the Cubs?	the '45 season
Who was fired during spring training in 1954 after admitting the Cubs were unlikely to finish above fifth place?	Phil Cavarretta
Who managed the Cubs in 1969?	Leo Durocher
The Cubs built a substantial lead in what league under management of Leo Durocher?	National League Eastern Division
When did Ken Hoitzman pitch a no-hitter?	August 19
Who threw a surprise pickoff attempt to third baseman Ron Santo?	Dick Selma
During what decade did the Cubs become known as "The Loveable Losers"?	the 70s
What is often pointed to as the one reason for the Cubs' inconsistent late season play?	unusually high number of day games
What year did the Cubs experience one of their biggest collapses?	1977
What year did the Cubs hire GM Dallas Green?	1981
Where was GM Dallas Green from?	Philadelphia
What team had Dallas Green managed in 1980?	Phillies
Who shored up the 1984 roster with a series of transactions?	Green
When was Scott Sanderson acquired from Montreal?	December, 1983
When did LF Gary Matthews and CF Bobby Dernier come from Philadelphia to the Cubs?	March 26
When did Green make a deal to shore up the starting rotation?	June 15
Why did Green make a deal to shore up the starting rotation?	due to injuries to Rick Reuschel (5–5) and Sanderson
Who was the 1979 NL Rookie of the Year pitcher?	Rick Sutcliffe
Where had Rick Sutcliffe been before moving to the Cubs?	the Cleveland Indians
What contest shift the Cubs' Fortunes?	NBC Saturday Game of the Week
What had the contest between the Cubs and the St. Louis Cardinals been dubbed as?	The Sandberg Game
How many game-tying home runs did Sandberg get against the Cardinals at the Sandber Game?	two
In what year did the league have two divisions?	1984
The division winners met in what kind of series to advance to the World Series?	best-of-5 series
Where were the first two games of the 1984 division winners held?	Wrigley Field
Why did the cubs need to host their home games at an alternative site?	Wrigley Field did not yet have lights
Where was it rumored that the Cubs could home their home games?	Comiskey Park
Comiskey Park was the home to what team?	Chicago White Sox
Who had the home field advantage in 1983?	Baltimore Orioles
Who easily won the first two games in the NLCS?	, the Cubs
Where did the Cubs easily win the first two games of the NLCS?	Wrigley Field
Who did the cubs play against in the first two games of the NLCS?	San Diego Padres
What year was the first full season with night baseball at Wrigley Field?	1989
Who was rookie of the year in 1989?	Jerome Walton
Who was rookie of the year Runner-Up in 1989?	Dwight Smith
Who did the Cubs meet in the NLCS during 1989?	San Francisco Giants
What legendary broadcaster died in the '98 season?	Harry Caray
Who was affectionately known as "H-Rod"?	Henry Rodríguez
How many round-trippers did Rodriguez slug in his first season in Chicago?	31
Who put together a good season for the Cubs in 2001?	Don Baylor
Who was brought in to preach "positive thinking"?	Mack Newton
Who hit a three run walk off homer off of closer Tom "Flash" Gordon?	Preston Wilson
When did the Cubs promote assistant general manager and player personnel director Jim Hendry?	July 5, 2002
What was Jim Hendry promoted to?	the General Manager position
Who did the Cubs hire in response to Jim Hendry's promotion?	Dusty Baker
In what game did Florida shut the Cubs out?	Game 5
What pitcher led the Cubs in Game 6?	Mark Prior
Who hit the foul ball that several spectators attempted to catch?	Luis Castillo
What year did most media outlets pick the Cubs to win the World Series?	2004
Who was acquired in a trade with Florida for Hee-seop Choi?	Derek Lee
Who was the mid-season deal for?	Nomar Garciaparra
Who did the Cubs trade after leaving the final game early and lieing about it?	Sammy Sosa
Who was a controversial figure due to a corked-bat incident?	Sammy Sosa
What popular commentator left during the '04 season?	Steve Stone
Who verbally attacked Steve Stone?	Kent Mercker
How many wins did the Cubs finish the NL Central with in 2006?	66
Who was signed to a contract at 8 years for $136 million?	Alfonso Soriano
Who replaced Dusty Baker as the Cubs manager?	Lou Piniella
What  Chunichi Dragons  start was signed to the Cubs in 2008?	Kosuke Fukudome
Who was acquired from the Oakland Athletics in early July?	Rich Harden
Who was named Rookie of the Year in 2008?	Geovany Soto
Who pitched a no-hitter against the Astros on Spetember 14th?	Zambrano
When did the Ricketts family acquire a majority interest in the Cubs?	2009
Who did Chicago engage in a see-saw battle for first place into August 2009?	St. Louis
What plagued the Cubs in 2009?	injuries
Who debuted as the starting shortstop in early May 2010?	Starlin Castro
When did Starlin Castro debut as the starting shortstop?	early May (2010)
Who announced on August 22nd they were leaving the Cubs prematurely?	Lou Piniella
Why did Lou Piniella leave the cubs prematurely?	take care of his sick mother
How many games under .500 did the Cubs finish the 2011 season with?	20
Who was the new owner of the Cubs?	Tom Ricketts
Who did the new owner of the Cubs sign from the Boston Red Sox?	Theo Epstein
How much was the contract given to Theo Epstein worth?	$18 million
Who did the Cubs trade to the Texas Rangers for Mike Olt, C.J. Edwards, Neil Ramirez, and Justin Grimm?	Matt Garza
Who did the Cubs send to the New York Yankees for minor leaguer Corey Black?	Alfonso Soriano
When did Theo Epstein made the decision to fire Dale Sveum?	September 30, 2013
How many seasons did Dale Sveum spend with the Cubs before getting fired?	two seasons
When did the Cubs announce that Joe Maddon had signed a five-year contract to be the 54th manager?	November 2, 2014
Who did the team sign on December 10, 2014 as a free agent?	Jon Lester
How much was Jon Lester's contract worth?	$155 million
What was the record the Cubs finished with during the 2015 season?	97–65
When were the Cubs and New York Giants involved in a tight pennant race?	September 23, 1908
Who were the Cubs involved with for a tight pennant race on September 23, 1908?	New York Giants
Who was the runner on first base?	Fred Merkle
When was game three of the World Series between the Cubs and the New York Yankees?	October 1, 1932
Who allegedly hit a home run to the Center?	Babe Ruth
When did Babe Ruth retire?	1935
When did Hack Wilson set a record of 56 home-runs and 190 runs-batted-in?	1930
Who Broke Lou Gehrig's MLB record of 176 RBI?	Hack Wilson
When did Manny Ramirez get his 165 RBI?	1999
What was Wilson named by the Baseball Writer's Association of America?	"Most Useful" player
When did protesters run into the outfield and try to set fire to the U.S. flag?	April 25, 1976
What stadium did protesters try to burn the U.S.  flag?	Dodger Stadium
Who grabbed the flag before protesters could light it on fire?	Rick Monday
When did Sammy Sosa explode into pursuit of Roger Maris' home run record?	1998
Who was in pursuit of Roger Maris' home run record?	Sammy Sosa
Sammy Sosa was in pursuit of beating whose home run record?	Roger Maris
What award did Sammy Sosa win?	the NL MVP Award
When did the Cubs record their 10,000 regular-season win?	April 23, 2008
Who did the Cubs record their 10,000 regular-season against?	Colorado Rockies
When was the beginning of the National League?	1876
How many batters did Kerry Wood strike out against Houston?	20
When did Kerry Wood strike out 20 batters against Houston?	May 6, 1998
Kerry Wood struck out 20 batters against what team?	Houston
What is the longest championship drought in all four of the major North American professional sports leagues?	107 seasons
The championship drought has led to the Chicago Cubs being know as what?	The Lovable Losers
When was the last time the Chicago Cubs appeared in the Fall Classic?	1945
When was the last time the Chicago Cubs win a World Series championship?	1908
Who was the first and only player to hit a pitched ball onto the roof of a five-story building across Waveland Ave?	Glenallen Hill
When did the first and only player to hit a pitched ball onto the roof of a five-story building across Waveland Ave?	May 11, 2000
Who barely missed the scoreboard when he launched a home run ball onto Sheffield Avenue?	Bill Nicholson
When did the Cubs sign a developmental agreement with the Kane County Cougars?	2012
The Cubs had a Class A minor league affiliation on two occasions with who?	Peoria Chiefs
When did the Cubs announce a move of their top class A affiliate from Daytona to Myrtle Beach?	September 16, 2014
Who began spring training in Hot Springs, Arkansas in 1886?	Chicago White Stockings
Who is the founder of Spalding Sporting Goods?	Albert Spalding
Whittington Park, Majestic Park, and Fogel Field were all built where?	Hot Springs, Arkansas
Where is the Cubs' current spring  training facility located?	Sloan Park
How many seats are in the Cubs' Sloan Park training facility?	15,000
When did Sloan Park open?	2014
Where is Rendezvous Park?	Mesa
Where is Blair Field?	Long Beach, California
Between what years did the club hold spring training in Scottsdale, Arizona?	(1967–1978)
Who had a majority interest in Cataline island  in 1919?	William Wrigley Jr
What did Wrigley construct on the island to house the Cubs in Spring training?	a ballpark
When did the Cubs choose to leave Catalina Island?	1951
Where was the former location in Mesa?	the second HoHoKam Park
How many square feet does Fitch Park provide?	25,000 square feet
When was the spring training home of the Oakland Athletics built?	1976
Who manned the Cubs radio and TV booth for parts of five decades?	Jack Brickhouse
What was Jack Brickhouse's trademark call?	Hey Hey!
What did Jack Brickhouse do when he approached his retirement age?	he personally recommended his successor
How long was Harry Caray's tenure  with the Cubs?	17-year
How did Caray become a well-known Chicago figure?	by broadcasting White Sox games for a decade
How long had Caray been a St Louis Cardinals icon?	25 years
Who did Harry hand-pick himself?	Steve Stone
Who did Caray often playfully quarrel with?	Stone
Why did Caray often playfully quarrel with Stone?	over Stone's cigar
What does the crowd sing during the 7th inning to honor Caray's memory?	Take me out to the ballgame
What company purchased the  Cubs in 1981?	Tribune Company
How much did Tribune Company purchase the Cubs for?	$20,500,000
How long were the Cubs ran under the Wrigley family?	6 decades
What was "Baseball's Sad Lexicon" also known as?	"Tinker to Evers to Chance"
Who wrote "Baseball's Sad Lexicon"?	Franklin Pierce Adams
What poem did Franklin Pierce Adams write?	"Baseball's Sad Lexicon,
What is the official Cubs team mascot?	a young bear cub
What is the official Cubs team mascot's name?	Clark
When did Clark make his debut?	January 13, 2014
What did "The Bear-man" wear as an outfit?	'polar bear' looking outfit
During what season were "cubbie-bear" mascots outside of Wrigley on game day?	2013 season
Who played Billy Cub?	John Paul Weier
What is another unofficial well-known mascot?	Ronnie "Woo Woo" Wickers
What is Ronnie known for to Wrigley Field visitors?	idiosyncratic cheers at baseball games
What did Harry Caray dub Wickers?	"Leather Lungs
Where is Wrigley Field located?	Chicago's Lake View neighborhood
What is the area surrounding the ballpark typically referred to?	Wrigleyville
What have many apartment buildings  surrounding Wrigley Field built on their rooftops?	bleachers
When did Tom Ricketts and Crane Kenney unveil plans for a five-year funded renovation of Wrigley Field?	2013
How much money has been funded to the renovation of Wrigley Field?	$575 million
How big is the jumbotron going to be?	6,000-square foot
What nickname has been given to the fans who sit in the bleacher section at Wrigley Field?	Bleacher Bums
Who heads the current group?	Derek Schaul
What did Bud Light dub the bleacher section?	the Bud Light Bleachers
What year did a group of Chicago Cubs fans form the Emil Verban Society?	1975
Where were the Emil Verban Society founders based in?	Washington, D.C
Who currently heads the Emil Verban Society?	Illinois Senator Dick Durbin
What year was the single "Hey Hey! Holy Mackerel! (The Cubs Song)" produced?	1969
What was the name of the album several members of the cubs recorded?	Cub Power
What did The Cubs Song incorporate?	the catch-phrases of the respective TV and radio announcers
When was Take Me Out to a Cubs game released?	2008
How many songs are on the Take Me Out to a Cubs Game album?	17 songs
When was Harry Caray's final performance of "Take Me Out to the Ball Game"?	September 21, 1997
What film depicts the Chicago Cubs defeating a baseball team from Miami in the 2015 World Series?	Back to the Future Part II
What team failed to make it to the playoffs in 2015?	Miami Marlins
What day were the Cubs swept by the New York Mets in the NLCS?	October 21
How many federal states does Germany have?	sixteen
What are Hamburg and Berlin called?	Stadtstaaten (city-states)
The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen includes which two cities?	Bremen and Bremerhaven
How many federal states does Germany have?	sixteen federal states
What do constituent states still have?	measure of sovereignty
What are the two major city-states?	Berlin and Hamburg
What is the name of the city-state that contains Bremen and Bremerhaven?	Free Hanseatic City of Bremen
What do Germans call the other 13 states?	Flächenländer
How many states are in Germany?	sixteen
Which cities are called Stadtstaaten, other than Bremen?	Berlin and Hamburg
What is the German terms for states?	Bundesland, or Land
How many states are called "Flächenländer"?	13
The Free Hanseatic City of Bremen includes which cities?	Bremen and Bremerhaven
What year was the Federal Republic of Germany created?	1949
The Federal Republic of Germany was founded after which world war?	World War II
What area was initially not apart of the Federal Republic of Germany?	West Berlin
When was the Federal Republic of Germany formed?	1949
How did this republic come to be?	the aftermath of World War II
How was the republic controlled at the end World War II?	American, British, and French administration
Which state was NOT a part of the Federal Republic in 1949?	West Berlin
When was the Federal Republic of Germany created	1949
Which countries administrations was the Federal Republic of Germany previously under?	American, British, and French
Which city was originally not a part of the Federal Republic of Germany?	West Berlin
What was the Federal Republic of Germany created in the aftermath of?	World War II
How did Baden-Württemberg form?	following a referendum
When did the  the Saar Protectorate rejoin the republic?	German reunification
What was it called when East Germany joined the republic?	German reunification
What states formed Berlin in 1990?	West and East Berlin
Who did Berlin fail to merge with in 1996?	Brandenburg
Which city did Baden, Württemberg-Baden, and Württemberg-Hohenzollern merge into?	Baden-Württemberg
In what year did Baden, Württemberg-Baden, and Württemberg-Hohenzollern merge?	1952
 In 1957, the Saar Protectorate rejoined the Federal Republic as which city?	Saarland
When did the German reunification take place?	1990
Why did a regional referendum in 1996 to merge Berlin with surrounding Brandenburg fail?	failed to reach the necessary majority vote in Brandenburg
What is an entrenched constitutional principle in Germany?	Federalism
In Germany, foreign affairs is under the exclusive purvey of what?	the federation
What is an example of what states retain authority over?	culture
The states defend their interests at the federal level through what?	the Bundesrat
Whose consent do the states need to make international treaties?	the federal government
What does the term Länder date back to?	the Weimar Constitution of 1919
Before 1919 what were the German states called?	Staaten
What does Bavaria refer to itself as?	Freistaaten
How many free states are there in Germany?	three
What are the two city-states in Germany?	Hamburg and Bremen
What keeps being debated in Germany?	delimitation of the federal territory
What does Gunlick remark that the German System of  dual federalism requires strong Länder to have other than the capacity to implement legislation?	pay for it from own source revenues
How many proposals have failed so far?	several
The Holy Roman Empire comprised of how many petty states?	more than 300
The number of territories was greatly reduced during what?	the Napoleonic Wars
A North German Federation under Prussian hegemony replaced what confederation?	the German Confederation
How much of the population did Prussia control?	62%
How much of the land did Prussia control?	65%
Who redrew Germany's internal borders after World War II?	Allied military governments
No single state comprised of how much of the population after World War II?	30%
After WWII how many states initially remained in Germany?	seven
Former German territory that lie east of the Oder-Neisse Line went under which countries administration?	Polish or Soviet administration
How many made to establish new states in the territories  lying east of the Oder-Neisse Line?	no attempts
How many states did West Germany have at its founding?	eleven
What was West Berlin under the sovereignty of?	Western Allies
Which state was West Berlin apart of?	neither a Western German state nor part of one
When did the Saarland form?	1957
How many states was Germany reduced to in 1952	1952
What was the German constitution later amended to say about the citizens of the 16 states?	had successfully achieved the unity of Germany
Article 23, before it was rephrased allowed what?	"any other parts of Germany" to join
Which state was Article 23 used to reintegrate?	Saar Protectorate
The amended article 23 now defines the participation of the Federal Council and what else?	the 16 German states
What has been discussed since the Federal Republic was founded in 1949?	new delimitation of the federal territory
What have experts advocated in regards to delimitation?	a reduction of the number of states
What is propagated by the richer states as a means to avoid or reduce fiscal transfers?	Territorial reform
When did the debate on delimitation begin in Germany?	1919
Who was the father of the Weimar Constitution?	Hugo Preuss
How many states was the German Reich to divided into?	14
Until 1933 how many configurations in the German states occurred?	four
When did Pyrmont join Prussia?	1922
When did the Nazi Party seize power?	January 1933
What happened to the Länder as they lost importance during the Nazi regime?	They became administrative regions
on January 1, 1934, Mecklenburg-Schwerin was united with which state?	Mecklenburg-Strelitz
When did the Greater Hamburg Act occur?	April 1, 1937
Which Prussian province did Lübeck become a part of?	Schleswig-Holstein
In the revision of Article 29, what was a binding provision for a new delimitation of the federal territory?	the Federal Territory must be revised
How much of the population must have been in favor of the revision?	one tenth
What was required in each territory or part of a territory whose affiliation was to be changed?	a referendum
Which paragraph stated that reorganization should be completed within three years after the Basic Law had come into force?	paragraph 6
In what negotiation did France offer to establish the independent Saarland?	Paris Agreements
In the 23 October 1955 Saar Statute referendum, what percentage opposed the formation of the Saarland?	67.7%
What was the Saar Statute referendum voter turnout?	96.5%
Which political figure supported the Saar Statute referendum?	Chancellor Konrad Adenauer
The rejection of the plan by the Saarlanders was interpreted as support for the Saar to do what?	join the Federal Republic of Germany.
Paragraph 6 of Article 29 states that a referendum, in the event of a successful petition should be held within how many years?	three
What did the Hesse state government due when the May 5, 1958 deadline passed?	filed a constitutional complaint
When was the Hesse state government's complaint dismissed?	July 1961
On what grounds was the Hesse state government's complaint dismissed	exclusively federal matter
What did Chancellor Willy Brandt propose in his  28 October 1969 address?	Article 29 of the Basic Law as a binding order
Where did Chancellor Willy Brandt make his  28 October 1969 address?	Bonn
An expert commission was established under which chairman?	Werner Ernst
When did the expert commission deliver its report?	the district of Germersheim
Which state would the district of Germersheim be a part of?	Baden-Württemberg
Which article stipulates that the structure of each Federal State's government must "conform to the principles of republican, democratic, and social government, based on the rule of law"?	Article 28
Most states are governed by what figure?	Ministerpräsident
What are most state legislatures called?	Landtag
How is the Minister President chosen?	a majority vote among the Landtag's members
Who does Minister-President choose to run state agencies?	a cabinet
What are the governments in Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg called?	Senate
 What is the government called in the three free states of Bavaria, Saxony, and Thuringia?	the State Government
What did Bavaria's government have before 2001?	a bicameral parliament
How many people are in the executive branch senate in Berlin?	eight
The parliament in Berlin is called what?	Abgeordnetenhaus
What are the districts of Germany considered?	administrative districts
Every state, other than the free states, consist of districts called what?	"rural districts"
How many urban districts are in Bremen?	two
Berlin and Hamburg are states and what else at the same time?	urban districts
Local associations of a special kind are an amalgamation of one or more Landkreise with what?	one or more Kreisfreie Städte
What do local associations replace?	administrative entities at the district level
What are local associations  intended to implement?	simplification of administration
What is the association a district-free city or town and its urban hinterland typically grouped into?	Kommunalverband besonderer Art
What does a Kommunalverband besonderer Art require?	the issuing of special laws
Every rural district is subdivided into what?	municipalities
Every urban district is what in its own right?	municipality
How many municipalities are there?	12,141
What is the smallest administrative unit in Germany?	a municipality
What are town rights called?	Stadtrechte
Municipalities have how many major policy responsibilities?	local governments can justify
What article grants the municipalities "the right to regulate on their own responsibility all the affairs of the local community within the limits set by law.	Article 28(2)
Under Article 28(2) local governments can justify what?	a wide range of activities
What is one way municipalities develop the economic infrastructure?	development
In what year did the Korean War begin?	1950
What caused the start of the Korean War?	North Korea invaded South Korea
What country was divided at the end of World War II?	Korea
Which country aided South Korea during the war?	United States
When did the Korean War end?	27 July 1953
What nation ruled Korea in 1910?	Japan
What part of Korea did the Soviet Union occupy?	north of the 38th parallel
Who occupied Korea south of the 38th parallel?	U.S. forces
What United Nation's committee considered the invasion of Korea to be an act of aggression?	United Nations Security Council
How many countries assisted in the defense of South Korea?	Twenty-one
At the beginning of the conflict, where were South Korean forces pushed back to?	Pusan Perimeter
In 1950, what country got involved in the war?	China
How many times did the control of Seoul change?	four
On land, where was the last two years of the war fought?	close to the 38th parallel
What type of combat was seen for the first time in the history of war?	air-to-air combat
In, China what is the war officially called?	War to Resist U.S. Aggression and Aid Korea
What did Macau and Hong Kong call the Korean War?	Korean Conflict
When is the term 'Chaoxian War' used as a name for the Korean War?	unofficial contexts
Along with Taiwan, what empire was Korea considered to be apart of?	Empire of Japan
Who was the colonial Governor-General that mandated cultural assimilation of Korea's people?	General Jirō Minami
What language were the Korean people forced to learn?	Japanese
What policy forced Koreans to change their names to Japanese names?	Sōshi-kaimei policy
In 1939, what caused nearly 2 million Koreans to be forced into the labor force or the army?	Conscription
How many Japanese forces were in Korea in 1945?	300,000
Where were 723,000 Koreans sent to work?	overseas empire and in metropolitan Japan
Who did Japan collaborate with to help control the citizens of Korea?	Korean police force
By 1945, what percentage of Koreans made up the Japanese labor force?	32%
What army were Korean men conscripted into?	Imperial Japanese Army
What job were Colonels Dean Rusk and Charles H. Bonesteel III given?	dividing the Korean Peninsula
What order was the division of Korea included in?	General Order No. 1
What two areas was Korea divided into?	Soviet and U.S. occupation zones
What was a factor in deciding where to divide the occupation zones?	the capital of Korea
Who had to agree to the US's decision to divide Korea at the 38th parallel?	Stalin
Who accepted Japan's surrender?	Gen. John R. Hodge
What was General Hodge appointed the head of?	United States Army Military Government in Korea
What government was not recognized by the U.S. Army Military Government in Korea?	People's Republic of Korea
Why was the People's Republic of Korea not recognized?	it was communist
Who did General Hodge restore power to, resulting in protests?	Japanese colonial administrators
What is the civil disobedience caused by the railroad worker's strike called?	the Autumn uprising
When was the Daegu Uprising?	1946
How many people attacked the Yeongcheon police station?	10,000
When did the Pusasn railroad strike begin?	23 September 1946
How did the USAMGIK respond to the uprisings?	declared martial law
What did the Joint Commission's lack of progress cause the US government to do?	hold an election
Why did the Korean Communists and the Soviets refuse to cooperate in the elections and creation of independent Korea?	it would not be fair
When was the South Korean general election held?	10 May 1948
What problems did the elections face?	terrorism and sabotage
Who held parliamentary elections on August 25, 1948?	North Korea
When was South Korea's constitution created?	1948
Who was elected president of South Korea on July 20, 1948?	Syngman Rhee
What year was the Republic of Korea established?	1948
Who led the Russian Koran Zone of Occupation?	Kim Il-sung
What two groups were excluded from the South Korean political process?	communists and leftists
Who supported the Chinese Communists during the civil war in Manchuria?	North Korean government
What two groups were fighting in the Chinese Civil War?	Chinese Communists and the Chinese Nationalists
What did the Chinese Communists want?	supremacy in Manchuria
What army did North Koreans serve in during the civil war?	Chinese People's Liberation Army
How much material did the North Koreans give to the Chinese communists?	2,000 railway cars worth
What country helped North Korea invade South Korea?	China
When was the People's Republic of China created?	1949
What caused a problem within the Korean Communist Party?	Chinese support
Who led the faction that challenged Kim-Il-sung?	Pak Il-yu
Who did China pledge to support if a conflict should occur between North and South Korea?	the North Koreans
What country did China see as a threat to the People's Republic of China?	Western nations
Where was it believed that that fight against Communism would take place?	China
To show their strength in the international Communist movement, what did China do?	promoted Communist revolutions
Who did America support during the Chinese Civil War?	the Nationalists
When did the Soviets first detonate a nuclear bomb?	1949
What treaty did Stalin and China enter into?	Sino–Soviet Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Assistance Treaty
What country did not prevent a Communist victory in China?	US
Who was convinced that the US did was no longer interested in Korea?	Stalin
Where did Stalin engage in an aggressive political strategy?	Asia
Who had to agree to send reinforcements for Stalin to give permission for the invasion of Korea?	Mao
Who did the Soviets not want to engage in conflict?	the Americans
What concern did Mao have about the South Korean invasion?	the Americans would intervene
Who needed Soviet financial and military aid?	China
What did Mao's assistance allow North Korea to accelerate?	preparations for war
Who did the Soviets send to North Korea?	Soviet generals
Where did the conflict in South Korea begin?	Ongjin Peninsula
What were the generals sent to North Korea collectively called?	the Soviet Advisory Group
When did the generals finalize their attack strategy?	May
Who called for Korean elections in 1950?	Kim Il-sung
Who rejected the peace gesture?	Rhee
What did Kim Il-Sung do after the peace overture was rejected?	revised his war plan
Why did Kim's war plan need revising?	South Korean agents had learned about the plans
When did Kim Il-Sung call for the Haeju conference?	1950
Who primarily initiated the clashes along the 38th parallel?	the South
What group trained the Republic of Korea army?	U.S. Korean Military Advisory Group
What general had a lot of confidence in the Republic of Korea's army?	General William Lynn Roberts
Who wanted to take over North Korea?	Syngman Rhee
Who was the diplomat that visited Korea?	John Foster Dulles
Who provoked a conflict by crossing the 38th parallel?	Korean People's Army
Where did the fighting begin?	Ongjin peninsula
Who claimed to have taken control of Haeju?	the South Koreans
Who questioned the claim that South Korean did not provoke the KPA?	scholars
Who was the Korean People's Army trying to execute?	Syngman Rhee
Who, along with members of the South Korean government, fled South Korea?	Rhee
What bridge were refugees attempting to cross when it was blown up by the South Korean Army?	Han River
How many South Korean National Assemblyman pledged their allegiance to Seoul?	forty-eight
What did South Korea do to cause members of the South Korean military unit to become trapped near the Han River?	blew up the highway bridge
What day was the city of Seoul captured?	28 June
What country was believed to provide a counterbalance to China's and the Soviet Union's involvement in Korea?	Japan
Which President decided to intervene after realizing that Japan's security would be affected by the hostility in Korea?	President Truman
Why was South Korea important to the US?	US policy toward Japan
What affected America's response to the situation in South Korea?	US policy toward Japan
What was the Truman administration concerned about that was preventing them from getting involved in the Korean conflict?	Soviet reaction
What agency approved the use of force in South Korea?	The UN Security Council
Why did the US not send in ground troops after the United Nations approved the use of force?	advisers believed the North Koreans could be stopped by air and naval power
Who believed that if the issues in Korea were not dealt with the communist aggression would spread?	Truman
What resources did the US devote to South Korea after the Security Council approved engaging in an armed conflict?	air and naval forces
Who condemned the actions of North Korea?	United Nations Security Council
Which permanent member of the UN Security Council boycotted council meetings in protest of Taiwan's seat in the United Nations?	Soviet Union
What resolution encouraged Security Council Members to send military assistance to the Republic of Korea?	Resolution 83
Who accused the United States of beginning an armed intervention in South Korea?	the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister
What did UN Security Council Resolution 82 accomplish?	condemned the North Korean invasion of the Republic of Korea
What country challenged the legitimacy of the Korean War?	Soviet Union
Where did the intelligence information that led to the passage of Resolution 83 come from?	U.S. Intelligence
What type of vote is required for the Security Council to commit to military action in Korea.	unanimous vote
How many permanent members did the UN Security Council have?	five
What charter did the US believe was violated by intervening in the Korean conflict?	UN Charter Article 32
How many infantry divisions did N. Korea have engaged in the war?	10
What was the maximum number of North Korean troops engaged in the war?	200,000
How many reserve soldiers did North Korea have?	30,000
What type of naval ships did the South and North Koreans have?	small warships
What was the problem with the ROK Army?	Army defenders were relatively unprepared and ill-equipped
Who declined the ROK's request for tanks?	U.S. military
In what country did the US maintain air forces and garrisons?	Japan
Who reported that South Korea's military was not ready for combat?	R.E. Appleman
Which Secretary of State did President Truman hold discussions about how the US would respond to the invasion of South Korea?	Dean Acheson
What did the US not want to see repeated?	the mistake of appeasement
The US involvement in the Korean War was important to achieving what goal?	the global containment of communism
What report discussed the United States's goals for containing communism?	National Security Council Report 68
The North Korean invasion of South Korea was compared to what event?	Adolf Hitler's aggressions
Why was the US naval blockade not feasible?	U.S. Navy no longer had the warships
Why was the US not able to provide an adequate response to the Korean invasion?	defense budget cutbacks
Who was tasked with reorganization and deploying of the US military?	General Omar Bradley
Who was forced to retreat back to the Pusan Peninsula due to unpreparedness?	American troops
Who stated that winning the war does not excuse putting US troops into a bad situation?	Major General Floyd L. Parks
What general provided material to the Republic of Korea and evacuated US nationals?	General MacArthur
Who disagreed with the idea of unilaterally bombing the North Korean military?	President Truman
What fleet was sent to the Taiwan Strait?	US Seventh Fleet
Fearing the provocation of Communist China, what country's request for combat troops did the US deny?	Republic of China
Who is the Chinese premier that called the actions of the US and the United Nations an act of aggression?	Zhou Enlai
What battle is considered the US's first significant fight in the Korean War?	Battle of Osan
Which infantry division was involved in the Battle of Osan?	24th Infantry Division
Where was the 24th Division forced to retreat to what location?	Taejeon
At what Battle did the 24th Infantry Division suffer major losses?	Battle of Taejon
In what country is the US's Task Force Smith located?	Japan
How did the KPA hurt the Republic of Korea's intellectual core?	by killing civil servants and intellectuals
Who was held responsible for the actions of the KPA?	Kim Il-sung
Where did the Eighth United States and ROK get pushed back to?	southeast Korea
What body of water provided a natural border to the UN command-controlled Pusan perimeter?	Nakdong River
How much of Korea was under the control of the United Nations?	10%
Why did Zhou Enlai want a commitment the Soviet Union to commit to supporting the Chinese troops?	To counter a possible U.S. deployment
Where did North Korea predict that MacArthur would enter Korea?	Incheon
Who helped North Korea prepare for war by surveying the country?	Chai Chengwen
Where did the Chinese military deploy troops in preparation for the arrival of US troops?	the Korean border
Even though it was predicted that the Korean War would end in August, who was less than optimistic about the prediction?	Chinese leaders
Which army was trying to capture Teague and the Naktong Bulge?	KPA
What did the US Air Force's daytime attacks cause the KPA to do?	to hide in tunnels by day and move only at night
Why did the Soviet Union complain about the action of the US to the UN Security Council?	aircraft mistakenly attacked facilities in Chinese territory
Along with India, what other nation was to determine the how much the US would have to compensate China?	Sweden
Why did India and Sweden never determine how much the US would compensate China?	the Soviets vetoed the US proposal
Where in the United States was the tank battalion located?	San Francisco
What is Korea's largest port?	the port of Pusan
Besides the United States, what other country sent military personnel to Korea?	Japan
Who had the fewest number of troops in Korea?	KPA
Who was able to counterattack and move the KPA away from the Pusan Perimeter?	UN forces
Why did General MacArthur suggest an amphibious landing at Inchon?	To relieve the Pusan Perimeter
Who did General MacArthur ask to plan the amphibious attack?	Major General Hobart R. Gay
Where did the 1st Infantry deploy from?	Yokohama, Japan
Why were KPA forces unable to adequately defend themselves against UN forces?	the KPA were undermanned and poorly supplied
Who initially opposed General MacArthur's landing plan?	the Pentagon
What Corps included 40,000 men from the 1st Marine Division?	The X Corps
Who coordinated the efforts of the ROK Army, Marine Corps and the US Army to stage a successful battle?	General Edward Almond
Whose nickname was 'Task Force Lynch'?	Lieutenant Colonel James H. Lynch
What was the 106 mile push through enemy territory called?	the "Pusan Perimeter Breakout"
Who was defeated near Seoul, Korea?	the KPA
Who was sent to Korea to act as an advisor to Kim Il-Sung?	General H. M. Zakharov
Why did Kim Il-Sung redeploy his military troops?	to defend Seoul
Who was not being briefed on the operational plans or the number of troops in combat?	Chinese commanders
When was it advised for North Koreans to attempt to defeat the opposing forces at Inchon?	if they had reserves of at least 100,000 men
What emergency session was called by Stalin?	Politburo
How many troops made it back to the KPA lines after retreating?	25,000 to 30,000
Who was held responsible for the defeat of North Korean troops?	Soviet military advisers
Who reclaimed the Seoul?	South Korean forces.
What city was left vulnerable by North Korea's quick retreat?	Pyongyang
What memorandum stated the circumstances for engaging in conflict above the 38th parallel?	National Security Council Memorandum 81/1
Who controlled the newly restored government of the Republic of Korea?	Syngman Rhee
Who sent a message to MacArthur giving him the authority to proceed past the 38th parallel?	Defense Secretary George Marshall
Who executed people who were believed to be loyal to North Korea?	ROK police
What year did the executions stop?	1951
Who vowed to intervene if the US was to engage in conflict North of the 38th parallel?	China
The tactics Zhou Enlai advised the North Koreans to use during their withdrawal was the same the Chinese used to escape event?	Chiang Kai-shek's Encirclement Campaigns
Who believes that the North Koreans only appeared to fail to effective execute their withdrawal plan?	Bruce Cumings
What may have been North Korea's goal in the way they rapidly withdrew from South Korea?	launch guerrilla raids
Who's control did the Chinese Communists escape in the 1930's?	Chiang Kai-shek
Who issued a statement calling for North Korea's unconditional surrender?	MacArthur
Who authorized giving troops the ability to follow the North Korean forces north?	the UN
How did the 187 Airborne Regimental Combat Team prevent North Korean leaders from fleeing?	cut the road north going to China
How many North Korean prisoners of war were held by UN forces?	135,000
What did President Truman do to prevent hostilities between the People's Republic of China and Taiwan?	dispatched the United States Seventh Fleet to the Taiwan Strait
What year did China decide to enter the war?	1950
What provoked China to join the war?	American aggression in the guise of the UN
Where did Mao Zedong declare that he would intervene in the Korean conflict?	the Politburo
What was discussed at the emergency talks held by Chinese leaders?	whether to send Chinese troops into Korea
Who was a proponent for intervening in Korea?	Mao
Who was Lin Biao replaced with when he declined to lead the Chinese troops in Korea?	Peng Dehuai
Who convinced the Chinese leaders who were against entering the war that it was a good idea?	Peng
What did Mao Zedong's reinvented PLA North East Frontier Force become?	People's Volunteer Army
Where did Zhou travel with a Chinese delegation to convince Stalin to support China?	the Black Sea
How long did the Soviet air force need to prepare to assist	two or three months
Where did Stalin say he would allow the Soviet air force to operate for a limited amount of time?	Chinese airspace
When did Stalin agree to send China any type of support?	March 1951
Where did the fighting take place that rendered Soviet air support useless to the Chinese?	the south side of the Yalu
What made seeing the PVA units difficult during the day?	their march and bivouac discipline
What were PVA troops told to do when planes flew by?	remain motionless
How many days did it take PVA forces to march 286 miles?	19
What were PVA officers supposed to do if troops disobeyed the security protocol?	shoot security violators
When would PVA forces march to minimize the chances of being seen?	19:00–03:00
Who did not capture the city of Namchonjam?	KPA
What was the capital city in the North?	Pyongyang
Where did Kim Il-Sung temporarily move the capital?	Sinuiju
What caused the North Koreans to move their capital for the second time?	UNC forces approached
When was Pyongyang captured?	October 1950
Where did President Truman and General MacArthur meet on October 15, 1950?	Wake Island
Who refused to meet on continental United States?	General MacArthur
What was President Truman told at this meeting?	little risk of Chinese intervention in Korea
Who was not concerned about the idea of Chinese troops moving south into Korea?	General MacArthur
What was believed would happen if the Chinese entered the conflict?	the greatest slaughter
Who initiated the First Phase offensive?	PVA 13th Army Group
Who did the First Phase offensive motivated to send more troops and resources to Korea?	Soviet Union
When did the Chinese and US military have their first confrontation in Korea?	1 November 1950
Where did UN forces retreat to when the PVA executed their sneak attack?	Ch'ongch'on River
What is unusual about the PVA's successful, surprise attack?	Chinese unexpectedly disappeared into mountain hideouts
Whose retreat during the Korean war was the longest in the history of the US Army?	U.S. Eighth Army's
Whose actions helped the Eighth Army be able to retreat?	Turkish Brigade
How many casualties did the 1st Marines face at the Battle of Chosin Reservoir?	12,000–15,000
What tactics of the PVA were US and ROK troops not prepared to handle?	PVA 9th Army Group's three-pronged encirclement tactics
Who did the PVA 13th Army Group force out of northwest Korea?	the U.S. Eighth Army
Whose death was not a direct casualty of the war?	General Walton Walker
Why did the X Corps leave Hungnam?	to reinforce the badly depleted U.S. Eighth Army
What effect did the death of General Walton Walker have on the troops?	UN morale hit rock bottom
What was the name of the ship responsible for undertaking the largest rescue operation by a single ship?	SS Meredith Victory
What did the Presidential Proclamation No. 2914, 3 1950 do?	declared a national emergency
What year was the Presidential Proclamation lifted?	1978
Who was stripped of their commanding rights by China?	Kim Il-sung
What country was condemned for their participation in the conflict in Korea?	China
What is the Third Phase Offensive also known as?	Chinese New Year's Offensive
Why goals were accomplished the the KPA and PVA's use gongs during these attacks?	facilitating tactical communication and mentally disorienting the enemy
How did some UN troops react to the use of noise?	some soldiers panicked, abandoning their weapons and retreating to the south
What did the PVA and KPA gain by using the tactics during the Third Phase Offensive	Seoul
Who was commanding the U.S. Eight Army at the time of the Third Phase Offensive?	Lieutenant-General Matthew Ridgway
Why was the PVA unable to advance beyond Seoul?	The PVA had outrun its logistics capability
What caused General Ridgway to initiate Operation Roundup?	PVA had abandoned their battle lines
What facilitated the success of Operation Roundup?	UN Command's air superiority
What city was recaptured as a result of the Ridgway's operation?	Wonju
How was the PVA transporting supplies at one point?	on foot and bicycle
What to be achieved by the Sancheong-Hamyang and Geochang massacres in South Korea?	destroy the guerrillas and their sympathizer citizens in Southern Korea
Who's attack resulted in victory at Hoengseong?	the PVA
What is considered to be the the Korean War's equivalent to Gettysburg?	the Fourth Phase Offensive
What did the French Battalion's efforts do to the PVA forces?	broke the attack's momentum
How many PVA soldiers fought in this battle and lost?	more than 25,000
What Operation was initiated after the successful Operation Roundup?	Operation Killer
What the the goal of the operation that followed Operation Roundup?	to kill as many KPA and PVA troops as possible
What signified the end of Operation Killer?	capturing Hoengseong
How many times was Seoul captured in a year?	This was the city's fourth conquest
Other than the drastic decrease in population, what other issue did the people in Seoul face?	severe food shortages
Why did Stalin send two air forces divisions and other assistance to the Chinese?	the Chinese war effort
What issues plagued the PVA throughout the war?	logistical problems
What was a great concern of many Chinese troops?	they had nothing to eat
What was Zhou's ineffective response to the issue plaguing the PVA?	increasing Chinese production and improving methods of supply
What did China introduce to the war in 1951?	the Chinese Air Force
Who was relieved from his duties as Commander in Korea?	General MacArthur
Who did not have faith in MacArthur's claim that victory was the only respectable outcome?	Truman
What mistake did MacArthur make regarding the 38th parallel?	the Chinese would not enter the war
What did Truman want to see happen in Korea?	a truce and orderly withdrawal
Whose involvement in the war was found to be in violation of the Constitution?	. MacArthur
Who was appointed Supreme Commander in Korea after the removal of General MacArthur?	General Ridgway
What was the goal of Operation Tomahawk?	get behind Chinese forces and block their movement north
Who was responsible for supply humanitarian aid to civilians?	The 60th Indian Parachute Field Ambulance
Under the guidance of Generals Van Fleet and Ridgway, joint forces were able to achieve what goal?	depleted the PVA and KPA forces
What was the Fifth Phase of the Chinese counter initiative called?	Chinese Spring Offensive
What may have began as an effective series of attacks by the Chinese regained what area?	Line Kansas
What ended with the armistice of 1953?	the stalemate
How many armies did the Chinese use in the Fifth Phase Offensive?	three field armies
Where was Line Kansas located?	just north of the 38th parallel
Where did armistice negotiations occur?	Kaesong
What did the UN Command want to achieve with the armistice talks?	recapture all of South Korea and to avoid losing territory
What tactics were used by the PVA to coax the UN Command to continuing the war?	military and psychological operations
Was there a cease fire during the talks?	Large-scale bombing of North Korea continued
Who directed the armistice negotiation for the Chinese?	Zhou Enlai
When was the Battle of White Horse?	6–15 October 1952
What year was the Battle of Bloody Ridge?	1951
What was the shortest of the major battles fought during the stalemate?	the Battle of the Hook
Did the UN troops or Chinese troops experience more war casualties?	Chinese troops
What did Zhou Enlai do as a result of the significant amount of Chinese casualties?	called a conference in Shenyang
What was the purpose of the Shengyang meeting?	discuss the PVA's logistical problems
Did the actions of the Chinese fix their problems?	These commitments did little to directly address the problems
Who believed that neither side would see a victory at the end of the Korean War?	Peng Dehuai
What meeting was conducted to discuss the PVA's problems?	the Military Commission,
What actions were taken to help the PVA?	PVA would be divided into three groups
Who ended up in charge of logistics as a result of the restructuring of the PVA?	the central government
How long did the armistice talks last?	two years
What issues stalled the armistice talks?	prisoner of war (POW) repatriation
What was deemed unacceptable to North Koreans and the Chinese during POW negotiations?	many PVA and KPA soldiers refused to be repatriated back to the north
When was the armistice agreement finally signed?	27 July 1953
What was established to deal with the issues surrounding prisoners of war?	Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission,
Who did the US elect as president during the Korean War?	Dwight D. Eisenhower
Who approved the Korean War armistice that officially declared a ceasefire?	the United Nations
What area was created by the parties involved in the Korean conflict?	Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ)
Along with the Joint UN Commands, ROKA and KPA, what country also still patrols the demilitarized zone?	United States
What was one of the first things that the newly-elected Dwight Eisenhower did after the election?	went to Korea to learn what might end the Korean War
Where is the capital city of Kaesong now located?	North Korea
What area is directly north and south of the 38th parallel?	The Demilitarized Zone
When was the Armistice Agreement signed?	27 July 1953
Was there ever an official peace treaty after the war?	there was no peace treaty
Who believes that they were victorious in the war?	North Korea
What was the point of Operation Glory?	to allow combatant countries to exchange their dead
How many US service members were exchanged during this operation?	4,167
Where are the remains of the 416 unidentified soldiers who died in the Korean War?	National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific
How many remains were recovered from the Sino-Korean border between 1996 and 2006?	220
Why is North Korea insisting that the 1953 armistice was violated?	new wave of UN sanctions
When did North Korea call an end to the armistice?	13 March 2013
In 2013, who what country did North Korea declare war on?	South Korea
What weapon does North Korea claim it now has the ability to use?	a nuclear weapon
How does the United States view North Korea's threats?	credible and realistic nuclear threat
What form of attack was an effective measure of slowing Korean armor?	ground attack aircraft
What weapon did the the KPA use that was successful early in the Korean conflict?	Soviet T-34-85 tanks
What helped the UN forces and shifted the war in their favor?	the North Koreans suffered major tank losses
What actions of the UN also helped them improve their results during the war?	the UN forces brought heavier equipment
How many tanks were in the North Korean tank corps?	120
Why were naval skirmishes not really seen in the Korean War?	neither Korea had a significant navy
Who pretty much gained and maintained control of the sea?	the UN nations
Who dominated any battles that may have taken place at sea?	the UN Command
Where was the last sea battle of the Korean War?	Inchon
What type of ships did the US spend most of its time sinking?	supply and ammunition ships
What weapon posed a significant threat to US navy ships?	magnetic mines
How many US warships were damaged by gun fire and mines?	87
Where were the majority of US naval patrols of Korea?	the west and east coasts of North Korea
Who denied having anything more than an advisory role in the Korean War?	the Soviet Union
Who ignored the direct participation of the Soviet Union to prevent expanding the Korean War to the Soviet Union?	UN Command
What may have occurred if the war was expanded to the Soviet Union?	atomic warfare
What did the Soviet pilots start doing when accused of playing an integral role in the Korean War?	dropping their code signals and speaking over the wireless in Russian
Who feared engaging in direct conflict with the United States?	Soviet Union
What plane did the US send to Korea to counter the power of the MiG-15?	F-86 Sabre
To mitigate the loses of the B-29, what did the US Air Force do?	switch from a daylight bombing campaign to the necessarily less accurate nighttime bombing
What was the MiG designed to be?	bomber interceptor
When was Royal Shell Group Created?	February 1907
When was the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company founded?	1890
When WAS the "Shell" Transport and Trading Company founded?	1897
The Royal Dutch Shell Group was created through the merger of which two rival companies?	the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company of the Netherlands and the "Shell" Transport and Trading Company Ltd of the United Kingdom
What was the main reason for the creation of the Royal Dutch Shell Group?	the need to compete globally with Standard Oil
In what year was the Royal Dutch Shell Group created?	1907
In what year was the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company founded?	1890
Why was the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company created?	to develop an oilfield in Sumatra
Aside from biofuels what other renewable energy activities is Shell involved with?	wind
How many countries does Shell operate in?	over 90
How much oil per day does Shell produce?	3.1 million barrels
How many services stations does Shell have?	44,000 service stations
In how many countries does Shell have operations?	over 90
How many barrels of oil equivalent does Shell produce per day?	3.1 million
Shell has how many service stations worldwide?	44,000
What is the name of Shell's subsidiary in the United States?	Shell Oil Company
Shell has minor renewable energy activities in which two areas?	biofuels and wind
What percent of ownership did the merger award the Dutch branch?	60
What prevented a full-scale merger of the two companies?	National patriotic sensibilities
What was the primary function of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company?	to direct the transport and storage of the products
The new firm operated as what type of company?	a dual-listed company
What percent of ownership of the new company was awarded to the British?	40
In what year was it announced that the Shell Group would move to a single capital structure?	2004
What was the name of the Shell Group's new parent company?	Royal Dutch Shell plc
On what exchange was the Shell Group's new parent company primarily listed?	the London Stock Exchange
Where was the Royal Dutch Shell plc headquartered?	The Hague, Netherlands
What was the cause of the period of turmoil prior to the announcement that the Shell Group would move to a single capital structure?	the revelation that Shell had been overstating its oil reserves
In what year did Shell and Cosan form a 50:50 joint venture?	2010
What was the name of the 50:50 joint venture formed by Shell and Cosan?	Raízen
Why did Shell sell some of its assets in March 2010?	to meet the cost of a planned $28bn capital spending programme
How much did Shell plan to raise from the sale of its assets?	$2–3bn
Royal Dutch Shell agreed to acquire all the business of what entity in June 2010?	East Resources
Which assets did the corporation begin to sell in 2013?	US shale gas
What was the value of the cancelled gas project that was to be contstructed in Louisiana?	US$20 billion
The appointment of a new CEO in 2014 came prior to what announcement?	the corporation's overall performance in 2013 was 38 per cent lower than 2012
In what year did the corporation sell the majority of its Australian assets?	2014
What was the value of assets the corporation planned to sell leading up to 2015?	US$15 billion
What is a cause of severe environmental issues in the Niger Delta?	The presence of companies like Shell
Many pipelines owned by Shell in the Niger Delta are described as what?	old and corroded
Shell has accepted responsibility for keeping its pipelines in what condition?	new
In contrast to its acceptance of responsibility for keeping the pipelines new, Shell has denied what?	responsibility for environmental causes
Environmental and human rights groups have created action plans to do what?	boycott Shell
The name Shell is connected to what company?	The "Shell" Transport and Trading Company
What was the purpose of the created of The "Shell" Transport and Trading Company?	to sell seashells to London collectors
What did the younger founder of The "Shell" Transport and Trading company discover while collecting seashell specimens in the Caspian Sea area?	there was potential in exporting lamp oil from the region
By what year did the company have a fleet of oil tankers operating in the Caspian Sea region?	1907
The company operated a refinery on what river for several decades?	Thames
What is Shell's primary business?	the management of a vertically integrated oil company
The development of what two types of exptertise established the core competencies on which the company was founded?	technical and commercial
One of the most important business in which Shell is involved is what?	natural gas
Each business now seeks to become what type of unit?	self-supporting
The business model that provided significant economies of scale and barriers to entry is called what?	vertically integrated
Shell was traditionally considered what type of business worldwide?	heavily decentralised
Shell operated companies in how many countries?	over 100
A good deal of technical and financial direction for the upstream came from what entity?	the central offices in The Hague
What types of companies existed in a few major oil and gas production centers?	"exploration and production"
Downstream operations currently includes what type of business?	chemicals
Downstream operations produces what percent of Shell's profits worldwide?	a third
How many petrol stationsare included in Shell's downstream operations global network?	more than 40,000
Prior to the 1990s, Shell's downstream businesses were essentially considered what kind of businesses?	local
In what way did the business paradigm of Shell's downstream operations begin to change?	the independence of operating companies around the world was gradually reduced
What did Shell announce in April 2010?	its intention to divest from downstream business of all African countries except South Africa and Egypt to Vitol and "Helios"
What happened in several countries in response to Shell's April 2010 announcement?	protests and strikes broke out
In June 2013, Shell announced a review of its operations in which country?	Nigeria
In August 2014, Shell announced it was in the process of doing what?	finalizing the sale of its interests in four Nigerian oil fields.
What did Shell indicate was a reason for the strategic review of operations in Nigeria?	assets could be divested
What company was the owner of the 7-Eleven brand in Scandinavia?	Reitan Group
In what year did Royal Dutch Shell and Reitan Group announce an agreement?	2007
How many service stations did Royal Dutch Shell and Reitan Group agree to re-brand?	some 269
Shell announced it was in the process of doing what in April 2010?	trying to find a potential buyer for all of its operations in Finland
In October 2010, Shell sold what to St1?	gas stations and the heavy vehicle fuel supply networks in Finland and Sweden, along with a refinery located in Gothenburg, Sweden
Shell Oil Company's United States business throughout its early history is described as what?	substantially independent
On which exchange was Shell Oil Company's U.S. stock historically traded?	the NYSE
Shell Oil Company historically had little direct involvement from what entity in the running of its American businesses?	the group's central offices
In what year did Royal Dutch Shell make a bid to purchase approximately 30% of Shell Oil Company's shares?	1984
What did Royal Dutch Shell's bid to purchase Shell Oil Company's shares lead to?	a court case
The final investment decision for what was finalized by Royal Dutch Shell in May 2011?	the world's first floating liquefied natural gas (FLNG) facility
The remote offshore Prelude field was discovered where?	off Australia's northwestern coast
On what developments was FLNG technology based?	liquefied natural gas (LNG)
The Prelude field was estimated to contain how many cubic feet of natural gas reserves?	3 trillion
FLNG technology faciliates what?	the exploitation of untapped natural gas reserves located in remote areas
What percent of its stake in Woodside Petroleum did Shell sell in June 2014?	9.5%
Shell became a major shareholder in Woodside after a takeover attempt was blocked in what year?	2001
Who blocked the takeover attempt?	then federal Treasurer Peter Costello
What percentage of shareholders voted to approve the 2014 buy-back?	72
What percentage of shareholder votes was need to approve the 2014 buy-back?	75
Shell purchased what in 2005?	an offshore lease
What did Shell initate after its 2005 purchase?	its US$4.5 billion Arctic drilling program
What executive initially led the Artic drilling project?	Pete Slaiby
What caused the delay in drilling after Shell's 2008 purchase?	the refurbishment of rigs, permit delays from the relevant authorities and lawsuits
Shell's plans to drill in the Artic led to protests from which particular environmental group?	Greenpeace
What conditions caused the delay of drilling in mid-2012?	difficult weather
What worsened the situation at the end of 2012?	the "Kulluk" incident
What amount had Royal Dutch Shell invested in the project by the end of 2012?	nearly US$5 billion
In what year did drilling in the Arctic region begin?	2012
Why was the Kulluk oil rig being towed to Washington?	to be serviced in preparation for the 2013 drilling season
What caused towing crews and rescue service to lose control while the Kulluk rig was in transport to Washington?	a winter storm
On January 1, 2013, the Kulluk was grounded off the coast of which island?	Sitkalidak
Following the incident, which magazine contacted Larry McKinney?	Fortune
Larry McKinney explained that a two-month delay in drilling could do what?	wipe out the entire drilling season
Following what event was it uncertain if Shell would recommence drilling?	the "Kulluk" incident
In February 2013, Shell Corporation announced that it would pause what?	its closely watched drilling project off the Alaskan coast
Shell Corporation announced what in January 2014?	the extension of the suspension of its drilling program in the Arctic
Which Shell Corporation executive explained the reason for the January 2014 announcement?	van Beurden
What reason did the executive give for Shell's January 2014 announcement?	the project is "under review" due to both market and internal issues.
For what particular reason did protesters criticize the company's environmental record in the 1990s?	the possible pollution caused by the proposed disposal of the Brent Spar platform into the North Sea
What entity supported Shell during the 1990s protests?	the UK government
Following the reversal of its decision, Shell published what?	an unequivocal commitment to sustainable development
In 1996, multiple groups filed lawsuits to hold Shell accountable for what?	alleged human rights violations in Nigeria
Shell was accused of participating in the execution of which southern Nigerian tribal leader?	Ken Saro-Wiwa
In what year did Shell agree to settle the lawsuits filed in 1996?	2009
For what amount did Shell agree to settle the 1996 lawsuits?	$15.5m
In contrast to its agreement to settle the 1996 lawsuits, Shell refused to do what?	accepted any liability over the allegations against it
A 2010 leaked communication revealed that Shell claimed to have inserted what into which entities?	staff into all the main ministries of the Nigerian government
The same leaked communication revealed Shell claimed to know what?	"everything that was being done in those ministries"
About what did the Shell executive boast in relation to the leaked communication?	the Nigerian government had forgotten about the extent of Shell's infiltration
Documents released in 2009 showed that Shell made regular payments to which entity?	the Nigerian military
For what purpose did Shell make regular payments to the entity cited in the documents released in 2009?	to prevent protests
How many Greenpeace activists boarded Fennica and Nordica in March 2012?	52
How many countries did the group of Greenpeace activists represent?	five
What types of vehicles were the Fennica and Nordica?	multipurpose icebreakers
Why were the Fennica and Nordica chartered?	to support Shell's drilling rigs near Alaska
What was the main concern of Edward Itta?	an oil spill could destroy the Inupiat Eskimo's hunting-and-fishing culture
Why did Shell file lawsuits?	to seek injunctions from possible protests
Jealous and Radford asserted that the legal action taken by Shell was what?	"trampling American's rights."
Greenpeace claimed that Shell requested Google to ban what?	video footage of a Greenpeace protest action that occurred at the Shell-sponsored Formula One (F1) Belgian Grand Prix
What banners appeared on the winners' podium at the August 2013 ceremony?	"SaveTheArctic.org"
At the 2013 ceremony, activitsts controlled their appearance with what?	the use of four radio car antennas
How do creators of content protect their work from infringement?	routinely invoke legal and technological measures
What are the rights of a content creator that has their work protected?	right to reproduce, distribute, display or perform the protected work, or to make derivative works
Who is protected by copyright laws?	The copyright holder is typically the work's creator, or a publisher or other business to whom copyright has been assigned
You wrote a song that was based on an original work, what is this called?	to make derivative works
What is it called when someone uploads a video to YouTube without the creators permission?	Copyright infringement
How do creators of content protect their work from infringement?	copyright law
Who is protected by copyright laws?	work's creator
What is it called when someone uploads a video to YouTube without the creators permission?	copyright infringement
You wrote a song that was based on an original work, what is this called?	derivative works
How are disputes resolved for small scale infringement?	direct negotiation, a notice and take down process, or litigation in civil court
Why has copyright infringement increased recently?	Shifting public expectations, advances in digital technology, and the increasing reach of the Internet
What are content creation industries focusing on doing to prevent infringement?	expanding copyright law to recognize and penalize – as "indirect" infringers – the service providers and software distributors
What can happen to people who commit copyright infringement on a mass-scale?	sometimes prosecuted via the criminal justice system
What are two examples of groups that allow you to make copies of protected works?	service providers and software distributors
What are content creation industries focusing on doing to prevent infringement?	expanding copyright law
What can happen to people who commit copyright infringement on a mass-scale?	prosecuted via the criminal justice system
What are two examples of groups that allow you to obtain copies of protected works?	service providers and software distributors
What terms are often linked to people who illegally use or distribute content that is not their own?	piracy and theft
What means the same as robbery or illegal violence at sea?	piracy
What kind of property is copyright used for?	intellectual property
What is the difference between robbery and piracy?	related only to tangible property
In the 1980's, the Supreme Court ruled that infringement does not equal what?	theft
What did the Royal Charter give to the Stationers' Company of London?	monopoly on publication and tasking it with enforcing the charter
How does Article 12 of the 1886 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works use the term piracy?	in relation to copyright infringement
What would happen if you imported a copyrighted work into a country where the original is protected by copyright law?	seized on importation
When was the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights enacted?	1994
Piracy has been more recently described online in relation to what?	peer-to-peer file sharing networks
When you are accused theft as it relates to copyright law, you are exercising exclusive rights without what?	authorization
What have courts said there is a difference between?	copyright infringement and theft
In Dowling v. United States, what did bootleg records NOT constitute?	theft, conversion, or fraud
What is the separate term of art to define misappropriation of copyright?	The Copyright Act
What did the court say was invaded?	certain exclusive rights
What is a possible cause of copyright infringement?	partial compliance
Who did Texas software company Apptricity write software for?	US Army
How many users were paid for in 2004?	500 users
How much was the lawsuit settled for?	US$50 million
Who is an example of a major anti-piracy organization?	the BSA
What did Cara Cusumano say about piracy in 2014 that people want?	immediacy
What had the festival done for the past three years when the statement by Cara Cusumano was made?	used the Internet to present its content
It was the first year of Tribeca featuring a showcase of producers who do what?	work exclusively online
What behavior is not just done by people who want content for free?	downloading
Who made clear the motivations of the filmmakers?	Matt Deaner
Who encourages watching movies at a theater as making money from the film?	Distributors
What is restricted to ensure the largest number of people see a movie at the theater?	immediate access to online
What is restricted unless the film has a traditional theater release?	tax support that a film can receive
What researchers conducted a study in the early part of May 2014?	University of Portsmouth
How many people were part of the study?	6,000
What was the age range of people studied?	seven to 84
Who did downloaders want to help by avoiding studios and record companies?	artists
Even though piracy adds costs to production, what else is offered to developing countries?	main access to media goods
What do the tradeoffs of digital piracy support?	current neglected law enforcements
In what country is the issue of digital infringement social?	China
What is in high demand in this country?	cheap and affordable goods
What does the government of this country provide to businesses that produce content?	connections
What happens when a country bans a movie?	the spread of copied videos and DVDs
Who did documentary maker Ilinca Calugareanu write an article for?	New York Times
What was Irina Margareta Nistor's job in Romania?	a narrator for state TV
What did a visitor give to Nistor?	bootlegged copies of American movies
How many movies did Nistor dub for secret viewings in Romania?	3,000
In the U.S., where is copyright infringement contested?	civil court
Who did MGM studios file a lawsuit against?	Grokster and Streamcast
In 2005, who did the Supreme Court rule in favor of?	MGM
What did P2P file sharing services market themselves as?	venues for acquiring copyrighted movies
What studio's case decision was NOT overturned?	Sony
Who can be assigned a contract to enforce a copyright in some jurisdictions?	third party
What do outside lawyers take infringers to court for?	to identify and exact settlements
What do critics usually call these lawyers?	copyright troll
What do these lawsuits have in the U.S.?	mixed results
When was the first criminal part of copyright law in the U.S. added?	1897
What type of penalty was made for unlawful performances that are willful and for profit?	misdemeanor
What did a criminal infringer do to be prosecuted?	for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain
What must a prosecuter show after the basic elements of infringement?	that defendant willfully infringed
What is the threshold of the number of copies and the value of the works?	very low threshold
When was United States v. LaMacchia contested?	1994
At the time, what infringement could not be prosecuted under criminal copyright law?	non-commercial motives
What loophole did the ruling give rise to?	LaMacchia Loophole
If there is no profit involved, what would happen to criminal charges of fraud?	dismissed
What federal law did the United States pass in 1997, in response to the LaMacchia Loophole?	No Electronic Theft Act
What is the maximum prison time for infringement under the new law?	five years in prison
What is the maximum monetary fine under the new law?	$250,000
How much were statutory damages raised by?	50%
What was the law called that let people be immune to prosecution?	Copyright Act
What directive in 2001 let European Union countries to enact laws that allowed making copies for personal use?	EU Copyright Directive of 2001
What was the directive NOT intended for?	legitimize file-sharing
Compensation to the rights-holder is generally a levy or what else?	a tax on the content itself
What is an example of a country that has no levies collected?	Canada
What are examples of general purpose storage devices?	computer hard drives, portable media players, and phones
What does the personal copying exemption explicitly need?	was obtained legitimately
What is an example of a country that the exemption was assumed?	Netherlands
When did the Court of Justice of the EU make a ruling about distinction?	April 2014
In which country is downloading from a file-sharing network no longer legal?	Netherlands
What is the U.S. law that uses the WIPO Copyright as it's Title I?	DMCA
What is it called when someone intentionally breaks encryption on a movie or game?	"circumvent[ing] a technological measure
Anticircumvention exemptions are generally seen to be be what?	inefficient
What are child safety and public library software used to filter?	website
What includes Internet portals, software and games?	intermediaries
What examples provide virtual information?	interactive forums and comment facilities
News, universities and libraries and archives are examples of what?	aggregators
What is an important element of the World Wide Web?	hyperlinks
Who did early court cases focus on?	Internet service providers
What could be sued for under civil or criminal law?	libel, defamation, or pornography
What was the result of early law on online liability?	varied widely from country to country
When were the first laws of liability passed?	mid-1990s
What law enacted in the U.S. in 1998 gave online intermediaries limited statutory immunity?	Digital Millennium Copyright Act
How is this law characterized in the U.S.?	safe harbor
In the E.U., what are the governing principles for ISP's?	mere conduit
What is it called when intermediaries cannot be given an order by governments to monitor what happens on their services?	no obligation to monitor
What was attempted to be amended in 2009 to support new ways to prevent copyright infringement?	European Telecoms Package
What do certain type of intermediaries NOT do?	host or transmit infringing content
What protocol do intermediaries use that include a torrent tracker?	BitTorrent
What do Torrent files NOT contain?	copyrighted content
What is a torrent site that uses magnet links to share peer-to-peer?	The Pirate Bay
What is the legal status of secondary liability?	subject of ongoing litigation
What makes peer-to-peer networks different than other online providers?	decentralised structure
What was the initial purpose of the BitTorrent protocol?	distribute large files effectively
What are the reasons for more complex network configurations in peer-to-peer software development?	to avoid liability as intermediaries
What does Article 10 of the Berne Convention call certain uses that limit copyright?	fair practice
Where are minimal quotations commonly used?	journalism and education
What categories do works that would normally be considered infringing fall into?	fair use or fair dealing
What do these statutes represent?	principles underlying many earlier judicial precedents
What are these statutes essential to?	freedom of speech
What is it called when a law disallows copyright owners from denying a license for certain uses?	compulsory licensing
What are two examples of this licensing?	compilations and live performances of music
What happens if a royalty is paid to the copyright owner or representative?	no infringement occurs
What country has fair dealing laws?	Canada
Where was the Public Relations Consultants Association Ltd v Newspaper Licensing Agency Ltd case contested?	Europe
Whose copyright were news aggregators infringing on?	news generators
When was the second part of the case decided?	June 2014
What did the courts rule was NOT infringement?	temporary web cache of consumers
If a work must include a degree of originality, what else must it contain to be protected?	in a fixed medium
What is NOT protected?	The idea itself
What makes a copy of an original idea infringing?	it copies that person's unique, tangible expression of the idea
What limitation is only embodied in case law, rather than statues?	what qualifies as original
Which country needs a similarity requirement to determine if the work was copied?	U.S.
What test might courts require software to pass to determine if it is protected or infringing?	Abstraction-Filtration-Comparison test
What has software case law determined about R&D, effort and expense put into creation?	doesn't affect copyright protection
Who takes different steps to prevent infringement?	Corporations and legislatures
What is the major focus of these steps?	preventing or reducing digital methods of infringement
What kinds of legislation are a strategy for preventing infringement?	civil & criminal
What does DRM and anti-circumvention laws do?	limit the amount of control consumers have
How have governments lowered infringement rates?	narrowing the scope of what is considered infringing
Besides upholding international treaty, what else have countries done specifically to digital works and uses?	enacted compulsory licensing laws
What law in the US considers digital transmission of audio to be licensed if certain conditions are met?	DMCA
What else does this law provide to service providers?	safe harbor
Who does this law target?	providers whose users are suspected of copyright infringement
What do some copyright owners do by reducing the scope of infringement?	employing relatively permissive, "open" licensing
What must a user do under a prepared license?	adhere to certain conditions
Besides lessening the burden on the courts, what is the effect of this license?	reducing infringement
What is an example of a free software license?	GNU General Public License
What works do Creative Commons licenses generally apply to?	visual and literary works
How long is a movie typically released in theaters for?	approximately 16 and a half weeks
During this time, how are digital versions of the movie transported in data storage devices?	by couriers
What can be done to a movie to only allow it to show at certain times?	encrypted
What can be coded to films to find the source of illegal copies?	Anti-Piracy marks can be added
What inferior versions of movies are available for piracy during the theatrical run of a movie called?	"cams" made by video recordings of the movie screens
What 2010 body found how difficult it is to accurately report the financial impact of infringement?	U.S. GAO
How many commanly cited estimates did the body report on?	three
What did the FBI use as a source?	estimate
What report said the data could not be substantiated or traced to a reliable data source?	GAO report
Who did a study in 2007 regarding the five countries with the highest rates of software piracy?	BSA and International Data Corporation
Which country had the lowest rate of software piracy?	U.S.
Which region had the highest loss?	Asia-Pacific
How much did the EU lose?	$12,383,000
Where was the lowest amount of U.S. dollars lost?	Middle East/Africa region
Who else did the BSA issues a report in 2011 with?	IDC and Ipsos Public Affairs
What percentage of people admit to pirating software?	57 percent
What was the commercial value of pirated software in 2011?	US$63.4 billion
What nation had the higest piracy rate?	Zimbabwe
What was the U.S.'s piracy rate?	19%
Who reported that piracy took $12.5 billion from the U.S. economy?	Institute for Policy Innovation
How much money have retailers lost?	over a billion dollars
How many production-level jobs were lost?	46,000
Which government lost $422 million in potential tax money?	U.S. government
What book did Professor Aram Sinnreich write?	The Piracy Crusade
What did Sinnreich call the link between lower music sales and peer-to-peer sharing site?	tenuous
What was the industry going through?	artificial expansion
What does he call the merging of economic, political and technological forces that drove the music industry?	perfect bubble
What was the estimated total value of pirated software in 2010?	$59 billion
Who accounted for over half the total?	emerging markets
 What did the established markets receive for the first time?	less PC shipments than emerging economies
What country has the highest retail value of software?	China
What percentage of software in Africa is illegal?	83 percent
On what peninsula is Greece located?	Balkan peninsula
How many geographic regions make up Greece?	nine
How long is the coastline of Greece?	8,498 mi
How many of Greece's islands are inhabited?	227
What is the tallest mountain in Greece?	Mount Olympus
Who was the first person to bring all of Greece together?	Philip of Macedon
Who was the son of Philip of Macedon?	Alexander the Great
Greece came part of what empire in the 2nd century BC?	Rome
When was the Greek Orthodox Church started?	first century AD
What year is considered the beginning of modern Greece?	1830
Greece is one of the members who founded what organization?	United Nations
Which political philosophy does Greece follow?	democratic
When did Greece join the Eurozone?	2001
Greece has the biggest economic power where?	Balkans
What is one of the names the Greeks call their country?	Hellas
What is the official name of Greece?	Hellenic Republic
From what word is Greece derived?	Graecia
What does the work Graecia mean?	the land of the Greeks
Who called Greece Graecia?	Romans
Humans in the Balkans have been dated to what year?	270,000 BC
Evidence of the earliest humans were found in what subterranean formation?	Petralona cave
The Franchthi cave has evidence of what 3 ancient eras?	Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic
Greece has evidence of Stone Age people during what time period?	7th millennium BC
What activity led to Greece having some of the earliest Stone Age settlements?	farming
Ancient Greece is considered to be where what was born?	Western civilization
What was the last civilization to rule Greece?	Mycenaean
The Mycenaean civilization deteriorated in what time period?	1200 BC
Around 1200 BC, what was the fall of the regional civilizations called?	Bronze Age collapse
What is the time period called from which no writing can be found.	Greek Dark Ages
When did the Olympic Game begin?	776 BC
The literary work "The Odyssey:, was written by whom?	Homer
What year is considered the be the last of the Dark Ages?	776 BC
Magna Graecia is Latin for what term?	Greater Greece
In what year is Democracy considered to have begun?	508 BC
In 500 BC, Greece was ruled over by who?	Persian Empire
What battle did Persia lose in 490 BC?	Battle of Marathon
The Spartans made their last stand at what battle location?	Thermopylae
The battles between the Greeks and Persians are known as what?	Greco-Persian Wars
After the Persians left Europe, the time period that followed was called what?	Golden Age of Athens
The war from 431-404 BC is known as what?	Peloponnesian War
What often caused strife between Greek states?	Lack of political unity
Who won the Peloponnesian war?	Sparta
Who eventually brought the Greeks together?	Macedon
Who was the first leader of a unified Greece?	Phillip II
Who controlled Macedon after Alexander died?	the Antigonid dynasty
The Roman Empire became more controlling of Greece starting in what year?	200 BC
Macedon lost what war in 168 BC?	Battle of Pydna
In what year did Greece become a part of Rome?	146 BC
The end of Antigonid rule began in what year?	168 BC
What Roman Emperor became the ruler of all of Greece?	Augustus
What saying by Horace became famous?	"Greece, although captured, took its wild conqueror captive"
What famous Roman figure visited Greece in 66 AD?	Nero
What famous Grecian author inspired later authors and their works?	Homer
What hero of Rome studied Greek philosophy and science?	Scipio Africanus
In what language was the first book of the Bible conceived?	Greek
What religion did early Greece practice?	paganism
The Olympics were last held in ancient Greece in what year?	393
Paganism was forbidden by what Roman Emperor?	Theodosius I
Which Emperor closed the school in Athens?	Justinian
When did the Slavs invade Greece?	7th century
What invading marauders caused havoc in the Balkans during the 4th century.	Barbarian
After the Slav's invaded, the government only controlled what areas?	islands and coastal areas
The Byzantine began taking back territories during the last of what century?	8th
The Byzantine had control over most of Greece in what century?	9th
Slavs that were caught were moved to what area?	Asia Minor
A stable Greece allowed it to have what?	strong economic growth
Greece was split into sections of different rulers in what year?	1204
Constantinople once again became a capital  in what year?	1261
The Grecian islands in the 14th century were under the control of who?	Genoese and Venetian
In 1261 Constantinople was the capital for which empire?	Byzantine
A lot of Greece was lost by whom in the 14th century?	Byzantine Empire
At the start of 15th century, the biggest Byzantine city was what?	Thessaloniki
Constantinople was overcome by who in 1453?	the Ottomans
The Ottomans controlled mainland Greece in what year?	1460
Who had a large impact on the Renaissance?	Byzantine Greek scholars
The Ottomans took which islands from the Venetians?	Cyprus and Crete
In what year were the Ionian Islands captured by the French?	1797
Who gained control of the Ionian Islands in 1809?	United Kingdom
The Ottomans controlled what islands b y the end of the 15th century?	Aegean islands
The Venetians had control of which two islands in the 15th century?	Cyprus and Crete
Due to discrimination, some Christians converted to what religion?	Islam
What is the name of one of the churches that ruled over the Christian population?	Greek Orthodox Church
Which empire thought that Christians were inferior?	Ottoman Empire
The Battle of of Lepanto took place in what year?	1571
The Morean War took place during which years?	1684–1699
The Orlov Revolt took place in what year?	1770
The Orlov Revolt was for which nation's supposed benefit?	Russian
During battles of the 1600 and 1700's, the Greeks usually fought against who?	Ottoman Empire
Greece's Dark Ages is thought of as what time periods?	16th and 17th centuries
Greek merchants ruled the trade industry in which century?	18th
Who published Greek documents that espoused Greek independence?	Rigas Feraios
Rigas Feraios was killed by Ottoman assassins in what year?	1798
In which year did the Society of Friends begin?	1814
The Society of Friends goal was what?	liberating Greece
The Society of Friends was also known by what name?	Filiki Eteria
The first of several revolutions began when?	6 March 1821
War was started with the Ottomans when?	17 March 1821
In what year did the Greeks take Tripolitsa?	1821
Who was the leader of the Greek revolt in 1821?	Theodoros Kolokotronis
The Greek and Ottoman Navy fought in which waters?	Aegean Sea
Turks and Egyptians attacked Greek island in what years?	1822 and 1824
How many successive civil wars occurred between Greek clans?	two
Who did Egypt send to Greece with an Army?	Ibrahim Pasha
Ibrahim Pasha landed with his army when?	February 1825
In what year did Missolonghi fall to the Egyptians?	1826
Ibrahim Pasha finally faced defeat where?	Mani
What three countries sent their Navy to Greece?	Russia, the United Kingdom and France
Which navy won the battle of Hydra?	the allied fleet
Which navy's ships intended to attack Hydra?	Ottoman–Egyptian
The recognition of a Greek state happened in what year?	1830
What was the agreement that recognized Greece as a state called?	London Protocol
In 1893 Greece announced what?	public insolvency
To pay off the people they owed, Greece had to accept what?	International Financial Control authority
The people of Greece that had higher education saw what dialect as beneath them?	Demotic
A hot topic in Greece in the 19th century was what?	language
War between Russia and the Ottomans began in what year?	1877
A revolt lasted for 3 years on which Greek island?	Crete
In what year did the Treaty of Berlin occur?	1881
What divided Greece into two political groups?	the country's foreign policy
How many governments did Greece have in World War 1?	two
When Greece entered World War I, on whose side did they fight?	the Triple Entente
Greece's multiple governments came together in what year?	1917
What years did the Greco-Turkish war take place?	1919–1922
After World War I, Greece wanted to expand into what area?	Asia Minor
An exchange of people between Greece and Turkey took place under what agreement?	Treaty of Lausanne
In what time period did the genocide of Greeks take place?	1914-1922
Who caused the deaths of thousands of Greeks?	Ottoman and Turkish officials
How many Greek refugees came from Turkey?	1.5 million
Pontian and Cappadocian refugees were relocated to where?	Macedonian mountains
Demotic speaking Greek refugees were placed where?	Greek Isles and cities
The Greek monarchy was reestablished by who?	Premier Georgios Kondylis
In 1924, what was established?	Second Hellenic Republic
Who became the Greek leader in 1935?	Premier Georgios Kondylis
In what year did a coup take place and new dictatorship form?	1936
The Greek Monarchy was abolished when?	1924
How many Greeks starved due to Nazi occupation?	Over 100,000
In what years did thousands of Greeks starve?	1941–1942
What civilian group in Greece fought against Nazi occupation?	The Greek Resistance
How many Greek citizens were displace due to Nazi retaliations?	almost 1,000,000
Who founded the PASOK?	Andreas Papandreou
What does PASOK stand for?	Panhellenic Socialist Movement
In what year did Greece rejoin NATO?	1980
Earthquakes hit both Greece and Turkey in which year?	1999
Greece joined what later became the European Union when?	1 January 1981
Greece is where geographically?	Southern Europe
Where does Greece's coastline place in world rankings?	11th longest
How long is Greece's coastline?	8,498 mi
How tall is Mount Olympus?	9,573 ft
The tallest mountain in the Pindus range is what?	Mt. Smolikas
How tall is Mt. Smolikas?	8,652 ft
Where does the Pindus mountain range end?	the island of Crete
Islands in the Aegean Sea are formed by what?	underwater mountains
What is the deepest gorge in the world?	Vikos Gorge
The Saronic gulf is near what city?	Athens
The Cyclade islands are located where?	central part of the Aegean Sea
The North Aegean islands are located where?	west coast of Turkey
The Dodecanese islands are located where?	between Crete and Turkey
The Sporades islands are located where?	off the coast of northeast Euboea
Greece's climate is mainly of what type?	Mediterranean
Greece's climate is affected by what range?	Pindus mountain range
East of the Pindus mountains, the climate is drier due to what?	a rain shadow effect
The climate of Greece in the Northwest is known as what?	Alpine climate
The Alpine climate of Greece gets what kind of weather?	heavy snowfalls
Northern Greece inland features what type of climate?	temperate
It has been known to snow even in what Southern city?	Athens
Greece's plant distribution belongs to what?	the Boreal Kingdom
How many ecoregions occupies Greece?	six
The Pindus and Balkan ecoregions are known as what?	mixed forests
The Crete ecoregion is known as what?	Mediterranean forests
The Illyrian ecoregion is known as what?	deciduous forests
What type of republic is Greece?	unitary parliamentary
What is the title of the leader of Greece?	President of the Republic
Who elects the president of Greece?	the Parliament
How long does the President of Greece serve?	five-year term
Greece's constitution has how many articles?	120
The constitution was amended to reduce the President's power in what year?	1986
Who has the most political power in Greece?	Prime Minister
The Prime Minister is elected by who?	the Parliament
Who formally names the Prime Minister?	President of the Republic
How many members are in Greece's parliament?	300
How often are elections help for parliament?	every four years
Parliamentary statutes are put into effect by who?	President of the Republic
In May 2012, who started the parliamentary elections?	The coalition government
What led to the loss of power of traditional Greek parties?	their support on the politics of Mnimonio and the austerity measures
Who became the second major party after the elections?	The leftist party of SYRIZA
What caused the second election of 2012?	No party could form a sustainable government
What was the demographic result of the second election?	coalition government composed of New Democracy (29%), PASOK (12%) and Democratic Left (6%) parties.
Who is the head for Greece's foreign policy?	Minister for Foreign Affairs
Who is the present Minister of Foreign Affairs?	Nikos Kotzias
The goal of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is what?	represent Greece before other states and international organizations
Greece is though of as what kind of power?	a middle power
Greece has how much strategic importance?	significant
What type of military service does Greece require?	universal compulsory
Can females be drafted into the military?	females are exempted from conscription
What is the length of military service required of men?	nine months
At what age might men required to serve in the National Guard?	18 and 60
How many regions exist in Greece since 2011?	thirteen
How many municipalities exist in Greece?	325
What went into effect on January 1, 2011?	Kallikratis programme reform
What is the one autonomous area in Greece?	Mount Athos
Where is Mount Athos located?	borders the region of Central Macedonia
The largest sector of Greece's economy is what?	the service sector
What percentage of the economy is Greece's service sector?	85.0%
What percentage of the economy does agriculture comprise?	3.0%
How many tourist visited Greece in 2009?	14.9 million
Greece holds what rank among most visited countries in the world?	16th
Greece's economy is what size?	larger than all the Balkan economies combined
What rank does Greece hold as an Albania investor?	number-two
What rank does Greece hold as an Bulgaria investor?	number-three
Greece is the largest foreign investor of what area?	Republic of Macedonia
OTE is known as what?	Greek telecommunications company
What classification does the Greek economy hold?	advanced and high-income
Greece help found what economic organizations?	Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)
When was Greece accepted into the European Union?	19 June 2000
When did Greece start using the Euro as its currency?	January 2001
What was Greece's former currency?	the Greek drachma
What was used to hide debts?	swaps
Swaps allow Greece to do what?	spend beyond their means
What other country hid its debt through swaps?	Italy
What can legally be overcome with swaps?	The Maastricht rules
Where is the Greek Merchant Navy ranked?	4th worldwide
How many ships does the Greek Merchant Navy have?	3,150
Where does Greece rank in number of tankers?	first
Where does most of Greece's visitors come from?	the European continent
How many of Greece's visitors are from Europe?	12.7 million
What is the single nation with the most visitors?	United Kingdom
Which part of Greece is the most visited?	Central Macedonia
Northern Greece gets how many visitors?	6.5 million
How long is the Greek railway system?	1,600 mi
A current railway upgrade plans to do what?	double lines
A new modern rail connection has been made between which two cities?	Athens and Thessaloniki
In recent years, what usage has risen dramatically?	3G/4G mobile internet
How much did internet usage increase in one year?	340%
Where does Greece rank in the work with communications?	among the top 30 countries
Greece has been a member of what agency since 2005?	European Space Agency (ESA)
Greece and ESA signed their first agreement in what year?	1994
When did /Greece apply for ESA membership?	2003
Greece is ranked as what member of ESA?	sixteenth
Greece became a full ESA member when?	16 March 2005
What Greek scientist invented the Pap test?	Georgios Papanikolaou
Who found the tomb of Philip II of Macedon?	Manolis Andronikos
What Greek won the 2007 Turing award?	Joseph Sifakis
What Greek won the 2002 Knuth prize?	Christos Papadimitriou
What Greek won the 2005 Knuth prize?	Mihalis Yannakakis
What is the religious minority in Greece?	Muslim
The Muslim minority is mostly located in what city?	Thrace
Immigrants from Albania are usually what religion?	Muslim
Greek Muslims were in a population exchange with what country?	Turkey
How many Greek natural citizens are Catholic?	50,000
How many Roman Catholic immigrants are in Greece?	200,000
How many Protestants live in Greece?	30,000
How many churches does the biggest Protestant denomination have?	120
How many Jehovah's Witnesses are in Greece?	28,874
When did the Greek Language dispute take place?	During the 19th and 20th centuries
When was the Greek language Katharevousa created?	the 19th century
Which language was considered the language of the people?	Dimotiki
What language was made the only official variation in 1976?	Dimotiki
From which language did Dimotiki evolve?	Byzantine Greek
What is the language spoken by most Greeks?	Greek
Greeks who speak the Pontic dialect came from where?	Asia Minor
Which Greek dialect is barely spoken currently?	Cappadocian
From which language did the Tsakonian language derive?	Doric Greek
Muslims make up how much of the Greek population?	0.95%
Minority languages have been reduce due to what?	assimilation with the Greek-speaking majority
In parts of the country, Romani is spoken by who?	Christian Roma
What groups are called Vlachs?	Aromanians and Moglenites
Where are Slavic speaking groups generally found?	northern Greek borders
Macedonia has how many Slavic speakers?	200,000 to 400,000
Greece's Jewish community spoke what language traditionally?	Ladino
The Urums are known to speak what dialect?	Greco-Turkic
In 2001, how many Greek residents were not citizens?	762,191
In 2001, what was the population percentage of resident non-citizens?	7%
From where did most non-citizen residents come?	Eastern European countries
What is the total Albanian population in Greece?	600,000
Greece is a major destination for what to enter?	illegal immigrants
In 2012, most illegal immigrants entered Greece from where?	Afghanistan
Immigrants arriving by sea are coming mainly for what reason?	Syrian civil war
How many immigrants arrived by sea in 2015?	856,723
What percentage of sea immigrants asked for asylum in Greece?	8%
Paideia is also known as what?	education
The first European university was created in what city?	Constantinople
When was Constantinople taken over by the Ottoman?	1453
Greece's secondary education has how many school types?	two
What is one type of Greece's secondary education?	unified upper secondary schools
What type of institute does secondary education also include?	vocational training
What type of education do vocational institutes provide?	formal but unclassified
What is one of the education sectors according to the Framework Law?	University sector
How long do the Tertiary institute courses last?	2 to 3 years
Examinations for Tertiary institutes are given at what grade level?	third grade
At what age may students be admitted to Hellenic university through lottery?	over twenty-two years old
What is the oldest university in the eastern Mediterranean?	The Capodistrian University of Athens
What kind of health care exists in Greece?	universal health care
Where does Greece's health care system rank out of 191 countries surveyed?	14th
What rank does Greece hold for the condition of mothers and new born babies?	19th
In 2010, how many hospitals were there in Greece?	138
In 2011, plans were made to decrease hospitals to how many?	77
Where did Greece culture begin?	Mycenaean Greece
What do historians credit with revitalizing Greek culture?	Greek War of Independence
The evolution of Grecian culture has evolved over what time period?	thousands of years
Greeks were pioneers in many scientific fields that require what?	systematic thought
What did Greece's political philosophy affect?	Modern democracies
Ancient Greece was the birthplace of what?	Western culture
Modern Greek theater began when?	early 19th century
Modern Greek theater was influenced by what?	Heptanesean theatre and melodrama
What was the first theater of modern Greece?	Nobile Teatro di San Giacomo di Corfù
What was the first Greek opera?	The Parliamentary Candidate
Who created the first opera, The Parliamentary Candidate?	Spyridon Xyndas
Which disciple of Plato was considered the most important?	Aristotle of Stagira
Plato's philosophy attempted to explain life from what standpoint?	the supra-sensual
Aristotle's philosophy was based from what standpoint?	experience
What is the name of two schools of philosophy?	Skepticism and Neoplatonism
What are two works by Homer?	Iliad and the Odyssey
During what time period did Homer write the Iliad and the Odyssey?	800 BC
Who were two major lyrical poets?	Sappho and Pindar
When did drama first begin in history?	Classical era
What year did cinema first appear in Greece?	1896
In what year did the first cinema theater open in Greece?	1907
In 1914 what was the name of the film company that was founded?	Asty Films
What was the first Greek feature film?	Golfo
Who directed the first nude scene in Greek film history?	Orestis Laskos
Which time period is considered the golden age of Greek cinema?	1950s and early 1960s
During the Greek cinema golden age, how many films were made each year?	More than sixty
Who directed the movie O Drakos in 1956?	Nikos Koundouros
Who directed the movie Stella in 1955?	Cacoyannis
Who wrote the movie Stella in 1955?	Kampanellis
What other famous movie did Cacoyannis direct?	Zorba the Greek
Who starred in the movie Zorba the Greek?	Anthony Quinn
What film won the Palme d'Or at Cannes in 1998?	Eternity and a Day
Who directed the film Eternity and a Day?	Theo Angelopoulos
What is a characteristic of the Mediterranean diet?	Greek cuisine
The epitome of the Mediterranean diet are dishes from where?	Crete
What food can be traced back to ancient Greece?	skordalia
What is added to almost every dish in Greece?	Olive oil
What is the name of one sweet dessert in Greece?	galaktoboureko
What is one of the flavorings commonly used in Greek Mediterranean food?	oregano
What is one of the sweet spices Greeks like to use with meat?	cinnamon
Greek vocal music goes back how far in history?	ancient times
What is one of the musical instruments used in ancient Greece?	lyre
During ancient Greece, at what age were boys taught music?	six
The Eastern Orthodox Church resisted what change in music?	polyphony
Music without any form of instrumental accompaniment is known as what?	monophonic
One type of music derived from Byzantine is called what?	Byzantine chant
What are the two cycles of the Greek folk song?	akritic and klephtic
Between what centuries was the akritic cycle of Greek song created?	9th and 10th
Which Greek song cycle expresses the life of the Greeks?	klephtic
What was the forerunner of Greek modern song?	Heptanesean kantádhes
Athenian serenades were most successful during what time period?	1870–1930
What influenced Greek modern song considerably?	Heptanesean kantádhes
What music began associated with the lower classes?	Rebetiko
Rebetiko was the base of what?	laïkó
One of the leading performers of the laiko genre is who?	Apostolos Kaldaras
Through which islands was European classical music introduced to the Greeks?	Ionian
When was the first school of modern Greek classical music formed?	1815
Who is considered the Greek National School of Music founder?	Manolis Kalomiris
Who is one 20th century Greek composers that has had an impact on modern classical music?	Iannis Xenakis
What is one of the famous movies Greek composers has scored?	Zorba the Greek
Who is one of the Greek composers known for their film scores?	Yanni
Who is one of the notable Greek opera singers in the 20th century?	Maria Callas
How many time has Greece participated in the Eurovision Song Contest?	35
In what year did Greece win the Eurovision Song Contest?	2005
What Greek song won the Eurovision Song Contest in 2005?	My Number One
Who performed the song, My Number One, in the 2005 Eurovision Song Contest?	Elena Paparizou
Where was the 51st Eurovision Song Contest held?	Athens
Greece is the birthplace of what sporting event?	Olympic Games
The first Olympic games was recorded in what year?	776 BC
Where were the first Olympic games in 775 BC held?	Olympia
During the Olympic parade of nations, who is always called first?	Greece
What ranking does Greece hold in all-time summer Olympics gold medal count?	32nd
What ranking did the Greek national football team hold in 2014.	12th
Greek was crowned the European champions in what event?	Euro 2004
How many national teams have won the UEFA European Championship?	nine
How many teams are in the Greek Super League?	eighteen
Who is one of the most successful teams in the Greek Super League?	Olympiacos
The Greek national basketball team held what world ranking in 2012?	4th
The Greek national basketball in 2012 held what ranking in Europe?	2nd
How many times has the Greek national basketball team won the European championship?	twice
Who did the Greek basketball team beat in the 2006 FIBA World Championship?	Team USA
What is the name of Greece's top domestic basketball league?	A1 Ethniki
In what year did Greece's women's water polo team win the World Championship?	2011
Which medal did Greece's women's water polo team win at the 2004 Summer Olympics?	silver
Which medal did Greece's women's water polo team win at the 2005 World League?	gold
The Greece Men's water polo team held which world ranking in 2005?	third
Who did Greece Men's water polo team beat in the 2005 World Aquatics Championships?	Croatia
The Greek Men's national volleyball team has won how many bronze medals?	two
The Greek Men's national volleyball team came in what place in the Olympic games?	5th
What Greek volleyball club is the most successful in the country?	Olympiacos
Who is the only Greek volleyball club to win European titles?	Olympiacos
Where did the mythical Greek gods live?	Mount Olympus
The main gods of ancient Greece known as the what?	Dodekatheon
The most important of the ancient gods was who?	Zeus
Zeus was married to which goddess?	Hera
Who was Zeus's sister?	Hera
Greek law says that every Sunday of the year is a what?	holiday
How many official Greek mandatory public holidays are there?	four
How many Greek national holidays are there each year?	eleven
What is one of the holidays regulated by law as optional?	Labour Day
in 2012, what was the amount of the bailout?	$173 billion
How much debt to creditors was Greece suppose to reduce?	53%
In what year did Greece realize a budget surplus?	2013
How much did Greece make from a bond sale in 2014?	€3 billion
After how many years did it take for Greece to gain back growth in the economy?	six years
Alexander III was the son of whom?	Phillip II
Alexander III invaded what empire after his father was killed?	Persian
What year did Alexander III Invade Persia?	334 BC
The Persian Empire was conquered by Alexander by what year?	330 BC
In which year did Alexander III die?	323 BC
Which specific mammal is the largest today?	blue whale
Which mammal is the smallest?	bumblebee bat
Which four legged mammal is considered to be the smartest?	elephants
About how small is the average bumble bee bat?	30–40 mm (1.2–1.6 in)
Who coined the name "mammal" from the scientific name Mammalia?	Carl Linnaeus
What do all female mammals have in common when they have children?	nurse their young with milk
How many mammals were known to exist up to 2006?	5,416
How many families did mammals consist of as of 2006?	153 families
How many species of mammals do not have a live birth?	five species
Which group consist of the most mammals?	Rodentia
Which group do humans belong too?	Primates
Which group do cats and dogs belong too?	Carnivora
From which time period did birds and reptiles began to appear from?	Carboniferous period
When did non-avian dinosaurs become extinct?	66 million years ago
Which early mammalian ancestor produced non-mammalian Dimetroden?	sphenacodont pelycosaurs
Who defined mammalian as the crown group mammals?	Timothy Rowe
By Rowe's definition, when did he start to exclude animals?	Triassic
Which group do marsupials and placentals belong to?	therian mammals
Which group are Ambondro's closely related to?	monotremes
Which two groups are closely related to therian mammals?	Amphilestes and Amphitherium
How many years do momotremes and therian mammals go back?	167 million years
About what year do synapsid date back to?	225 Ma
Who wrote the "Principles of Classification and a Classification of Mammals?	George Gaylord Simpson
Simpson laid the systematics of mammal origins and was taught universally up until the end of what century?	20th
Which new concept has greatly taken over Simpsons much debated theoretical systematization?	cladistics
In 1997 who revised the classification of mammals?	Malcolm C. McKenna and Susan K. Bell
Where did the two authors work together as paleontologist?	American Museum of Natural History
From whom did McKenna inherit the project from?	Simpson
Through Molecular studies, what was used to suggest new relationships among mammal families?	DNA analysis
During these Molecular studies, which three major groups of mammals shared a common ancestors from the Cretaceous period?	Afrotheria, Xenarthra, and Boreoeutheria
Afrotheria,Xenartha, and Boreoeutheria deprives from which two lineages?	Euarchontoglires and Laurasiatheria
From which period did the first known amniotes arise from?	Carboniferous
From which group did amniotes descendents of?	reptiliomorph amphibious tetrapods
Two important Amniotes  lineages became distinct, what was the name of that distinction?	the synapsids
Sauropsids would later include which other animals into its group?	turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodilians, dinosaurs and birds
What is a distinct trait of Synapsids?	single hole (temporal fenestra) low on each side of the skull
From which dinosaur group did Therapsids descend from?	pelycosaurs
Around what time did Therapsids become the dominant land animal?	265 million years ago
At which group did Therapsids end with?	probainognathian cynodonts
What was the name of extinction level event that ended the dominance of the carnivores among therapsids?	Permian–Triassic
During which time period did archosaurs begin to take over as the dominant carnivore?	Triassic
Which three groups did the early Triassic period consist of?	crocodylomorphs, the pterosaurs, and the dinosaurs
During the Jurassic period which group came out as the most dominate for both carnivores and herbivores?	dinosaurs
What is the oldest know fossil among the Eutheria group?	shrewlike Juramaia sinensis
How long ago does oldest know fossil date back to?	160 million years ago
In what time period did early animals share some features with marsupials?	125 million years ago
Which lineage were some of these early marsupial features were lost?	placental
How long ago did most placental orders diverge from?	100 to 85 million years ago
Which two major time periods did placentals appear?	Eocene through the Miocene
Which time period did early highly undisputed fossils of placental mammals appear?	Paleocene
When is the earliest know primate thought to had exist?	55 million years ago
How much did the first primate weigh?	20–30 grams (0.7–1.1 ounce)
When is it believed that the earliest know hair was said to exist?	164 million years ago
When was it suggested that foramina premaxillae could contain the first know hairs?	1950s
Which major time period were these suggested hairs from?	Jurassic
Which group of animal has a lower body temperature that marsupials and placentals?	monotremes
Which time period is suggested that cynodonts had a high metabolic rate?	Triassic
Why is it necessary for smaller animals to have an insulative covering?	maintenance of a high and stable body temperature
When air enters both the oral and nasal cavities, where does it flow through?	larynx, trachea and bronchi
Increasing pressure on the diaphragm thus increasing air output more frequently is usually caused by?	exercise
A result of air being sucked into or blown out of the lung thats moving its pressure gradient is referred to?	bellows lung
Where did the term Bellows Lung come from?	blacksmith's bellows
What is the typical thickness of the epidermis?	10 to 30 cells thick
What is the main function of the epidermis?	to provide a waterproof layer
How much more thicker is the dermis to the epidermis?	15 to 40 times thicker
What is the dermis mainly consist of?	bony structures and blood vessels
What does the Hyperdermis consist of?	adipose tissue
What is another name used for mammalian hair?	pelage
Which color of hair is most common among mammalian taxa?	Light-dark color
Besides Camouflage being a reason for having certain hair colors, what other reasons have been discovered?	sexual selection, communication, and physiological processes
What is the common mammal group that gives birth to live young?	viviparous
How many species of mammals lay eggs?	five species
Which mammal that has the bill of a duck lays eggs?	platypus
The platypus has sex chromosomes more related to which other non-mammal?	chicken
Which sub class are most viviparous mammals in?	Theria
Viviparous mammals today are in which two main infraclasses?	marsupial and placental
What is present in all non-placental mammals?	epipubic bones
Which part is larger relative to the brain in primates?	cerebrum
Which non-primate has the ability to learn and perform new task?	Rats
Mammals with smaller brains tend to be in what class in the food chain?	prey
To be able to maintain a constant body temperature, what do mammals need to maintain?	nutritious and plentiful diet
What does a omnivore imply?	eats both prey and plants
What do the majority of mammals under 18 oz eat?	insects
What determines a mammals diet type?	The size
What is the name given when zones of gradation exits?	clines
What is the given name of a lion and tiger hybrid?	liger
What is the marketed name given in the meat industry when you involve a european or indian domestic cattle mixed with an American bison?	Beefalo
What is the given name of a offspring from two different animals?	hybrid
The Spanish Armada suffered a defeat in what year?	1588
What was the first year the London merchants were granted permission to sail the Indina Ocean?	1589
Who did the London merchants petition to get permission to sail the Indian Ocean?	Queen Elizabeth I
how many ships sailed Torbay?	three
who returned to england after sailing around Cape Comorin?	Edward Bonventure
 in this paragraph the Spanish Armada suffered a defeat in what year?	1588
how many ships sailed  from Torbay?	three
What did the Queen give them for suceeding?	a Royal Charter
What was the name of the Royal Charter?	Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading with the East Indies
What did this charter give them?	a monopoly on trade with all countries east of the Cape of Good Hope and west of the Straits of Magellan
Who commanded the the voyage between 1601 and 1603?	Sir James Lancaster
Who led the third voyage?	General William Keeling
Who commanded the the voyage between 1601 and 1603?	Sir James Lancaster
Who commanded the second  voyage in 1604?	Sir Henry Middleton
What was the rank of the person who commanded the third voyage?	General
what was the name of the company that traded with East Indies?	Merchants of London
how many years did the Merchants of London has a monoploy on trade?	fifteen
Where was the first factory in south India?	town of Machilipatnam on the Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal
In 1609 the charter was renewed for what period of time?	indefinite
what would happen if the trade did not return a profit for at least 3 years?	charter would cease to be in force
why did King James I licence other trading companies from england?	high profits
Where was the first factory in south India?	Machilipatnam
What initially moved King James 1 to grant subsidiary licences to other trading companies in England?	high profits
While the company was  giving an indefinite period when renewing thier charter what clause did King james use to make sure the company stayed profitable	the charter would cease to be in force if the trade turned unprofitable for three consecutive years.
how many years did the Merchants of London have to become profitabl when their charter was renewed by king james?	three consecutive years
when was the bombay trading post established?	1668
who commanded the factories owned by the East India company?	factor or master merchant and governor
who helped join the East India company in a joint attack on Portuguese and Spanish ships?	Dutch United East India Company
how many employees were in the factories in India?	90
what were the walled forts of Fort William in Bengal, Fort St George in Madras and Bombay castle before they were forts?	major factories
who helped join the East India company in a joint attack on Portuguese and Spanish ships?	Dutch
by 1647 how many factories did the company have?	23
the east india company changed how it did business by moving from  focusing on royal patronage to what type of business?	commercial trading operations
when the east india company move to commercial  trading what  company did they surpass?	Portuguese Estado da Índia
The top or most important factories had what  physical feature in  common?	walled forts
Name the wars that was caused by the intense competition between the EIC and Dutch East India Company	Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th and 18th centuries
what caused the Dutch to expand thier spice trade in the malaccan straits?	ousting the Portuguese in 1640–41
How important were cotton, silk, indigo dye,saltpetre and tea to the company?	The company's mainstay business
what year did the Mughal emperor completely wave customs duities?	1717
who did the Mughal emperor extend hospitality to?	English traders
what region was made available to english traders by  the Mughal emperor?	Bengal
in 1717 what made the region of Bengal  so appealing to English traders?	waived customs duties
why type of  dye was one of the East  India company's main  products?	indigo dye
Who were the main competitors that  had a monopoly of the spice trade in Malaccan?	The Dutch
what wars was a result of the competitive nature of the mulitple trading companies in the 17th and 18th centuries?	Anglo-Dutch Wars
How much treasure was taken by pirates?	£50,000 to £60,000
waht was the name of largest ship operating in the Indian ocean?	Ganj-i-Sawai,
how often did the Indian fleet voyage to Mocha?	annual
What type of Captain was Henry Every?	English pirate
What was the name of the Pirate on board the Fancy who later teamed up with five other pirate captiains to attack the Indian Fleet?	Captain Henry Every
When did  Captain Henry Every attack the Indian Fleet	1695
Where was the indian Fleet headed when they were attacked by Captain Every	Mocha
What was reportly the largest ship in the Mughal Convoy in the Indian Fleet?	Ganj-i-Sawai
how many gold and silver pieces were on the Ganj-i-Sawai?	500,000
What was the total value of cargo on the Ganj-i-Sawai?	£325,000 and £600,000
who was on the Ganji-i-Sawai according to the EIC?	a relative of the Grand Mughal
what is the Ganj-i-Sawai know for?	richest ship ever taken by pirates
What was reportedly the high value of of loot that the Ganj-i-Sawai had?	£600,000
as times has past what has become know as the richest ship ever taken by Pirates?	Ganj-i-Sawai
how many gold and silver pieces were on the Ganj-i-Sawai?	500,000 gold and silver pieces
Who caused the first worldwide manhunt?	Every
What was the total bounty offered for Captian Every after England heard that the Ganj-i-Sawai was  taken	£1,000
Captian Every was the focus of the first recorded worldwide.... what in history?	manhunt
What was the name of the  council that offered part of the bounty for Captain Every	Privy Council
Who took 4 East India ship and arrested their officers as a reaction to the attack on Ganj-i-Sawai	Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb
Due to the danger the Captian Every put the trading abiliy of East India Company what  Act would he never qualify for that other pirate were later offered?	Acts of Grace
enlish firms were allow to trade with  India unless?	prohibited by act of parliament
what was the name of the  second East india company that ended up runnig parallel to the first?	English Company Trading to the East Indies
The two parallel East India company  had a power stuggle in both  England and?	India
In what  year was the Act passed the made a parallel East India company?	1698
The stock holder of the Original East India  company rasied how much money  to  try and deal with the parallel East India Company?	£315,000
in 1720 what % of  import goods were from India?	15%
Who passed the acts that effected the profits of East india company	Parliament
Who argued against parliament on the trade issue that involded the East India Company	company lobby
The British Government agrree to extend the licensed for the company in India until 1793 for how much money	£1 million
What was the big fear that brought the British government to extend the deadline for the trade license for the company?	monetary consequences of a war
What was the name of the  war that lasted from 1756 to 1763?	Seven Years' War
The seven years' war  changed the British state focus from trade to protecting  europe and defending  which colonies?	colonies in North America
in what year did the Seven years' war	1763
what was the type of  Revolution that allowed Britian to move ahead of its European rivals?	Industrial Revolution
What was the name of William Henry Pyne book from 1808?	The Microcosm of London
What became the largest player in the British global market according to William Henry Pyne?	The company
What country was the home to the Industrial Revolution?	Britain
The industrial revoluntion gave raise to the access to what type of material?	raw
Due to agreed debt what 250 tons  product was first permitted to be exported by the company after the seven years' war?	saltpetre
in what year did Banks  negotiate between the king and the East india company for 700 tons of saltpetre?	1673
Saltpetre was used for what people, specifically the need for this product had people overlooking untaxed sales?	armed forces
One of the governor of the company said that he would rather have saltpetre then____ in its raw form?	salt
how much did 700 tons of saltpetre go for in the contract negotiated by Banks in 1673	£37,000
what year was the Treaty of Paris agreed on?	1763
The treaty of Paris return how many esablishment captured by the British?	five
The Treaty of Paris prevented France from keeping troops in what location?	Bengal
in 1793 what war was the french involded in even without a big  military presences?	French Revolutionary Wars
what is the acronym for the East india company?	EIC
In 1750 how many regular troops did the  EIC  have?	3000
in 1778 most of the troops that the EIC had were from where?	Indian
what year did the EIC have 26,000 troops in their employ	1763
how many Anglo Maratha wars were there?	three
What empire ended after the three Anglo- Maratha wars?	Maratha empire
With the formal end of Maratha Empire the EIC created a  firm hold on what country?	India
Was the Maratha Empire ended quick or gradual?	gradual
what country  took over the fort of Ahmmadnagar that then became part of the cause for the Maratha Emprie to end?	British
What was the name of EIC military company?	Addiscombe Military Seminary
what was the  highest rank an Indian could be in the EIC army	Subadar-Major
While in EIC army  the British officer outrank the indian officer they  both promoted based on?	seniority
in 1838 what was the sentence for smuggling opium in to China?	death penalty
in 1838 about how many tone of  Opium was smuggled in to China per year?	1,400 tons
what was the title of the person people were sent to if they were  caught smuggling Opium in to China?	Special Imperial Commissioner
when did the first Opium war start?	1839
Britian faught side by side with what country  in the second Opium war?	France
EIC was leased back the land they held in British India by what part of the British goverment?	Parliament
How much did the parliament lease British india for to EIC (the lease was for two years)?	£40,000
The British Government  created a how many man council in Calcutta?	five
How many council member weres allow to be from the EIC?	two
By having 3 members on the council in Calcutta from the British Government they were always able to ____ the two EIC members?	outvote
in British indian a jugde had to come from where to oversee the  legal system?	British
The highest ranking persons title in British india is?	The Governor General
The highest ranking person's title in British india is?	Governor General
Did EIC have a monopoly over the governement or trade in british india	trade
Other then money what did it cost the EIC to have the control in trade the had in British India	export a minimum quantity of goods yearly to Britain
The name of the Act that was a failure in creating bourdaries for the Crown and the EIC for being subjective?	Pitt's Act
after the Pitt act the Crown began to focus more on _______ efforts of its people in it territories?	humanitarian
what was the  name of the person who was once a large  shareholder in EIC and talk to the issues with with the new Regulating bill in 1793?	Edmund Burke
Was the new Regulating Bill of 1793 passed or defeated?	defeated
by the middle of the 19th century how much of the worlds population was effected by EIC and it trade?	fifth
To EIC in Malaya what state  was the forth most improtant settlement?	Penang
during this time the relationship change between Britian and the EIC. the EIC became more of a what to the crown??	regularised subsidiary
when EIC become more like a regularised subsidiary  did they have greater or less accountability to the Crown	greater accountability
What Lord helped the EIC through his politics, take control over all of india?	Lord Wellesley
in the past the deals under the crown strained the finances of EIC  now as they expained throughout India what was the biggest strain on their finances	the expense of wars
what treaty  allowed the Eic in to the then kingdom of nepal?	Sugauli Treaty
While the EIc took over all of India there were, two exception the first being Punjab, what was the Second?	Sindh
EIC reached out to parliament for help with finances. this lead to which Act?	Charter Act of 1813
Where were the EIC  headquarters located?	London
What was the name of EIC headquartes?	East India House
between 1638 and 1648 what street was EIC headquarters on?	Leadenhall Street
Where was the EIC headquarters moved to after  1648?	Craven House
What building now sits where the EIC headquarters last sat?	the Lloyd's building
in 1803 was act of parliament supported by  EIC?	promoted by the East India Company
the 1803 act created what dock program?	East India Dock Company
The goal of the East in dock company was  first what?	aim of establishing a new set of docks (the East India Docks) primarily for the use of ships trading with India
What was the name of the export dock of the EIC after the 1803 act?	Brunswick Dock
in 1838 what company did the  East india dock company merge with?	West India Dock Company
in the period of  1600 what Canton cross repesented England	St George's Cross
after the act of  1707  what was the second  cross added to the Canton for great britian	St Andrew's cross
IN what year did the canton become a flag with crosses on it and not just a cross?	1707
in wat year did  ireland join with great britian offically?	1800
What is the name of the union that Ireland and Great Britian created when they came together?	United Kingdom
What does DEUS INDICAT mean?	God Indicates
what type of flowers did Gules use?	roses
after the DEUS INDICAT what type of sea animals were pictured?	sea lions
in the above quote how many ship and masts were indicated?	three
What animal was listed as part of the four fleur-de-lis in the above quote	leopard
The EIC Arms feature what king of the jungle animal on it?	lion
in the arms of EIC what was the lion holding in his forepaws	crown
how many lions were on the EIC arms	Two
what year did the EIC arms include both france and england?	1698
During what war Did the EIC get letter of marque for its vessels	Napoleonic Wars
Why did EIC want tthe letters of marque most?	should they have the opportunity to take a prize, they could do so without being guilty of piracy
With out the letters of marque what wepon did  they have to protect themself that was a part of their ship?	cannon
The Earl of Mornington would have how many ___ guns on the EIc ships?	six
What was the most notable naval victory EIC  had?	Battle of Pulo Aura
what general played the biggest role in the capture of the seven Dutch East Indiamen?	General Goddard
Where were the 7 Dutch Easteast indiamen capture?	off St Helena
In 1797 how did the  Woodford  get to safety without firing one bullet?	bluffing
in 1797 who was the captian of the Woodford that is first listed of the 5 captians?	Captain Charles Lennox
Where are the records of the EIC housed today?	British Library in London
Where are the British government's records houseed today?	The National Archives at Kew
Are you able to search most of the records online today?	The catalogue is searchable online in the Access to Archives catalogues
Which state is not a member of the Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)?	East Timor
Which country is considering joining the Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)?	Papua New Guinea
What was Southeast Asia commonly known as before?	East Indies
What type of issue exist over the territories in the South China sea?	Sovereignty
Which country is Christmas Island governed by?	Australia
Which country has stated that it might join ASEAN?	Papua New Guinea
What does ASEAN mean?	Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Which two Islands governed by Australia are considered a part of ASEAN?	Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Which state is not a member of ASEAN?	East Timor
What country is Nicobar Island apart of?	India
What part of New Guinea is also considered to be apart of Southeast Asia?	Papua New Guinea
What island in India is also considered to be geographically a part of Southeast Asia besides Nicobar Island?	Andaman
What is the Seven Sister States of India geographically apart of?	Southeast Asia
Which Island is geographically considered a part of Southeast Asia?	The Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Which countries are culturally a part of Southeast Asia?	Eastern Bangladesh and the Seven Sister States of India
Which islands were a part of the Spanish East Indies?	Papua New Guinea, is sometimes included so are Palau, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands
How many years ago did Homo sapiens reached the Southeast Asia region?	45,000 years ago
Which type of people might have migrated from Taiwan into Southeast Asia?	Austronesian people
What country did the Austronesian people arrived at first?	Indonesia
Which group became extinct after living in the region for about 12,000 years?	Homo floresiensis
When did the Austronesian people arrive in indonesia?	2000 BC
Where did the Austronesian people settle down in Indonesia?	coastal areas
Which people became extinct after the Homosapiens arrived?	Homo floresiensis
How long ago did the Homo floresiensis live before they became extinct?	12,000 years ago
Which kingdom during 200 BCE that is located in Java and Sumatra exist?	Jawa Dwipa Hindu
What nationality were the traders that came to archipelago?	Indian
What country did the merchants the traders did trade with come from?	China
How long did the Indian influence date back to for the Malay-speaking world?	3rd century BCE
What religion besides Hinduism became well established in the Malay Peninsula?	Buddhism
Which Hindu kingdom existed around 200 BCE?	Jawa Dwipa
Which traders came to the archipelago for trade?	Indian traders
The Java Dwipa kingdom was well-known for what?	abundant forest and maritime products
Which religions were well established in the Malay peninsula by the beginning of the 1st century CE?	Hinduism and Buddhism
Apart from the Indian traders, who else discovered the Malay peninsula for trade?	merchants from China
Which Indianised kingdom was based in eastern java?	The Majapahit Empire
Which ruler reigned between 1350 to 1389?	Hayam Wuruk
How long did the Majapahit Empire last?	1293 to around 1500
How far did the Majapahit Empire's influence stretch?	parts of Sulawesi, Maluku, and some areas of western New Guinea and the Philippines
Which kingdom did the Chola navy attack during the 11th century?	Srivijaya kingdom
What was the capital of Srivijaya kingdom?	Sangrama Vijayatungavarman
Which king of Kedah converted to Islam in the year 1267?	Phra Ong Mahawangsa
Name an Indonesian Islamic scholar who lived from 1908-1981?	Hamka
Which Chinese admiral was related to the development of Islam in Indonesia & Malaya?	Admiral Zheng He
In the 15th century, the ruler of which port embraced Islam?	Malacca Sultanate
Where did the traders from Yemen settle?	Indonesia, Singapore, and Malaysia
Which missionary helped to spread Islam?	The Sufi missionaries
Which religion proved a positive force among the ruling & trading classes?	Islam
The western colonies were invaded by whom during World War II?	Imperial Japan
According to the UN report, what was the count of people who perished due to famine?	4 to 10 million
What violent acts did the Showa regime commit?	Manila massacre and the implementation of a system of forced labour
Who defeated Japan during the World War II?	The Allied powers
Name the largest country in Southeast Asia.	Indonesia
Geologically what is Indonesia's region most active for?	volcanically active
What is the climate like in Southeast Asia?	tropical–hot and humid
Which region has the 2nd largest rain-forest in the world?	Southeast Asia
Which regions in Southeast Asia see cold winter with snow?	Northern Vietnam and the Myanmar Himalayas
What causes additional rainfall during monsoon?	The tropical rain belt
What causes the Southeast Asian regions to experience wet & dry seasons?	seasonal shift in winds or monsoon
Name the line that splits the Indonesian Archipelago?	Wallace Line
What region comprises of the Wallacea?	The islands between Java/Borneo and Papua
Which country has created a system of national parks & preserves?	Indonesia
Which species in Java face extinction?	Javan rhinoceros
What is the concern in Southeast Asian region due to development & population expansion?	impact of human activity on the region's environment.
Where on Earth is the highest marine activity recorded?	Raja Ampat
Which areas are composed as the Coral Triangle?	Indonesia, Philippines, and Papua New Guinea.
Which area is called the heart of the world's Coral reef biodiversity?	The Coral Triangle
Name the largest species of fish in the world.	The whale shark
What percentage of plant and animal species extinction is predicted in the 21st century?	40%
Where has haze been predominant?	Sumatra and Borneo
How is a haze formed?	caused by "slash and burn" activities
What agreement has the Southeast Asian countries signed to combat haze pollution?	Transboundary Haze Pollution
When did the 2 worst haze pollution occur in Southeast Asia?	1997 and 2006
Name some important commodities that originated in Southeast asian region?	pepper, ginger, cloves, and nutmeg
Who developed the spice trade initially?	Indian and Arab merchants
Which European traders moved into Indonesia?	Dutch
The origin of which community can be traced to the 16th century?	Chinese
The rise of Chinese population saw a rapid increase during which revolution?	Communist Revolution
When did the Chinese revolution start in Southeast Asia?	1949
What is the name of the network through which the Chinese communities were connected with?	the bamboo network
What reserves are abundant in Southeast Asia?	Oil reserves
Which region manufactures textiles, heavy industrial products & high-tech electronic goods?	Vietnam
Of the Southeast Asian countries, which country has  the largest economy?	Indonesia
Which sector is the Southeast Asia heavily dependent on?	agriculture
Of the Southeast Asian countries, which one's key economic development is based on Tourism?	Cambodia
According to which entity can tourism be a tremendous development tool & means to preserving the cultural diversity of the planet?	UNESCO
Who was the regional leader in tourism in 1995?	Singapore
From 2000, Cambodia has surpassed other ASEAN countries in generating GDP on which sector?	tourism
What is the approximate area of Southeast Asia?	4,000,000 km2
Among the Southeast Asian countries, which one is densely populated?	Indonesia
Which Island in Southeast Asia is densely populated?	Java
name the largest ethnic group in Southeast Asia.	the Javanese
Which ethnic groups dominate in Indonesia?	Javanese and Sundanese
The Tagalog, Cebuano,Ilocano & Hiligaynon groups are significant within which country in Southeast Asia?	Philippines
The ethnic groups Malays & Chinese are predominant in which country?	Malaysia
Which religion is widely practiced in Southeast Asia?	Islam
Among the Southeast Asian countries, which country has the most populous Muslims among them?	Indonesia
Roman Catholic population is predominant in which Asian country?	Philippines
What percentage of the population in Southeast Asia practice Islam?	40%
East Timor is predominantly catholic due to which European rule's history?	Portuguese
Which is Asia's largest christian nation?	Philippines
Garuda is the national symbol of which 2 countries?	Thailand and Indonesia
Which religion is dominant on the Island of Bali?	Hinduism
Name the most Muslim populous region in Asia?	Indonesia
What is practiced in Vietnam?	Vietnam
Arabia has a strong influence in which Southeast Asian country?	Brunei
Singapore & Vietnam shows which influence predominantly?	Chinese
The Indian influence is evident in which country through the Tamil migrants?	Singapore
Where did the Southeast Asians introduce their dance?	into their court
Which dance was famous for strong feet & hand movements?	Apsara Dance
The Khmer Empire was influenced by what?	Indian Hinduism
What were the favorite forms of entertainment in Southeast Asia?	Puppetry and shadow plays
Art & literature in Southeast Asia is influenced by which religion?	Hinduism
The UNESCO has recognized which show as a Masterpiece of Oral & Intangible Heritage of Humanity	The wayang kulit
Which country despite converting to Islam has retained many forms of Hindu practices, culture, art & literature?	Indonesia
What did the Khmer & Indonesian classical arts depict of?	the life of the gods
Which group brought with them the Chinese artistic traditions to the Southeast Asian country?	Tai
According to the Southeast Asian people, the life of the Gods were comparable to what?	life of the peoples themselves
Which form of writing extended before the invention of paper?	palm leaf
What were the alphabets of Southeast Asia?	abugidas
What other forms of writing materials were used during this period?	copperplate scrolls
In what direction were the writings on a palm leaf?	longitudinally
The sections of the palm leafs were bound by what material?	twine
What is professional wrestling abbreviated as?	pro wrestling
What are a couple of styles of combat based on?	classical wrestling, catch wrestling
Who are live events held by?	touring promotions
What is professional wrestling?	an athletic form of entertainment based on a portrayal of a combat sport
What kind of style does wrestling show?	it portrays a unique style of combat based on a combination of adopted styles, which include classical wrestling
How are the actions conducted?	the combative actions and reactions are executed in special manners designed to both protect from, yet simulate, pain
What are the fan encouraged to do?	willing suspension of disbelief for the audience
How is the end result of the match planned out?	match outcomes is choreographed
What do wrestlers have to say about the realness or fakeness of the matches?	will often directly acknowledge the fictional nature of the spectacle.
What part of the world has wrestling become less popular in?	it has greatly declined in Europe
Where did wrestling originally come from?	Originating as a popular form of entertainment in 19th-century Europe
Where was wrestling later showcased in North America?	later as a sideshow exhibition in North American traveling carnivals and vaudeville halls
What is wrestling now thought to be?	is now considered a multimillion-dollar entertainment industry
What did television do for wrestling?	The advent of television gave professional wrestling a new outlet
Where does the money made from wrestling come from?	live event ticket sales, network television broadcasts, pay-per-view broadcasts, personal appearances by performers, branded merchandise and home video
Where large places are some of the major wrestling shows held at?	Madison Square Garden, as well as football stadiums
What has the internet been utilized for in wrestling?	to air web shows, internet pay-per-views (iPPVs) or on-demand content
what wrestling shows occur yearly?	WrestleMania, SummerSlam, Royal Rumble, and formerly Bash at the Beach, Halloween Havoc and Starrcade
In which decade did wrestling start becoming very popular?	Particularly since the 1950s, pro wrestling events have frequently been responsible for sellout crowds at large arenas
What is one popular wrestling film?	2008 film The Wrestler
What award was The Wrestler nominated for?	several Oscar nominations
What are the names of a couple wrestling documentaries?	Beyond the Mat directed by Barry W. Blaustein, and Wrestling with Shadows
Where does wrestling keep coming up as a subject?	in both academia and the media
What is the biggest wrestling company?	the United States-based WWE
Which companies are some of WWE's competition?	WCW and Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW)
What are some other major wrestling companies?	Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) and Ring of Honor (ROH), Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL) and Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (AAA)
What is the name of a Japanese wrestling company?	Japanese New Japan Pro Wrestling (NJPW)
Who confessed that wrestling was not competition?	prominent figures in the wrestling business (including WWE owner Vince McMahon)
How have people reacted to the revelation that wrestling is purely entertainment?	This public reveal has garnered mixed reactions from the wrestling community
How do many U.S. states handle wrestling?	many U.S. states still regulate professional wrestling as they do other professional competitive sports
How do the wrestlers treat the audience?	The audience is recognized and acknowledged by the performers as spectators
How does the audience being acknowledged by the wrestlers impact the show?	This leads to a high level of audience participation
What can the audience do during a show?	their reactions can dictate how the performance unfolds.
What kind of conflict can arise during a show?	Often, individual matches will be part of a longer storyline conflict between "babyfaces" (often shortened to just "faces") and "heels".
Which of the wrestlers are the bad guys?	"heels" (the "bad guys")
Who wins in a wrestling match?	the first side to achieve the majority number of pinfalls, submissions, or countouts being the winner.
How could a wrestler win in the past?	Historically, matches were wrestled to 3 falls ("best 2 out of 3") or 5 falls ("best 3 out of 5").
How can a wrestler win in modern times?	The standard for modern matches is one fall.
In what instance will a match be declared a draw?	if not enough falls are scored by the end of the time limit, the match is declared a draw.
How long can a title match be?	title matches can go for up to one hour
What happens when a wrestler has a fall against them?	is forced out of the match
What kind of rules does a poly-sided match usually have?	no holds barred rules
What usually happens when two or more wrestlers are involved?	to simply go one fall, with the one scoring the fall, regardless of who they scored it against, being the winner.
How can a champion lose a championship?	does not have to be pinned or involved in the decision to lose the championship.
What is the most common of the special matches?	The most common of these is the ladder match
What must the wrestlers do in a ladder match?	In the basic ladder match, the wrestlers or teams of wrestlers must climb a ladder to obtain a prize that is hoisted above the ring.
How does one win a ladder match?	the wrestler or team of wrestlers must try to incapacitate each other long enough for one wrestler to climb the ladder and secure that prize for their team.
What is a common prize in a ladder match?	championship belt
How many wrestlers are in a standard battle royal match?	20-30 wrestlers
What determines how the referee acts?	their actions are also frequently scripted for dramatic effect
What is a common rule about referees?	The most basic rule is that an action must be seen by a referee to be declared for a fall or disqualification.
What are referees called?	Most referees are unnamed and essentially anonymous, though the WWE has let their officials reveal their names.
How can a wrestler gain an advantage by using a referee?	distracting or disabling the referee in order to perform some ostensibly illegal maneuver on their opponent.
What kind of referees are occasionally used?	Special guest referees may be used from time to time;
What are famous referees directed to do?	often scripted to dispense with the appearance of neutrality and use their influence to unfairly influence the outcome of the match for added dramatic impact. F
What do special referees have the ability to do?	They also have the power to eject from ringside any of the heel wrestler's entourage/stable, who may otherwise interfere with the match.
What material is within a wrestling ring?	an elevated square canvas mat with posts on each corner.
What is around the ring?	Three horizontal ropes or cables surround the ring,
What is used for protection in the ring?	For safety, the ropes are padded at the turnbuckles and cushioned mats surround the floor outside the ring.
What does a "tag" entail?	Two wrestlers must make physical contact (typically palm-to-palm) in order to transfer this legal status.
What are two things that can be done with tagging?	"tagging out" and "tagging in".
How long does a wrestler have to leave the ring once they are tagged out?	has a 5-second count to leave the ring
How much time does a wrestler have once they tag in?	the one tagging in can enter the ring at any time, resulting in heels legally double-teaming a face.
What happens in a fatal four-way?	four wrestlers, each for themselves, fight in a match, but only two wrestlers can be in the match at any given time.
In a fatal four-way, who can make tags?	tags can be made between any two wrestlers.
What was the most common type of match before the fatal four-way?	four-corner match
Why are tagging rules made?	this is done to give wrestlers a break from the action
At what point can a count be started?	any time that a wrestler's shoulders are down (both shoulders touching the mat), back-first and any part of the opponent's body is lying over the wrestler.
What can happen to an arrogant wrestler?	a cocky wrestler may place their foot gently on the opponent's body, prompting a three-count from the referee.
What might a partially conscious wrestler do?	wrestler who is half-conscious may simply drape an arm over an opponent
What happens during a pin attempt?	one wrestler is covering another prone, back-first wrestler can be considered a pin attempt
What is a common offensive move to break a pin attack?	a stomp to the back and an elbow to the back of the head
What can the referee consider a pin attempt to be, even if the attacker is still on top of the pinned wrester?	broken
What is a pinning method that isn't allowed?	using the ropes for leverage and hooking the opponent's clothing,
How often are illegal pinning methods seen by the referee?	Such pins as these are rarely seen by the referee
What are the illegal pinning methods called?	cheating
Can illegal pinning methods result in being disqualified?	it is rare for such an attempt to result in a disqualification
What happens with an illegal pinning move when it is seen by a referee?	results in nullification of the pin attempt,
How can a wrestler willingly submit?	verbally informing the referee
What is the move called where all limbs are incapicitated?	Mexican Surfboard
What can a wrestler do to show a willing submission?	tapping out
Several well-known wrestlers were famous for winning with a move called what?	submission
What move did Tazz make popular?	Tazzmission
What legitimate sport related to wrestling began to become popular?	mixed martial arts
Many holds will leave what body parts free?	an arm or leg
When must contact stop between wrestlers?	if any part of the body is touching, or underneath, the ropes,
How might a wrestler attempt to break a submission hold?	by deliberately grabbing the bottom ropes
How long does a wrestler have to get themselves free of the hold?	the count of five
What happens if the wrestler doesn't break a hold?	they are disqualified
How does a referee check for a knockout?	a referee will wave their hand in front of the wrestler's face
What happens if all wrestlers are down?	If nobody rises to their feet by the end of the count, the match is ruled a draw.
If all wrestlers are down, how long do they have to rise?	usually ten seconds, twenty in Japan
What kind of match has to end in a knockout?	Last Man Standing
What is another name for a knockout?	referee stoppage
In what case can a referee choose to end the match?	when they or official ring physician decides that a wrestler cannot safely continue the match
What is one reason that a wrestler may not be able to continue?	an injury
Why couldn't Shawn Michaels defend himself?	due to excessive blood loss and impaired vision
Where did Chris Jericho win in 2008?	Great American Bash
What are a couple other ways to write countout?	"count-out" or "count out"
What happens during a countout?	when a wrestler is out of the ring long enough for the referee to count to ten
What will some wrestlers do to take advantage of the countout?	sliding in the ring, and immediately sliding back out
What is the trick of sliding in and then back out of the ring called?	breaking the count.
What else is disqualification called?	DQ
How can a wrestler be disqualified?	wrestler violates the match's rules, thus losing automatically
In what case can a countout and disqualification be done away with entirely?	must be declared a "no holds barred" match, a "street fight" or some other term
What are the usual reasons for an automatic disqualification?	low blows, weapon usage, interference, or assaulting the referee
What must the referee do to rule the match at an end via disqualification?	must see the violation with their own eyes
In what case can a referee's decision be overturned?	Dusty finishes
What is it called when a ref is knocked out?	ref bump
What can wrestlers do when a ref is out?	free to violate rules
What is one way a match can end?	in a draw
What is one reason a draw can result?	if both opponents are simultaneously disqualified
What usually happens regarding a championship during a draw?	may not change hands in the event of a draw
What is another name for a one hour draw?	"Broadway"
What kind of injury can cause a no contest ruling?	debilitating
How is no contest related to a draw, if at all?	state separate and distinct from a draw
How can a referee's action result in a no contest?	loss of referee's control over the match
What is the point of a match?	to excite and entertain the audience
Higher attendance and more ticket sales can be the result of what?	Heightened interest
Though the contest is staged, what can garner more interest from the crowd?	dramatic emphasis
What do most wrestlers do, as far as how they act?	portray character roles
What is the name of one wrestler who acts like a cartoonish character?	Doink the Clown
The Rock's persona is seen as what?	exaggerated versions of the performer's real life personality
What is common apparel in lucha libre?	masks
What is the popular way for wrestlers to refer to one another?	by their stage names/characters
Other than a company, who else can own a character?	the wrestler
How can a wrestler get around changing their ring name entirely?	typeset change
What else might a wrestler do to obtain their ring name?	change their legal name
What are other names for a protagonist?	babyface, or "the good guy"
What will an antagonist usually do?	break rules
What is a wrestler whose persona is somewhere between the two norms called?	tweener
Who is generally the audience favorite?	protagonist
What might a character do with their persona?	turn
What did Hulk Hogan become?	heel
Who has the most turns in the WWE?	Vince McMahon
Who is a wrestler who never turned?	Ricky Steamboat
What did Stone Cold Steve Austin start as?	heel
What was The Rock's original character?	Rocky Maivia
What did Steve Austin become?	one of the greatest antiheroes
Who helps out a wrestler with poor speaking abilities?	manager
What sometimes happens with managers?	become major personalities
Who else can perform the manager role?	"valet
Who might participate in a love triangle story?	an appealing female
What do most matches have?	a story analogous to a scene in a play or film, or an episode of a serial drama:
What is it called when the protagonist loses?	tragedy
What do they call it when a protagonist wins?	triumph
What can be wagered in a match?	from a character's own hair to their job with the promotion
What are rivalries often called?	feuds
How long might a feud last?	a few days up to multiple decades
How long did the feud between Ric Flair and Ricky Steamboat last?	late 1970s into the early 1990s
What is an example of a popular feud?	Stone Cold Steve Austin vs. Mr. McMahon
What supernatural things have been portrayed in matches?	magic, curses, the undead and Satanic imagery
What can be used in a wrestling story?	anything that can be used as an element of drama
What romantic drama might be used in a story?	love triangles and marriage
What happens behind the scenes of a match?	bookers in a company will place the title on the most accomplished performer,
Who else do bookers focus on?	those the bookers believe will generate fan interest
Who might they use a lower ranked title on?	performers who show potential
What does it show when a wrestler has many titles?	ability to maintain audience interest and/or a wrestler's ability to perform in the ring
What can be important in a wrestler's career?	championship accomplishments
What do those accomplishments indicate?	performance ability and drawing power
What has Ric Flair accomplished?	multiple world heavyweight championship reigns spanning over three decades
Who held 10 records at once?	Último Dragón
What occurs when a wrestler enters the ring?	accompanied by music
What does the music playing indicate?	the wrestler's personality
What typically happens when a match is won?	victor's theme music is usually also played
What happens with many wrestlers?	have music and lyrics specially written for their ring entrance
Who won the women's title in 1937?	Mildred Burke
What did Mildred Burke form?	Women's Wrestling Association
What year did June Byers retire?	1964
What year did Mildred Burke retire?	1956
What is professional female wrestling called in Japan?	joshi puroresu
What is the short form for joshi puroresu?	joshi puro
What was the major joshi organization for two decades?	Japan Women's Pro-Wrestling
What does a mixed tag team consist of?	a male and female on each team
When did mixed tag teams start?	1980s
What happened when a tag was made?	the other team had to automatically switch their legal wrestler as well
What isn't uncommon in lucha libre?	cheap-shots and male-female attacks
When were intergender singles bouts fought on a national scale?	1990s
Who was the first woman to hold a belt that wasn't exclusive to women?	Chyna
What was the record before it was stripped?	478 days
Who stripped the previous record?	Brooke Hogan
A wrestler may have a small person called what?	mini me
What else can a little person do in the match?	become valets
Who was Dave Finlay often helped by?	Hornswoggle
What else did Finlay do with his little person?	occasionally threw him at his opponent(s
What happened to Hornswoggle?	given a run with the Cruiserweight Championship
Who are the most well-known wrestling bears?	Ginger, Victor, Hercules and Terrible Ted
What animal has been a part of wrestling for a long time?	bears
What condition are bears usually brought in in?	declawed and muzzled
Who do the bears fight?	audience members
How many states have banned bear wrestling as of 2006?	20
What does every match have?	a story
Who is usually included in stories?	characters like faces and heels
What are the possibly outcomes of a story?	It is a "triumph" if the face wins, while it is a "tragedy" if the heel wins.
What is Doink the Clown's persona like?	melodramatic, slapstick and fantastical
What might happen during interviews?	heels may even attack the faces
How do characters differ in Mexican wrestling?	they are less emphasized
How are Mexican wrestlers different?	more agile and perform more aerial maneuvers
What do American wrestlers depend on?	rely on power moves and strikes to subdue their opponents
What else is lucha libre known for?	tag team wrestling matches
How does lucha libre's tag team matches differ?	often made up of three members, instead of two as is common in the U.S
How is Japanese wrestling similar to American?	outcome of the matches remains predetermined
How does Japanese wrestling differ?	the form of the psychology and presentation of the sport
What does Japanese wrestling combine?	hard hitting martial arts strikes with shoot style submission holds
What is the emphasis placed on in Japanese wrestling?	Fighting Spirit
What is a common background for a Japanese wrestler?	legitimate martial arts
What is expected of newcomers?	to "pay their dues" for a few years by working in lower-profile promotions
What were wrestlers expected to do for decades?	keep the illusions of wrestling's legitimacy alive
How did wrestlers have to act in public?	acting in character
What effects can wrestling have on the wrestlers?	devastating effects the job can have on one's life and health
What do the fans have?	their own subculture
What sometimes happens with fandoms?	overlap
Where have some wrestlers appeared?	comic book conventions
What do some fans like to do?	collecting tapes of wrestling shows
What has the internet done for wrestling fans?	exposure to worldwide variations of wrestling
Many companies who handle wrestling footage have been founded since what decade?	1990s
What companies did WWF purchase in 2001?	WCW and ECW
What kind of notoriety have wrestlers achieved?	fame within mainstream society
What did the Rock 'n' Wrestling Connection do?	combined wrestling with MTV
What are some other career paths wrestlers embarked on?	music, acting, writing, business, politics or public speaking
Name a popular series of boxing films?	Rocky series
Who is the movie The Baron about?	Baron von Raschke
What episode of South Park dealt with wrestling?	"W.T.F."
What critically acclaimed wrestling film came out in 2008?	The Wrestler
Many of what forms of entertainment have portrayed wrestlers?	television shows and films
What other areas has wrestling garnered interest from?	academic study and journalistic criticism
What areas of study is wrestling talked about in?	theatre, sociology, performance, and media
What did Heather Levi write?	an ethnography about the culture of lucha libre
What college has a course about the cultural impact of wrestling?	Massachusetts Institute of Technology
What impact did the revelation of wrestling being "fixed" have?	looked down on as a cheap entertainment for the uneducated working class
When was Roland Barthes book published?	1957
What did Barthes believe a wrestler give the audience?	a theatrical spectacle
What was the name of Roland Barthes' essay?	"The World of Wrestling"
What is wrestling sometimes called?	"soap opera for males"
What is wrestling to people during a peaceful time?	vicarious outlet for aggression
What role does wrestling fill?	past forms of literature and theatre;
Who has studied the lives of wrestlers?	Documentary filmmakers
When did Beyond the Mat come out?	1999
Who hosts Real Sports?	Bryant Gumbel
Who are a few wrestlers who have had memoirs written about them?	Chris Jericho, Rob Van Dam and Roddy Piper
What are the risks of wrestling?	high chance of injury, and even death
What is the ring commonly made of?	2 by 8 timber planks
What are common injuries in wrestling?	shoulders, knee, back, neck, and rib injuries
What other injuries have been connected with wrestling?	Chronic traumatic encephalopathy and traumatic brain injuries
Chris Benoit was involved in what tragic event?	double-murder suicide case
What does the film's quantum efficiency limit?	sensitivity
What speed of film is produced by insensitive film?	slow film
What leads to lower quality images?	reduction of exposure
What types of film are considered fast films?	Highly sensitive films
What effect does highly sensitive film have on images?	reduced image quality
What consists of 25 pigmented squares touching a plate below a phosphorescent tablet under the light of a burning Magnesium ribbon?	The Warnerke Standard Sensitometer
What do degrees Warnerke measure?	The speed of the emulsion
How much speed is associated with each degree Warnerke?	an increase of 1/3 in speed
What were usual ranges of Warnerke speeds?	between 10° and 25° Warnerke
What does the last exposed number on the plate represent?	'degrees' Warnerke
Who created the Scheinergrade system?	the German astronomer Julius Scheiner
What is the Scheinergrade system used for?	comparing the speeds of plates used for astronomical photography
What do degrees Scheiner indicate?	the speed of a plate
What is the range of Scheiner speeds?	from 1° Sch. to 20° Sch
Approximately how many degrees indicate double the sensitivity?	an increment of 3° Sch
Who developed a device that improved on the shortcomings of Scheiner's invention?	Austrian scientist Josef Maria Eder (1855–1944) and Flemish-born botanist Walter Hecht (de)
What did the Eder-Hecht device measure?	emulsion speeds
What method did manufacturers use much of the time to compare film speeds?	comparing with competing products
What type of measurement methods began to proliferate?	modified semi-Scheiner-based systems
What eliminated comparability?	modified semi-Scheiner-based systems
When was the DIN system established?	January 1934
Who created the DIN system?	Deutsches Institut für Normung
What was proposed at the VIII International Congress of Photography?	a standardized method of sensitometry
Who presented the idea that grew into the DIN?	Robert Luther (de) (1868–1945) and Emanuel Goldberg (1881–1970)
Where was the VIII International Congress of Photography held?	Dresden
What unit was used in the DIN to express speeds?	degrees
How was sensitivity expressed at first in the DIN system?	as a fraction with 'tenths' (for example "18/10° DIN")
When did the degree symbol fall out of use in the DIN system?	with DIN 4512:1961-10
Why did the definition of film speeds change considerably?	to accommodate then-recent changes in the American ASA PH2.5-1960 standard
What happened to film speeds of black-and-white negative film?	would become doubled
What took the place of the German DIN 4512 system?	ISO 6:1974, ISO 2240:1982, and ISO 5800:1979
How is sensitivity shown in the ISO systems?	in linear and logarithmic form as "ISO 100/21°"
What standards did the DIN begin to use?	ISO standards
When were the ISO standards first adopted?	in the 1980s
When were the last ISO standards adopted?	July 2002
What system was used previous to the ASA system?	the system of Weston film speed ratings
Who devised the Weston film speed ratings?	Edward Faraday Weston (1878–1971) and his father Dr. Edward Weston (1850–1936)
What company did Dr. Edward Weston start?	the US-based Weston Electrical Instrument Corporation
When was the Weston model 617 created?	August 1932
Who is credited with creating the film and meter system?	William Nelson Goodwin, Jr.
Which cameras were first of their type to adopt the ASA scale?	The Weston Cadet (model 852 introduced in 1949), Direct Reading (model 853 introduced 1954) and Master III (models 737 and S141.3 introduced in 1956)
What were updated Weston values based on?	the ASA system
How were Weston values changed to ASA values?	by subtracting 1/3 exposure stop
Beginning with which year was the Weston to ASA conversion not necessary?	1956
Until what year did other models use the original Weston scale?	1955
Which company adopted the ASA scale in 1946?	General Electric
Beginning what year were cameras built with the ASA meter?	1946
How did older models convert to ASA scale?	replaceable hoods with ASA scales
How was the ASA scale shown on models built after 1946?	labeled "Exposure Index"
What were recommended film values lined up with after 1946?	they were now aligned to the ASA scale
Who pioneered research that led to the new ANSI values?	Loyd Ancile Jones
What standards were the ANSI developed from?	Weston film speed ratings and General Electric film values
What types of film did the ANSI measure?	black-and-white negative films
When did the ANSI define its new measure?	1943
What were ANSI values often called in the beginning?	American standard speed numbers or ASA exposure-index numbers
In what year were big changes made to the ANSI?	1960
What did the 1960 changes to film speed measures lead to?	effectively doubling the nominal speed of many black-and-white negative films
Which other system were these changes applied to?	the DIN system
In what year was the BS system modified?	1963
What safety factors were done away with beginning with the modifications to the standards?	safety factors against under-exposure
What is the plot from which film speed is derived called?	the D–log H curve or Hurter–Driffield curve
How many regions does the Hurter-Driffield curve have?	five
What is plotted in the Hurter-Driffield curve?	a plot of optical density vs. log of exposure for the film
What is denoted when the specified contrast condition is met?	The exposure Hm, in lux-s
What are the five regions of the Hurter-Driffield curve?	the base + fog, the toe, the linear region, the shoulder, and the overexposed region
What is the effective f-number proportional to?	the ratio between the lens focal length and aperture diameter
What is used to discover the right exposure parameters?	Film speed
What variables help the photographer produce the desired effect?	lighting, film speed, f-number (aperture size), and shutter speed (exposure time)
A lens with a setting of f/1.4 lets how much to hit the focal plane compared with a setting of f/2?	twice as much
In the APEX system, the increment that doubles the exposure is called what?	"stop"
What determines the effect on the emulsion after exposure?	the amount of light energy that reaches the film
In what range of exposures does reciprocity usually work?	between 1/1000 second to 1/2 second
How is the exposure of film changed?	by varying the camera's shutter speed and aperture
How are ways of finding an emulsion's sensitivity possible?	because reciprocity holds
What happens outside the 1/1000 second to 1/second exposure range?	reciprocity failure
What are two examples of films that are marketed with speeds above their true ISO speed?	Ilford Delta 3200 and Kodak T-MAX P3200
What speed of film is the Ilford Delta 3200?	ISO 1000
Which two companies produced E6 films meant for "pushing"?	Kodak and Fuji
What is the base speed of Ektachrome P800/1600 and Fujichrome P1600?	ISO 400
What type of films are Ilford Delta 3200 and Kodak T-MAX P3200?	high-speed black-and-white films
What is another name for an exposure index rating?	ISO setting
How do some camera designs give some EI choices?	by adjusting the sensor's signal gain in the digital realm
Who provides the exposure index rating?	the manufacturer
What are digital photo cameras also called?	digital still cameras
What types of cameras have proven to be much more sensitive to light than film?	Digital cameras
What ISO equivalent speeds can digital cameras obtain?	409,600
What is responsible for these vast increases in speed?	Faster processors, as well as advances in software noise reduction techniques
What is one thing that limited speeds of older digital hardware?	prohibitively time consuming to process
What does the higher speed do for the images produced?	a higher level of refinement
How many techniques are available because of ISO 12232:2006?	five
What techniques did CIPA DC-004 provide?	two new techniques allowing for measurement of JPEG output files
What factors affect the exposure index rating?	the sensor sensitivity, the sensor noise, and the appearance of the resulting image
What does the standard of ISO 12232:2006 specify?	the measurement of light sensitivity of the entire digital camera system and not of individual components
In what year did Kodak start using a different way of characterizing two sensors?	2001
What option does the Recommended Exposure Index give manufacturers?	to specify a camera model’s EI choices arbitrarily
What is another name for multi-zone metering?	pattern metering
What distinction does the Recommended Exposure Index have?	the only technique available under the standard for output formats that are not in the sRGB color space
When was the Recommended Exposure Index introduced?	2006
What is the only technique that can be used when multi-zone metering is used?	Recommended Exposure Index (REI) technique
What year was the Standard Output Sensitivity technique introduced?	2006
What does the Standard Output Sensitivity technique apply to?	sRGB images—typically JPEG
What is the output level measured in?	the sRGB output from the camera
With what type of metering can the Standard Output Sensitivity not be used?	multi-zone metering
With what standard is the automatic exposure control system calibrated?	ISO 2721
Which methods are required by CIPA DC-004?	REI or SOS techniques
In what year did the three EI techniques from ISO 12232:1998 largely stop being used?	approximately 2007 and later
With what cameras can earlier techniques not be used?	cameras that produce images only in JPEG format
What nation's cameras does the CIPA DC-004 apply to?	Japanese
What does the DC-008 change?	the Exif specification
What does the sensor usually determine?	lower limit of the saturation speed
How can the saturation speed be increased?	with the gain of the amplifier between the sensor and the analog-to-digital converter
What is indicated by the factor √2?	there is half a stop of headroom to deal with specular reflections that would appear brighter than a 100% reflecting white surface
What can too much exposure lead to?	clipped or bloomed camera output
Which ratios are employed to calculate noise-based speed?	the 40:1 ("excellent image quality") and the 10:1 ("acceptable image quality") ratio
What is the noise-based speed?	the exposure that will lead to a given signal-to-noise ratio on individual pixels
How are the two ratios found?	subjectively determined based on a resolution of 70 pixels per cm (178 DPI) when viewed at 25 cm (9.8 inch) distance
What is a definition of signal-to-noise ratio?	the standard deviation of a weighted average of the luminance and color of individual pixels
What factors influence the noise-based speed?	the properties of the sensor and somewhat affected by the noise in the electronic gain and AD converter
What is the range for exposure latitude?	from the saturation-based speed to the 10:1 noise-based speed
What is another speed that can also be reported by the camera?	SOS-based speed
When should the noise-based speed be used?	the noise-based speed (40:1) is higher than the saturation-based speed
Why should noise-based speed be rounded down to a lower standard?	exposure according to the lower saturation-based speed would not result in a visibly better image
What does the standard specify?	how speed ratings should be reported by the camera
What measures might the user "ISO" setting correspond to?	the noise-based speed, saturation-based speed, or the specified output sensitivity, or even some made-up number for marketing purposes
What did the 1998 version of ISO 12232 not permit?	measurement of camera output that had lossy compression
What types of sensitivity ratings can be specified by a camera?	REI or SOS
What standards changed what Japanese camera makers have to specify?	CIPA DC-004
In what year was CIPA DC-004 introduced?	2006
How man feet above sea level is Mexico City	7,350
How many municipalities are in Mexico City?	sixteen
What did they used to call the municipalities within Mexico City?	boroughs
What is the Spanish word for Mexico City?	Ciudad de México
How many meters above sea is Mexico City?	2,240
How big is Mexico City's GDP?	US$411 billion
How much bigger is Mexico City's GDP's than Costa Rica's?	five times
What percent of the Mexican GDP is the metropolitan area of Mexico City responsible for?	22%
Which country has about the same size GDP as Mexico city?	Peru
What was the original name of Mexico City?	Tenochtitlan
Who originally built Mexico City?	the Aztecs
When was the Federal District formed?	1824
Where was the city first built?	on an island of Lake Texcoco
When was Mexico City officially founded by the Spanish?	1585
Why can't Mexico City become a state?	Because of a clause in the Mexican Constitution
When did people become able to vote for representation?	1997
What political party controls the Mexico City legislature?	Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD)
What was Mexico City's old affiliation with the nation of Mexico?	Federal District
How are officials elected to the legislature?	popular vote
What was the labor draft called?	the desagüe
Who helped build infrastructure around the lake?	Indians
What was the main problem with being so close to the lake?	flooding
What was a negative of regulating the lake's water height?	changed the habitat for fish and birds
How many Indians helped build the infrastructure?	thousands
What is a common nickname for Mexico City?	The city of palaces
How did mexican nobles spend money in Mexico City?	building churches, supporting charities and building extravagant palatial homes
When did the construction of exuberant houses slow down?	the last half of the 18th century
When did Mexico gain independence?	September 27, 1821
How long was the war?	a decade
What was the first battle of the Mexican Independence war called?	The Battle of Guanajuato
What was the battle cry of the war?	Grito
When did the war begin?	September 16, 1810
Who commanded the U.S. Army in the battle against Mexico City?	Winfield Scott
What war did America and Mexico fight in?	Mexican–American War
When did the battle for Mexico City take place	September 8 to September 15, 1847
What American divisions got into Mexico City?	U.S. Army's 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th
Who led the 4th division?	John A. Quitman
What treaty was signed?	Guadalupe Hidalgo
Who were the future confederate generals?	George E. Pickett and James Longstreet
Who carried the castle?	the 4th Division
When did the castle fall?	on September 13
When was most of the urbanization completed?	by 1908
The extensive modernization started with what?	Many Spanish Colonial style buildings were destroyed
What was built during the modernization?	hospitals, schools, factories and massive public works
What famous street was built during this period of modernization?	Reforma Avenue
What was turned into a monument after the war?	the main dome of Diaz's new senate hall
Who was the man behind the modernization of Mexico City?	Diaz
Why wasn't Diaz's plan completed?	the Mexican Revolution
What was the overall design plan of Mexico City?	Porfirian/French style
What was the main construction project in the Profirian/French style?	Colonia Roma
Who was the leader at the end of the Mexican Revolution?	Plutarco Elias Calles
Where was Alvaro Obregon killed?	in a restaurant near La Bombilla Park in San Ángel
When was Alvaro Obregon killed?	1928
Where were the Zapatist forces from?	Morelos
Who was the third to last leader before the end of the Mexican Revolution?	Adolfo de la Huerta
How many of the industrial jobs in the county were based in Mexico City in the late 20th century?	half
What did the countryside workers make to live in?	shantytowns
What did the shantytowns create?	serious air pollution
What day of the week did the major earthquake strike Mexico City?	Thursday
How strong was the powerful earthquake that hit Mexico City in 1985?	8.1 on the Richter scale
What month did the 8.1 earthquake hit Mexico City in 1985?	September
Why did the one-party government struggle after the major earthquake in 1985?	paralyzed by its own bureaucracy and corruption
Who led the rescue effort after the earthquake of 1985?	ordinary citizens
What is the minimum height in meters of the region Mexico City is located in?	2,200
Where is Mexico City located?	Valley of Mexico
How high do the mountains get in Mexico City's region?	5,000 metres (16,000 feet)
Why is Mexico City vulnerable to flooding?	no natural drainage outlet for the waters that flow from the mountainsides
How does the city prevent flooding?	canals and tunnels
When did draining of Lake Texcoco begin?	17th century
How much water is there, approximately, in the lake Mexico City is on?	none
How much has the city fallen?	as much as nine metres (30 feet)
What does Mexico City rest on?	Lake Texcoco
Where are most of the trees located in Mexico City?	southern boroughs
How much rain falls on Mexico City?	820 millimetres (32.3 in)
When is it warm, yet does not rain?	March to May
When does the majority of the rain fall in Mexico City?	June to October
When is it coldest in Mexico City?	November to February
What mostly controls the rain in Mexico City?	tropical winds
What happened to the dikes the Aztecs built?	destroyed during the siege of Tenochtitlan
Where does the lake still remain?	municipality of Atenco, State of Mexico
Who first built the dikes in Lake Texcoco?	The Aztecs
What made up Lake Texcoco?	a system of interconnected salt and freshwater lakes
Where is the lake located in Atenco?	Federal District
How bad is the ozone in Mexico City?	2.5 times beyond WHO-defined safe limits
Carbon Monoxide levels are about 3 times lower now than in what year?	1992
What city is similar to Mexico City in terms of pollution?	Los Angeles
When Mexico one of the worst cities in terms of pollution?	1990s
Who decides safe levels of o-zone in cities?	WHO
What is the bus system called in Mexico City?	Metrobús
What is the bike-sharing program called in Mexico City?	Ecobici
How many days a week does the city encourage people to go without a car?	two days
What pollutants does the city closely monitor?	ozone and nitrogen oxides
How often do citizens need to get their cars examined?	biannual
What was the other city in the running to become capital of Mexico?	Querétaro
What part of the constitution established the right to create a capital city?	Section XXVIII of Article 50
When was the federal constitution signed?	October 4, 1824
What type of land is Mexico City?	federal
Who is in charge of the land of Mexico City according to the original constitution?	federal government
When was Mexico City declared the capital?	November 18, 1824
How large was the area the federal government would proclaim to be the capital?	two leagues square (8,800 acres)
Where was the state government located when Mexico City was declared the capital?	Palace of the Inquisition
What is the Palace of the Inquisition known as now?	Museum of Mexican Medicine
Where was the government of Mexico City moved to at the time it was declared capital of Mexico?	Texcoco
How many smaller cities did Mexico City make up at its height?	twenty-two
What is the current area of Mexico City?	1,479 km2 (571 sq mi)
How large was Mexico City at its largest?	1,700 km2
When was the boundaries of the city last adjusted?	1902
Who increased the size of Mexico City to it's largest?	Antonio López de Santa Anna
When were the powers of the municipalities of Mexico City first reduced?	1903
When was the autonomy of the municipalities eliminated?	1928
How many boroughs did the city consist of when they were first established?	13
Who first reduced the power of the municipalities of Mexico City?	Porfirio Díaz
Who led Mexico City?	an appointed governor
When was the General Anaya borough officially merged into Mexico City?	1941
How man boroughs was the borough of Mexico City split into in 1970?	four
How many districts does the federal government control in 1970?	sixteen
Which boroughs was the Mexico City borough split into?	Cuauhtémoc, Miguel Hidalgo, Venustiano Carranza and Benito Juárez
If Mexico City was declared a state, how many states would be in the federation?	32
What event caused the citizens to reconsider how the government of Mexico City was set up?	the 1985 earthquake
What do people call the leader of Mexico City?	Mayor
Who declared the "Mayor" of Mexico City?	the president
What state does Mexico City belong to?	all
When did the Federal District receive more power?	1987
When did citizens receive the right to elect the head of the Federal District?	1997
How is the leader of Mexico City now established?	popular vote
What gave the Federal District more autonomy?	first Statute of Government
Who was elected to be the head of government in 2006?	Marcelo Ebrard
Why did the first elected head of government of Mexico City resign?	to run in the 2000 presidential elections
Who was the second head of government elected?	Andrés Manuel López Obrador
Who was head of government after the first elected head of government?	Rosario Robles
Who was the first woman to run Mexico City?	Rosario Robles
What is the local government of Mexico City called?	The Legislative Assembly of the Federal District
How is the local government of Mexico City formed?	parallel voting
What is the proportionality voting referred to in Mexico City?	plurinominal deputies
How many representatives make up the Federal District?	26
What is the maximum percentage of seats a single party can control?	63
How many seats of the uninominal elections did the PRD get in the 2006 elections?	34
Why does the government prevent more than 63% of a party to control the legislature?	over-representation
When was gay marriage legalized in Mexico City?	December 2009
When were the economic laws passed in Mexico City?	1980s
What political leaning does Mexico City take?	more liberal than those of the rest of the country
Compared to other cities in Latin America, how early did Mexico City legalize same sex marriage?	first
How many boroughs make up Mexico City?	16
How are the heads of the boroughs elected?	plurality
How were the heads of the boroughs originally established?	appointed by the head of government of the Federal District
Who provides the city services?	Government of the Federal District
When did election of borough heads begin?	2000
What is the oldest part of the city?	The Historic Center
How old are the oldest buildings in Mexico City?	16th century
What used to be the main party district of Mexico City?	Zona Rosa
What is the center of the LGBT community in Mexico City?	Art Deco architecture
What district is known for its Art Deco Architecture?	Condesa
Where are many of the wealthy neighborhoods located?	West of the Historic Center
What is the Mexican name for the historic center?	Centro Histórico
Which rich neighborhood has a strong problem of impoverished lands around it?	Santa Fe
Where are many of the corporate headquarters and other tall buildings located?	along Paseo de la Reforma
What type of population lives in Tiahuac?	rural
How is Milpa Alta constructed?	entirely rural
Where is the World Trade Center?	Along Avenida Insurgentes
What is the name of one of the rich neighborhoods south of the city?	Colonia del Valle
Where is much of the industry now located?	nearby municipalities in the State of Mexico
What is Ciudad Satelite?	a vast middle to upper-middle-class residential and business area.
Where is Gustavo A. Madero?	North of the Historic Center
How many boroughs had very high HDI scores in 2005?	three
How many boroughs had high (not very high) HDI scores?	12
Which borough had the highest HDI score?	Benito Juárez
What year was the report that said 3 boroughs had very high HDI scores?	2005
What borough was the second highest HDI score?	Miguel Hidalgo
What borough had the lowest HDI score in the federal district?	Iztapalapa
Which borough had the lowest HDI score?	Milpa Alta
What rank was Milpa Alta nationally in terms of HDI score?	627th
All boroughs except for Milpa Alta were in what ranking of HDI score?	top 200
What score did Milpa Alta get on the HDI test?	.7984
How large is the budget of the IMSS?	over 6 billion pesos
What is the name of one of the great hospitals in Mexico City?	Hospital Ángeles
What is an organization that has a large presence in the city?	National Health Ministry (SSA)
What is the name of a large facility run by the IMSS in Mexico City?	National Medical Center
What do new cars in Mexico need to have?	catalytic converter
When did the underground rail system begin construction?	1968
How many people ride the Mexico city subway system each day?	5 million people
How many days of the year in 1991 was the air pollution a serious health risk?	355
What is one way the government helps with the "Crush" of the rush hour riding of the subway system?	reserved a special carriage specifically for women
What percentage of the National GDP does the Federal District produce?	15.8
What is the GDP of Mexico City?	$390 billion
What ranking in terms of GDP is Mexico City globally?	eighth
What percentage of service sector national GDP does Mexico City account for?	25.3
By what year will the Mexico City GDP double by, according to research?	2020
Who privatized the airlines of Mexico?	President Carlos Salinas de Gortari
Who signed NAFTA for Mexico?	President Carlos Salinas de Gortari
What did NAFTA do to the businesses in Mexico City?	led to decentralization and a shift in Mexico City's economic base, from manufacturing to services
Where did the factories of Mexico City move to most commonly?	northern border
in 1921, what percent of Mexico City's population Mestizo?	54.78
How many people lived in Mexico City in 1921?	less than one million
What percentage of Mexico City's population was indigenous in 1921?	18.74
How many people live in the Federal District?	8.7 million
What is the overall population of Mexico City in 2008?	19.8 million
What was the migration rate of Mexico City from 95-2000?	negative
Compared to other cities in Mexico, Mexico City's growth is?	much lower
What countries do most of the South American immigrants come from?	Argentina and Colombia
Where do most of the Asian immigrants come from?	China and South Korea
When did Filipinos start migrating to Mexico City?	since the era of New Spain
Who designated the floating gardens as a World Heritage site?	UNESCO
The Historic Center and the floating gardens are both examples of what?	World Heritage Sites
When was the Templo Mayor found?	1978
How was Templo Mayor discovered?	workers were digging to place underground electric cables
What is the most popular icon of Mexico City?	golden Angel of Independence
Who made the Angel of Independence?	the order of the Emperor Maximilian
The angel of independence is over the roadway that connects what?	National Palace (seat of government) with the Castle of Chapultepec
What is the name of the longest avenue in Mexico City?	Avenida de los Insurgentes
How long is the longest avenue in Mexico City?	28.8 km (17.9 mi)
Chapultepec Castle is located where?	Chapultepec Park
Where is the National Museum of Anthropology located?	Chapultepec Park
When did construction of the Fine Arts Palace end?	1934
What is the name of the tour bus that shows off the monuments of Mexico City?	Turibus
Why did the construction of the Fine Arts Palace take so long?	interrupted by the Mexican Revolution
How many museums are in Mexico City?	about 160
How many art galleries are in Mexico City?	over 100
How many concert halls are in Mexico City?	30
Who has painted murals all over the city?	Diego Rivera
Where is the house that Leon Trotsky was murdered?	Coyoacán
How large is the metro system of Mexico City?	225.9 km (140 mi)
When was the Mexico City metro system first opened?	1969
How many lines are in the metro system?	12
How many people ride the metro system each day?	4.5 million
How many stations are in the Mexico City metro system?	195
What is the name of the city's fast bus line?	Metrobús
When did Metrobus begin services?	June 2005
When did the second line of Metrobus open?	December 2008
How many people ride the Metrobus every day?	850,000
April 2012 was the year which Metrobus line opened?	line 4
What are the one-way roads in Mexico city called?	ejes viales
What is different about the second level roads?	tolls are charged
When were these second level roads opened?	2012
What main road leads to the airport?	The Viaducto Miguel Alemán
What connects Santa Fe and the southwestern part of the city?	the Supervía Poniente
How do people know which days to not drive their car?	ending digit of their license plates
How many cars were still restricted in 2003?	40%
When were new emisson standards enacted?	2006
How can cars get exempt from the restrictions?	pass regular emissions tests
What is the name of the parking meter system in Mexico City?	ecoParq
Who operates the parking meters?	Operadora de Estacionamientos Bicentenario
How much money a month do the parking meters bring in?	16 million-peso
What are the hours of Mexico City Parking meters?	8 AM to 8 PM
How many parking meters were installed as of October 2013?	721
What is the name of the city's bike sharing system?	EcoBici
When did the bike sharing system of the city begin?	2010
How many bikes are involved in the bike share system?	4,000
What do they call the bike paths in Mexico City?	Ciclovías
What country is the inspiration for Mexico City's new programs?	Denmark
What is the name of the major airport in Mexico City?	Mexico City International Airport
What is the short hand code for Mexico City's largest airport?	MEX
About how many passengers come through the Mexico City International Airport each year?	34 million
What is the name of the smaller airport near Mexico City?	Adolfo López Mateos International Airport
How many passengers come through Adolfo Lopez Mateos International Airport?	700,000
When did the second terminal open at the Mexico City Airport?	2007
How many national airlines are there in Mexico?	21
How many of the main Mexican airlines are based in Mexico City?	11
What is the new city that will be added to the group of Mexican Airports around Mexico City?	Pachuca
When were the new plans of the airport revealed?	September 2, 2014
When are the new plans supposed to come to fruition for the airport?	2018
How many runways will be in the new airport?	six
How many passengers will the new airport be able to handle?	120 million
How much does the new airport cost?	$9.15 billion
When did Mexico City lost most of its artifacts?	Conquest of Mexico
When did the complex art of Mexico City begin?	pre-Classical period
What holds most of the old art of the Mexico city region?	National Museum of Anthropology and the Templo Mayor museum
What are the main artifacts that have survived?	pottery and stone-engraving
What comprised most of the early art of Mexico City?	codices
Most of the art since the Aztecs took what style?	religious
Whose art is displayed at the large cathedral in Mexico City?	Juan de Rojas
"The Little Horse" is also known as what?	equestrian sculpture of Charles IV of Spain
Who created "The Little Horse?"	Manuel Tolsá
What is the large art school in Mexico City?	Academia de San Carlos
Where does most of the artwork produced as the Academia de San Carlos get featured?	Museo Nacional de San Carlos
Who is one of the most famous people to graduate from the large art school of Mexico City?	José María Velasco
The San Carlos Museum has art from who, among others?	Rembrandt, Velázquez, Murillo, and Rubens
Who was a big proponent of modernism in art?	José Luis Cuevas
When did artists start to immigrate to Mexico City?	20th century
Who was a famous engraver that migrated to Mexico City?	Leopoldo Méndez
What was the Popular Graphics Workshop mission?	help blue-collar workers find a venue to express their art
What nationality was Remedios Varas?	Catalan
When was the Museo Tamayo opened?	mid-1980s
Who's art collection was the reason the Museo Tamayo opened?	Rufino Tamayo
Where was Rufino Tamayo born?	Oaxaca
What type of art is shown in The Museo Carrillo Gil?	avant-garde
What famous art building was opened in late 2008?	University Museum/Contemporary Art
Who is the Museo Soumaya named after?	the wife of Mexican magnate Carlos Slim
What other famous sculpture has had his art displayed at the Museo Soumaya?	Dalí
How many years worth of art does the Museum in the historic center hold?	400
What city houses the only collection of Rodin sculptures that is larger than the one in Mexico City?	Paris
When did the new design of the museum open?	2011
When did the Museum of Remembrance and Tolerance open?	2011
What main event inspired the Museum of Remembrance and Tolerance?	Holocaust
The exhibit inaugurated by the Dalai Lama opened when?	September 2011
What is the main subject of the Museum of Remembrance and Tolerance?	discrimination and genocide
Where does the Mexico City Philharmonic perform?	Sala Ollin Yoliztli
When was the first wrap-around concert hall in the Western Hemisphere opened?	1976
What is the name of one of the main orchestras of Mexico City?	National Symphony Orchestra
The Palace of Fine Arts hosts what main symphony?	National Symphony Orchestra
What does OFUNAM stand for?	Philharmonic Orchestra of the National Autonomous University of Mexico
How many people does the National Auditorium hold?	10,000
What main languages are supported by shows at the National Auditorium?	Spanish and English
What year was the National Auditorium voted best in the world?	2007
How can you see the Grand Opera of New York in Mexico City?	giant, high definition screens
How many sets are in the Teatro Metropolitan?	3,000
The Foro Sol Stadium hols how many people?	50,000
Where does Cirque du Soleil go in Mexico City?	Carpa Santa Fe
The Pepsi Center World Trade Center holds how many people?	3,000
Where is the Centro Cultural Universitario?	UNAM's main campus
The CCU holds, in addition to a music theater, what?	National Library
The former Ministry of Foreign Affairs had a cultural center opened in what year?	2007
What is the name of the CCU center opened in 2007?	Tlatelolco
Where is Tlatelolco located?	north-central Mexico City
What makes the Papalote children's museum so famous?	world's largest dome screen
Where is the Papalote Children's Museum located?	wooded park of Chapultepec
What is the largest amusement park in Latin America?	Six Flags México
What borough is Six Flags Mexico located?	Tlalpan
What city has the largest outdoor ice skating rink in the world?	Moscow
Where is the Mexican Film Library located?	near the Coyoacán suburb
What large movie festival is hosted at the Mexican Film Library?	International Showcase
What are the two large movie companies in Mexico?	Cinépolis and Cinemex
What type of theaters does Mexico City have the most of compared to other cities?	IMAX
How many states does Mexico have?	31
What are some international cuisines offered in Mexico City?	Canadian, French, Italian,
What other specific types of food does the city offer?	kosher, vegetarian and vegan
What opera legend also has a famous restaurant in Mexico City?	Plácido Domingo
What famous Italian Restaurant also has a branch in Mexico City?	Alfredo
What is one of the famous Lima-based restaurants in Mexico City?	La Mar
What Japanese restaurant also has a branch in Mexico City?	Suntory
What famous soccer stadium is in Mexico City?	Azteca Stadium
How many fans does Azteca Stadium hold?	91,653
What is the largest stadium in Latin America?	Azteca Stadium
What year did Mexico most recently host the World Cup?	1986
What division are the Mexico City soccer teams in?	First
What year did Mexico City host the olympics?	1968
Which American city did Mexico City defeat to host the 1968 olympics?	Detroit
What year did Mexico City first host the Pan America games?	1955
What famous form of wrestling is native to Mexico?	Lucha libre
What are the main arenas for Lucha Libre?	Arena México and Arena Coliseo
What university is the largest of the continent?	The National Autonomous University of Mexico
How many students attend UNAM?	300,000
What percent of scientific research is done at UNAM?	50
What worldwide ranking does UNAM hold?	74th
What is the main campus of UNAM called?	Ciudad Universitaria
What is the second biggest education center in Mexico City?	National Polytechnic Institute
What American University has a big campus in Mexico City?	University of California
What does the University of California call its campus in Mexico City?	Casa de California
Where is the Universidad Tecnologica located?	Mexico City
Who is in charge of the education in Mexico City?	Secretary of Public Education
What is the public high school system called in Mexico City?	Instituto de Educación Media Superior del Distrito Federal
Who allocates the funding of the school systems?	government of Mexico City
Who created El Colegio Nacional?	Miguel Alemán Valdés
Where do the superior artists and scientists of Mexico City have the option to attend?	El Colegio Nacional
What must members of El Colegio Nacional do?	publicly disclose their works through conferences and public events
What is El Colegio Nacional modeled after?	College of France
How many newspaper call Mexico City home?	Dozens
What is one of the main papers of Mexico City?	El Universal
What American magazines have a footprint in Mexico City?	Vogue, GQ, and Architectural Digest
How many entertainment magazines are published in Mexico City?	dozens
What are mobile markets in Mexico City called?	tianguis
How is the retail market of Mexico City?	immense and varied
What is a common way stores are distributed in Mexico City?	in a street dedicated to a certain type of good
What is the spectrum of gods you can get in Mexico City?	basic foods to ultra high-end luxury goods
What are the markets called that are located and run by the boroughs?	mercado
What are some of the traditional drinks of Mexico City?	aguas frescas and atole
What is the centerpiece of Mexico City's markets	mercado
The author uses which adjective to describe the mercados?	omnipresent
Similar tianguis might set up shop where?	plazas comerciales
What is the most basic way a street vendor might sell their goods?	tarp or cloth laid on the ground
Street vendors might sell their goods in official places as well as where?	non-officially controlled concentrations around metro stations and hospitals
Where is the Chapultepec Zoo located?	Chapultepec Park in the Miguel Hidalgo
When was the Chapultepec Zoo opened?	1924
What sets the Zoo San Juan de Aragon apart from the others?	species that are in danger of extinction
How big is the Zoo Los Coyotes?	27.68-acre (11.2 ha)
How many animals inhabit Zoo Los Coyotes?	more than 301 specimens
Who termed the slogan "la Ciudad de la Esperanza?"	Andrés López Obrador
What is the nickname of the city that the government is trying to push now?	Capital en Movimiento
How is the city commonly abbreviated?	CDMX
When did the abbreviation CDMX begin to take hold?	2013
Who more recently tried to change the nickname of Mexico city?	Marcelo Ebrard
What are locals of Mexico City called?	chilangos
What do Mexicans call Mexico City?	Chilangolandia
How do Mexicans take being called "chilangos?"	proudly
What nickname are residents of Mexico given that more reflects the Spanish influence of the city?	defeños
What is the "official" term to denote a citizen of Mexico City?	capitalinos
How many crimes occurred around the turn of the latest century?	average of 478 crimes were reported each day
Why might more than 500 crimes have occurred each day at the turn of the century instead of the officially reported number?	most people are reluctant to report crime
What Mexican mayor tried to crack down on crime immensely?	Marcelo Ebrard
What is one way the city tried to combat crime?	installation of 11,000 security cameras
What is the ratio of cops to citizens in Mexico City?	one uniformed officer per 100 citizens
Approximately how many of the world population speak German as a native language?	100 million
Of the population that speaks German as a native language how many of them consider themselves to be German?	80 million
How many of the worlds population claim German ancestors?	80 million
what is the total number of Germans both native speaking and heredity in the world?	between 100 and more than 150 million
Where in Brazil is most of the German descendants located?	mainly in the South Region of the country
How many native German speakers in the world are there?	100 million
How many native German speakers consider themselves German?	80 million
How many people in the world claim to be from German ancestry?	100 and more than 150 million
What emperor forced the Germanic tribes to the east side of the Rhine?	Julius Caesar
In what did Emperor Augustus order the conquest of the Germans?	12 BC
The Romans suffered a horrible defeat in there conquest of the Germans in what battle?	Battle of the Teutoburg Forest
Roman's adoption of what religion would greatly influence the German society?	Christianity
Through what act would Roman and German customs become intertwine?	Germanic and Roman peoples intermarried
Which Roman emperor ordered the conquest of the Germans?	Augustus
What religion did Germans adopt?	Christianity
What battle did Germans defeat the Romans?	Battle of the Teutoburg Forest r
During the Migrations period Germans would encounter what groups in the east?	Balts and Slavs
During the Migrations period Germans would encounter what group in the south?	Celts
The Limes Germanicus was breached in what year?	AD 260
Who allied with the Germans after previous fighting them along side the Romans?	the Huns
What leader had both prominent German and Hun families in his entourage throughout Europe?	Attila
When was the Limes Germanicus breached?	AD 260
Who did the Germans come in contact with to the south?	Celts
Which Germanic tribe did the Huns cooperate with?	Ostrogoths
What language did the Huns adopt?	East Germanic
What happened to the Huns after Attila's death?	either escaped into Asia, or otherwise blended in amongst Europeans
how many tribes are credited with the creation of the modern day germans?	five tribes
In modern day what is still influenced by the  five tribes?	German language
What king united the tribes in the 9th century?	Charlemagne
What part of Germany became mostly Slavonic-speaking due to migration?	Eastern Germany
The tribes that moved out of east Germany took to inhabit what fallen empires lands?	Roman Empire
What five tribes are attributed with coalescing into a German ethnicity?	Saxons, Franci, Thuringii, Alamanni and Bavarii
What 6th tribe is sometimes included with the original 5 German tribes?	Frisians
Who united the 5 tribes?	king Charlemagne
What century did King Charlemagne reign?	9th
What period in history do we see the emergence of German culture?	High Middle Ages
The kingdom of Germany formed within what outer established empires?	East Francia
When was the Title King of the Germans first used?	late 11th century
Who coined the phrase "king of the Germans"	chancery of Pope Gregory VII,
Who was given the prilavage of being called the first King of the Germans?	Henry IV
When did a German ethnicity emerge?	the Middle Ages
When is the title of rex teutonicum first used?	the late 11th century
Who first used rex teutonicum?	Pope Gregory VII
When is ein diutscher first used?	12th century
What does ein diutscher mean?	a German
The Expansion of Germany  by the Catholic Church into the areas of the Slavs and balts is know as what?	Ostsiedlung
What was the name of the group that waged war in the Baltic?	Catholic German Teutonic Knights
Who was the Old Prussians ethnic group related to?	Latvian and Lithuanian Baltic peoples
Although conquered the Persian language lived on till when?	17th or early 18th century
Who is a famous German that  name has Slavic origins?	Karl von Clausewitz
When was the Prussian language extinct?	17th or early 18th century
What happened to the Slavic people of the Baltic?	were assimilated into German culture
Who led the German expansion?	the Roman Catholic Church and local rulers
What famous German military strategist has a name with Slavic origin?	Karl von Clausewitz
What let to the assimilation of Baltic and Slavic populations?	Massive German settlement
German's domination of trade in the Eastern Europe was credited to what?	naval innovations
Because of the increased trade what places became the hubs of German culture?	Hanseatic trade stations
What was promoted due to wealth and power of the German families?	Stadtrecht
the holy roman empire due to its many different conquests was seen as what type of society?	multi-ethnic and multi-lingual
What helped the Germans dominate trade?	naval innovations
What is the German work for German town law?	Stadtrecht
Was the Hanseatic league exclusively German?	The Hanseatic League was not exclusively German
What other ethnicities, besides German were part of The Empire?	Dutch, Italian, French, Czech and Polish
By what time period had many of the Jewish  population joined the Holy Roman Empire?	Middle Ages
The Jewish populations upon migrating into the German society mingled languages to form what new language?	Yiddish
What cause the tolerance and mixing  into German Society to end for the Jews?	Crusades
What language did many of the Jews speak after the crusades?	German
What language did the Jews speak prior to assimilating into German culture?	Judeo-French
After assimilating to German culture, what language did the Jews adopt?	Yiddish.
When did Jewish assimilation end?	during the Crusades
What happened to the Jews during the crusades?	forcefully expelled from Germany
What was one of the main factors that caused the dissolve of the Holy Roman Empire?	Napoleonic Wars
What assured  Europe would remain the same preventing Germany from becoming one country?	Congress of Vienna
When was the Crimean War?	1856
When was Germany's unification?	1860s
What prominent Jewish German  sought German unification in the mid 19th century?	Eduard Lasker
What was the cause of the final dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire?	The Napoleonic Wars
What two countries emerged as competitors after the Congress of Vienna?	Austria and Prussia
Who led the way for the Congress of Vienna?	Austria
In what decade was German unification?	1860s
Who was Eduard Lasker?	a prominent German nationalist figure who promoted the unification of Germany in the mid-19th century
When did the strife between Austria and Prussia erupt?	1866
in What conflict of the German war did the Prussians successfully create the North German Confederation?	(Battle of Königgrätz
What was Germany going to be called if Prussian won?	Little Germany
What was Austria not willing to give up to settle the conflict?	non-German-speaking land inside of the Austrian Empire
When did Austria and Prussia go to war?	1866
Who won the battle of Koniggratz?	Prussia
What did the Prussians want Germany to unify under?	Little Germany
What was created when the Prussians defeated Austria??	North German Confederation
When did France attack Prussia?	1870
Who won the Franco-Prussian War?	Prussia and its new allies in Southern Germany
When was the German Empire founded?	1871
What regions was excluded from the German Empire?	effectively excluding the multi-ethnic Austrian Habsburg monarchy
What was the primary religion of Germany?	Protestant
When was the German empire created?	1871
Who was excluded from the German Nation State?	Austrian Habsburg monarchy and Liechtenstein
What religion was a majority in Germany?	Protestant
What did many people in Germany still want to do?	Integrating the Austrians
What leader tried to unite all people considered themselves "German"	Adolf Hitler
Who resisted the uniting of people under Hitler?	The Swiss
The Swiss has viewed themselves as their own country since what year?	1648
Who welcomed the idea in area such as Sudetenland and Poland?	ethnic Germans
Who headed the Nazis?	Adolf Hitler
Who resisted the Nazi idea of uniting all Germans from the get go?	The Swiss
Since when had the Swiss viewed themselves as a different nation?	1648
When was the Peace of Westphalia?	1648
Who wanted to unite all of the Germans all over the area?	The Nazis
With the conclusion of World War 2 what did most Eastern Europe countries do with their German citizens?	expelled the Germans
How long did many of the Germans live in the eastern Europe countries before being expelled?	for centuries
Approximately how many Germans were expelled from their home after world war II?	12 and 16,5 million ethnic Germans and German citizens
After World War II where were Germans forced to relocate to?	westwards to allied-occupied Germany
How many Germans were expelled after WWII?	Between 12 and 16,5 million
After what war were Germans expelled from their territories?	World War II
Where were Germans that were inhabiting other lands expelled to?	allied-occupied Germany
What is credited with the origins of the German identity?	Protestant Reformation
How was early German culture developed?	literary and religious figures
What man is credited with the emergence of the German nation?	Johann Gottfried Herder
When did the popularity of the German nation increase?	aftermath of the French Revolution
What is credited with creating the Origins of a German identity?	Protestant Reformation
Who developed the concept of a German Nation?	Johann Gottfried Herder
When did the popularity of a German identity arise?	in the aftermath of the French Revolution
Who was Johann Herder?	German philosopher
Residence that speak German as their mother tongue and  families have been in place for generations are often consider?	most German
What is the name given to Germans who family left but came back to the lands?	Aussiedler
What is the name of  gven to the population that lives outside of current Germany boundary but still within historic Germany?	Restdeutsche
What are refugees from Germany that still speak German referred to?	Auswanderer
People who have generations of family in Germany, and look and speak German are classified as what?	most German
Who are people of German ancestry but have lived in other parts of Europe, then returned to Germany?	Aussiedler
What are people who have ancestral roots in Germany, but now live outside of Germany called?	Restdeutsche
What are people called who have left Germany but still speak German?	Auswanderer
What is the native language of Germans?	German
What languages is German related to?	English and Dutch
How many natives speak German?	100 million
What is the most commonly spoken language in the European Union?	German
What is the dominant language of science?	English
How many German Americans are there?	50 million
How many Germans live in Brazil?	5 million
How many people in the world have German heritage?	100 million
America is home to what percentage of German decedent people?	one third
Who is a German philosopher from the middle ages?	Albertus Magnus
When was Leibniz an active philosopher?	17th century
What German philosopher inspired Schopenhauer and Nietzsche?	Kant
In the late 19th century, which German philosopher helped develop the idea of communism?	Engels
When was the University of Berlin founded?	1810
Who discovered X-Rays?	Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen
Who won the first Nobel Prize in Physics?	Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen
In what year, was the first Nobel Prize in Physics won?	1901
Where is the Walhalla temple located?	Bavaria
What two people were important to the creation of modern physics?	David Hilbert and Max Planck
From which country is Bach, Mozart and Beethoven from?	Germany
In what tradition of music did Brahms Wagner and Hadyn achieve fame?	Austro-German
Who marked the switch from classical to romantic eras in classical music?	Beethoven
In 2008,, where was Germany ranked as a world music market?	fourth largest
What type of music was pioneered in Germany?	trance
What type of music does Kraftwerk make?	electronic
What is the largest music festival in Germany?	Rock am Ring
How many people does M'era Luna Festival attract?	up to 30,000
Who was the original German cinematic?	Max Skladanowsky
What types of film were produced in the Nazi era?	propaganda
Who controls film production in the GDR?	Deutsche Film-Aktiengesellschaft
When did German cinema come back internationally?	1960s
In what year was the never ending story made?	1984
What award did Nowhere in Africa win in 2002?	Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
In what year did The Lives of Others win the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language?	2007
How often is the Berlin International Film Festival held?	yearly
What was the first year of the Berlin International Film Festival?	1951
In what year did Martin Luther challenge the Catholic Church?	1517
During what years was the thirty year war?	1618–1648
Until the Reformation, what was the established religion in Germany?	Roman Catholicism
Where was the thirty year war primarily fought?	Germany
Who was the thirty year war between?	Protestants and Catholics
What percentage of Germans are Roman Catholic?	30.8
What percentage of Germans are Evangelical Protestants?	30.3
What religion is the North and East part of Germany?	Protestant
Where is there a non-religious majority?	Hamburg and the East German states
How many Germans are members of sports clubs?	27 million
What is the most popular sport in Germany?	Football
What is the largest athletic organisation in the country?	German Football Federation
How many members are in the German Football Federation?	6.3 million
What year was the turning point for Germany in the Nation Brands Index?	2006
What year did BBC reveal that Germany is the most positive influence in the world?	2010
what percentage have a negative view of Germany?	14%
What percentage of people have a positive view of Germany?	59
In what century did the Pan-Germanisms origins begin?	19th
What movement came out of the French Revolution?	Nationalism
Who was threatened by Nationalism?	aristocratic regimes
Who ruled central and Eastern Europe during the 19th century?	Romanovs and the Habsburgs
Where was Johann Tillmann from?	East Prussia
Who were the two most powerful nations in the 1860's?	Kingdom of Prussia and the Austrian Empire
When was the German Empire created?	1871
Who was Wilhelm I?	head of a union of German-speaking states
What were Prussia and Austria looking to expand?	influence and territory
Which empire was a multi ethnic state?	The Austrian Empire
What greatly reduced the size of Germany after WWI?	treaty of Versailles
Who was relocated during the second world war from the Soviet Union?	Volga Germans
What name did Rump-Austria adopt?	German-Austria
What is the German translation for German-Austria?	Deutschösterreich
What percentage of 14 year olds said they were proud to be German in 2009?	60
What percentage of 14 year olds in 2009 said they would choose German for their nationality if they got to choose?	78
Where does Eugen Buss work?	University of Hohenheim
Who was Poland's foreign minister in 2011?	Radek Sikorski
What are Germans trying to forget?	Nazi past
What are Germans trying to focus on?	Prussian history
Who is Europe's strongest economy?	Germany
What is the largest city in Connecticuty?	Bridgeport
What was the population of New Haven according to the 2012 Census?	130,741
What was the population of New Haven according to the 2010 Census?	129,779
What was the population of Greater New Haven in 2010?	862,477
New Haven Harbor is located on the northern shore of what waterway?	Long Island Sound
In which US state is New Haven located?	Connecticut
In what county is New Haven located?	New Haven County
What is the population of New Haven according to the 2010 United States Census?	129,779
New Haven County makes up the outer limits of what major metropolitan area?	New York metropolitan area
What is the population of New Haven City in 2010?	129,779
What is Connecticut's biggest city?	Bridgeport
In what county is New Haven located in?	New Haven County,
The population of the Greater New Haven in 2010?	862,477
What is the metropolitan next to New Haven County, Connecticut?	New York
How many Puritans were in the initial group that settled New Haven?	five hundred
What group sold the land to the Puritans?	The Quinnipiacs
The Quinnipiacs were under attack by what group?	Pequots
What is the name of the religious leader who co-led this founding group?	Reverend John Davenport
What is the name of the London merchant who co-led this founding group?	Theophilus Eaton
In what year did the Puritans survey New Haven Harbor?	1637
From what colony did the original 500 Puritan settlers originate?	Massachusetts Bay Colony
Who was the religious leader of the original Puritan settlers?	Reverend John Davenport
In what year did the original 500 Puritan settlers arrive in the New Haven harbor area?	1638
From what native tribe did the original Puritan settlers purchase land in exchange for the offer of providing protection?	Quinnipiacs
What year begin the founding of New Haven Harbor?	1638
Where did the settlers came from?	Massachusetts Bay Colony
What was the name of the Native Americans that sold them the land?	Quinnipiacs,
In comparison to Massachusetts what where settlers hoping to establish in New Haven Harbor?	better theological community
Who was the religious leader that lead the pilgrims to New Haven Harbor?	Reverend John Davenport
How did New Haven colony differ from Connecticut colony in regard to religion?	New Haven colony was an intolerant theocracy that did not permit other churches to be established
What was the name of the settlement before it was called New Haven?	Quinnipiac
What was the name of the area north of New Haven changed to in 1678?	Hamden
What was the town center of the Connecticut colony?	Hartford
What type of government did the Puritan settlers establish?	theocratic government
By what year did the Puritan settlers rename the area from Quinnipac to Newhaven?	1640
In what year was the northern area of New Haven renamed Hamden?	1678
What colony was located to the north of New Haven Colony, centered around the area known as Hartford?	Connecticut Colony
What did New Haven Colony not permit that principally distinguished it from Connecticut Colony?	other churches to be established
In 1678 what was  the new name of the Northern part of New Haven?	Hamden
New Haven Colony was separated from the Connecticut Colony which was located where?	Hartford
What made New Haven different from the other colonies in Connecticut?	an intolerant theocracy
Where was the headquarters of the New Haven Colony located?	Quinnipiac
What is the name given to the celebrated date of 23 April 1775 in New Haven?	Powder House Day
Who was the captain of New Haven's Second Company, Governor's Foot Guard?	Benedict Arnold
How long did the march from New Haven to Cambridge, Massachusetts take Arnold and his men?	a three-day march
Who was the influential New Haven general that hoped to avoid conflict with the British Parliament as the American Revolution loomed closer?	General David Wooster
What date is still commemorated by Powder House Day in New Haven?	23 April 1775
What was the name of the Second Company in New Haven that was the first to enter the inaugural struggle with the British?	Governor's Foot Guard
Under whose leadership did the Governor's Foot Guard break into the powder house to arm themselves?	Captain Benedict Arnold
Toward what area did the New Haven militia march for three days following the powder house incident?	Cambridge, Massachusetts
Power House Day is celebrated on what day in New Haven?	23 April
What is the name of infamous historical person who played an important role on Power House Day?	Benedict Arnold
Where was George Washington planning to go after staying in New Haven?	Cambridge
What is the name of the New Haven Militia that fought on during Powder House Day?	Governor's Foot Guard
Although the militia were mainly made of volunteers what item distinguish them from other militia companies?	uniforms.
What is the name of the General who led the raid against New Haven on July 5, 1779?	General William Tryon
Who was the president of Yale at the time of the attack?	Ezra Stiles
Why did New Haven fair better than other invaded cities?	New Haven was not torched
What was the size  of the invading force?	2,600
Who was the governor of New York under which the loyalist and British raid of New Haven took place?	General William Tryon
The students of what New Haven university formed an ad-hoc militia to confront the Redcoats?	Yale
Who was the professor of Yale Divinity School that led the student militia to confront the Redcoats?	Naphtali Daggett
On what date did the loyalists and Redcoats land in New Haven Harbor to commence a raid on New Haven?	July 5, 1779
Who was the president of Yale that provided diary accounts expressing disbelief over the commencement of the revolution in New Haven?	Ezra Stiles
What is the name of the general that lead British regulars to New Haven Harbor?	William Tryon
At the time what was the population of New Haven Harbor?	3,500
A group of militia from a very famous modern town in Connecticut came to fought in the Harbor, what was the name of their town?	Yale
The militia that fought in New Haven was lead by who?	Naphtali Daggett
After the battle were New Haven historical features lost or torched?	town's colonial features were preserved.
Who is the Yale graduate, inventor, and arms manufacturer that had a large positive impact on the New Haven economy in the late 18th century?	Eli Whitney
What invention, for which he is primarily known, did Eli Whitney develop in New Haven?	the cotton gin
What is the area near Hamden that was renamed for Eli Whitney?	Whitneyville
What was the nickname given to Connecticut due to the large number of arms manufacturers that arose in the state?	"The Arsenal of America"
In 1836, who invented the automatic revolver in Eli Whitney's gun manufacturing plant?	Samuel Colt
What is the name of the inventor that created the cotton gin in New Haven?	Eli Whitney
What is the name of the main road that connects New Haven to Hamden?	Whitney Avenue
What was the company that was responsible Connecticut rise as a manufacturing economy?	A. C. Gilbert
The rise of gun factories within Connecticut earn the state what name?	The Arsenal of America
In what year was the first automatic revolver invented?	1836
In what year did an important trial take place which situated New Haven among the forefront of the growing anti-slavery movement?	1839
What tribesman were being transported  as slaves on a ship by the Spanish?	Mende
What was the name of the Spanish slave ship used to transport the Mende tribesmen?	Amistad
Who was the informal leader of the slaves to whom there is a statue dedicated beside City Hall in New Haven?	Joseph Cinqué
In 1860, what notable U.S. president gave a speech on slavery in New Haven?	Abraham Lincoln
Who was the leader of slaves during the New Haven anti slavery movement in 1839	Joseph Cinqué
What famous president made a speech in New Haven in 1860?	Abraham Lincoln
Exactly who were the slaves upon the Spanish slaveship?	Mende tribesmen
What is the name of the slaveship that once sit in New Haven Harbor?	Amistad
What major war stimulated the New Haven economy by way of industrial goods purchased through the New Haven Arms Company?	American Civil War
What was the New Haven Arms Company later renamed?	Winchester Repeating Arms Company
The increase in immigrants from what country in southern Europe had a notable impact on the population growth in New Haven in the early 20th century?	Italy
What ethnic group currently comprises approximately half the population of East Haven, West Haven and North Haven?	Italian-American
What area of New Haven was known for being the center of the Jewish community?	Westville
What was the original name of the famous rifle manufacturing companies in New Haven?	New Haven Arms Company
In modern day New Haven who makes up for majority of the demographics in terms of ethnicity?	Italian-American
The Civil War had many effects after the war, what was the main effect for New Haven?	population grew and doubled
What New Haven mayor is responsible for projects that placed the city among the forefront of urban renewal in the U.S. circa 1954?	Richard C. Lee
What major U.S. interstate runs along the Long Wharf section of New Haven?	Interstate 95
What New Haven thoroughfare runs between Interstate 95, downtown, and the neighborhood known as The Hill?	The Oak Street Connector
What area of New Haven was Route 34 originally intended to service?	the city's western suburbs
What did the western portion of Route 34 ultimately become?	a boulevard
What was the name of the mayor that lead the urban development project in New Haven 1954?	Richard C. Lee
What was of the major urban development that affected several New Haven neighborhood?	construction of Interstate 95
During this redevelopment process what happen to the West part of Route 34?	becoming a boulevard
In approximately what year did revitalization most recently begin to occur in downtown New Haven?	2000
What specific area of downtown New Haven enjoyed a notable increase in apartments in condominiums at the beginning of the current century?	the area surrounding the New Haven Green
What specific service sector has substantially increased in downtown New Haven in recent years?	retail
In addition to Stop & Shop, what new supermarket is located one block from the Green and is poised to serve the growing downtown population?	Elm City Market
In the 21st Century what has happen to most of Downtown New Haven in terms of retail?	the opening of new stores
How has the media perceive most of these changes to the Downtown area?	positive press from various periodicals.
What has happen in New Haven Green during the 2000s?	experienced an influx of apartments
Including to the growth, what market chain have expanded nearby Downtown New Haven?	Stop & Shop
What multi-use project in New Haven is the largest residential building in Connecticut?	360 State Street
What park is anticipated to extend to downtown New Haven?	Farmington Canal Trail
For what area are a new boathouse and dock being planned?	New Haven Harbor
What is the city landmark demolished in 2007 that the city ultimately wish to redevelop?	New Haven Coliseum
What is the name of building project is taking place in Gateway Community College downtown?	360 State Street.
The New Haven Harbor is receiving what kind of adjustment?	dock is planned
The city of New Haven wants to redevelop/build what sort of structure?	New Haven Coliseum
In terms of infrastructure, what is being develop in the downtown area?	linear park Farmington Canal Trail
What type of bridge is replacing the old Q Bridge?	an extradosed bridge
In what year did the U.S. Supreme Court entertain a lawsuit filed by 18 New Haven firefighters against the city of New Haven?	2009
What was the distinguishing issue of the lawsuit over which 18 white firefighters in New Haven sought relief from the U.S. Supreme Court?	reverse discrimination
What was the name of the case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the city of New Haven had violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by denying any firefighter a promotion?	Ricci v. DeStefano
In what year did low scores of black firefighters on a promotion test issued by the New Haven Fire Department ultimately halt promotions for all firefighters of any race in the city?	2003
How many of the 18 white firefighters received promotions via district court order to the city of New Haven following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in favor of the petitioning firefighters?	14
What was the decision from the 2009 Supreme Court Case?	to ignore the test results
The Court case was involve between which two parties?	firefighters against the city
What did the city do after the fail test scores for promotions?	no one would be promoted
Out of how many of the white fireman got a promotion afterwards?	14 of the white firefighters
Funding was awarded to Connecticut in 2010 and 2011 to build what line with a southern terminus in New Haven?	Hartford Line
At what terminal in New Haven was the Hartford Line slated to originate?	Union Station
What location provided the northern terminus for the Hartford Line?	Springfield's Union Station
What is the name of the corridor in western Massachusetts by which federal authorities sought to improve trip times and the amount of the population served in both New Haven and Springfield?	Knowledge Corridor
In what year was the "Knowledge corridor high speed intercity passenger rail" slated for construction?	2013
What is the name of the train line that connects Connecticut and Massachusetts together?	Hartford Line
Where is the starting point of the terminus line in New Haven?	New Haven's Union Station
The purpose of the train line is to connect Connecticut and Massachusetts to what state north?	Vermont
When does the Knowledge Corridor line begins it's construction?	in 2013
Generally how fast are these trains?	180 km/h
In addition to the New Haven Harbor, what additional natural element is a prominent geographic feature of the area, flanking the northeast and northwest boundaries?	basalt trap rock ridges
Which trap rock ridge was altered to accommodate the east-west portion of the Wilbur Park Crossway?	West Rock
What was the name of the group that once utilized West Rock as a hideout, known colloquially as "The Three Judges?"	"Regicides"
What is the name of the war monument located at the peak of East Rock?	Soldiers and Sailors
What is the name for the popular feature that ascends the cliffside of East Rock?	"Great/Giant Steps"
What is New Haven best known for in terms of the main landmark and structure?	large deep harbor
In terms of economy and geographic landscape what is the used for the two trop rocks ridges north nearby the city?	as extensive parks
The West Rock is also used for what sort of infrastructure?	highway tunnel
What does the Eastern Rocks offer as a park on the other hand?	war monument
By how many rivers is the city of New Haven drained?	three
Which New Haven river releases into West Haven Harbor?	West River
Into what local body of water do the Mill and Quinnipiac rivers discharge?	New Haven Harbor
Into what larger waterway do the West Haven Harbor and New Haven Harbor recess as embayments?	Long Island Sound
What is the name of the western river in the city of New Haven?	the West
The eastern river bears the name of the Native American Tribes that once live in New Haven, what is the name?	Quinnipiac
The two eastern rivers meets in which of New Haven Harbor?	New Haven Harbor
These two harbors are part of what estuary?	Long Island Sound.
Are all of New Haven's smaller stream active through all four seasons?	Not all of these small streams
Though harboring transitive properties, what Koppen climate classification does the New Haven climate more closely characterize?	Dfa
What season is typically characterized as humid and warm in New Haven?	Summers
What baseline temperature threshold do temperatures normally exceed throughout the summer in New Haven?	90 °F (32 °C)
How heavy is the snowfall typically throughout the winter in New Haven?	moderate
New Haven's climate is largely analogous to what major adjoining metropolitan area?	New York
The New Haven's area closesly resemble which type of climate?	humid continental climate
Does summertime gets weather hotter than 90 degrees?	7–8 days per year
Due to being a coastal city, how much snow does the city gets?	moderate snowfall
What is the main effects  in New Haven's weather due to being a coastal city?	differences in temperature between areas
On what type of city plan was New Haven laid out upon the founding of the area?	grid plan of nine square blocks
For what environmental initiative is the city of New Haven known, primarily for instituting the first of its kind in America?	public tree planting program
What was the nickname given to the city of New Haven due to an indigenous tree which largely perished in the mid-20th century?	"Elm City"
What was the cause of the sudden extinction of many of the elms in New Haven?	Dutch Elm disease
What public area in New Haven was named a National Historic Landmark in 1970?	New Haven Green
What was New Haven's nickname?	Elm City"
Due to the replanting of trees the center of the city is called what?	New Haven Green
In what year did it became recognize as a landmark?	1970
In the original plans of the city, how many city block were designed?	nine square blocks
Because of it's trees New Haven is known for being first to implemented what in the US?	public tree planting program
Approximately how many residents make up the population of downtown New Haven?	7,000
What downtown New Haven restaurant was cited by the New York Times, Esquire and Wine Spectator for its outstanding Spanish cuisine?	Ibiza
Downtown New Haven contributes approximately what amount of the overall tax base for the area?	half
Downtown New Haven contributes approximately how many jobs to the city?	about half
How many people live in downtown New Haven?	7,000 residents
In terms of economy the downtown portion is responsible for what?	half of the city's jobs
Of the downtown area what gets the most positive media coverage?	new upscale restaurants
What has help the most with the continuous growth within the area?	thousands of apartments and condominium
What area of New Haven comprises the area centered around the business district and New Haven Green?	Downtown
What is the historic water-front neighborhood located in the southern area of New Haven?	City Point
What east-central neighborhood in New Haven is home to a large number of Italian-Americans?	Wooster Square
What is the name of the neighborhood in New Haven that rests between the Mill and Quinnipiac rivers, and is comprised primarily of an immigrant community?	Fair Haven
What is the name of the district nearing the harbor of the city?	Long Wharf
Though the Green is the popular center of the city, there is another district, what's the name?	central business district
If you were to go northern part of New Haven, what district would you find?	Newhallville
Between two of it's rivers lies a district with a heavy immigrant population, the name is?	Fair Haven
Wooster Square is known for what roots?	Italian-American
What sector originally provided the largest contribution to New Haven's economy?	manufacturing
What entity serves as the largest employer in New Haven?	Yale
What percentage of New Haven's economy is based in services grounded in health care and education?	56%
What is the second largest employer in New Haven?	Yale – New Haven Hospital
What pharmaceutical company serves as a large employment provider for New Haven?	Alexion
New Haven relied on what in terms of growth and economy?	manufacturing
Was the city the only one that suffer a decline within the manufacturing sector?	entire Northeast was affected
In modern day how much does New Haven depend on blue collar jobs?	over half (56%)
What institution has largest impact on the city's job market?	Yale
What Fortune 1000 company, also the largest Catholic service organization in the world, is based in New Haven?	The Knights of Columbus
What prominent producer of electrical equipment, also a Fortune 1000 company, is based in Greater New Haven?	Hubbell
What publicly traded bank, also the second largest in Connecticut, is based in New Haven?	NewAlliance
What is the name of the New Haven-based business faction of the infamous Skull and Bones Society?	Russell Trust Association
In what year did the Southern New England Telephone Company, formerly the District Telephone Company of New Haven, establish operations in the area?	1878
New Haven contains one of largest religious service organization in the world, it's name?	Knights of Columbus
Within the New Haven metropolitan area contain a Fortune 1000 company located in Orange, the name of the company?	Hubbell
What is the name of the second largest bank found in Connecticut?	NewAlliance Bank
As one of the oldest telephone companies, the SNET started in what year?	1878
In modern day SNET operates as what in New Haven?	subsidiary of AT&T
How many households are located in New Haven according to the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau report?	47,094
What percentage of New Haven's population is comprised by individuals identifying as White?	42.6%
What percentage of New Haven's population is comprised by individuals identifying as African American?	35.4%
What minority sector of the poulation in New Haven is currently experiencing rapid growth?	Latino
What is the total population of New Haven as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2010?	129,779
In terms of population density, what is the average person per square kilometers in New Haven?	2,648.6/km²
In regards to it resident, what is the demographic for Native Americans living in the city?	0.5%
New Haven has a large immigrant population, what seems to be one of the main cause of it throughout the last century?	postwar
In modern times has the population of White/Caucasian increase or decrease since the 70s?	down from 69.6% in 1970
What is the most prominent religion in New Haven?	Roman Catholic
Under what immediate jurisdiction of the Catholic Church does New Haven fall?	Archdiocese of Hartford
How many yeshivas are located in New Haven?	two
With what religious movement do many Puerto Ricans in New Haven associate?	Pentecostals
In addition to Jews, what other religious community comprises a large share of the non-Catholic population of New Haven?	Black Baptists
In terms of religious affiliation, what is the most prevalent religion in the city?	Roman Catholic
There are several religious group that have seem rise in demographics, one of which is popular among African Americans being?	Baptists
However Christianity can be found within the city, particularly which neighborhoods?	working-class
What former U.S. president was born in New Haven?	George W. Bush
What New Haven institution did former U.S. president Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton both attend?	Yale Law School
What former U.S. vice president graduated from Yale University?	John C. Calhoun
Prior to 2008, in what year did the last election occur in which neither major party had an individual on the ticket with a connection to New Haven and Yale University?	1968
Who was the President pro tempore of the Senate in 1801 that was native to New Haven?	James Hillhouse
Which former U.S. president have been born in New Haven?	George W. Bush
Multiple president have studied at this popular college, you can guess the name of the university?	Yale
Serving in President Obama's cabinet, this man has also studied at Yale, can you guess who?	John Kerry
Yale University is heavily affiliate with our presidential candidates since what year?	1968
What is the title of the political science book, written by a Yale professor, that explores New Haven politics and history throughout the 1950's?	Who Governs? Democracy and Power in An American City
Who is the author of "Who Governs? Democracy an Power in An American City"	Robert A. Dahl
What penultimate work by Alexis de Tocqueville makes mention of New Haven's original theocratic government?	Democracy in America
To which prominent conservative, that authored God and Man at Yale, did New Haven provide residence in 1951?	William F. Buckley, Jr.
Who is the author of The Fifteenth Ward and the Great Society?	William Lee Miller
What is the name of popular book discussing the politics of New Haven published in the 50s?	Democracy and Power in An American City
What famous french historian mention the city within his book Democracy in America?	Alexis de Tocqueville
New Haven was the home to author that wrote God and Man at Yale, the writer's name was?	William F. Buckley, Jr.
What is the name of the book published in 1966 that had focus on the city politics in relations with President Johnson's policies?	the Great Society
What New Haven trial is known to be the longest in the history of Connecticut?	New Haven Black Panther trials
In what year did the New Haven Black Panther trials take place in New Haven?	1970
Who was the co-founder of the Black Panthers that was placed on trial in New Haven?	Bobby Seale
What day marked the beginning of New Haven being overwhelmed by 12,000 individuals protesting the Black Panther trials?	May Day
In what central New Haven location did protesters of the Black Panther trials congregate?	New Haven Green
What political movement group is known in within city among non whites?	Black Panther
How many attended the trials of the Black Panther in 1970?	12,000
The protest of trial result in what specifically?	Violent confrontations
The protest also initiate the start of criticizing what presidential administration?	the Nixon Administration
What was the name of one of the party's leader that also happen to be on trial?	Bobby Seale
In what year did the U.S. Supreme Court agree to hear a lawsuit originally filed by 20 white and Hispanic firefighters seeking relief from the city of New Haven?	2009
What was the primary legal issue at the center of the suit filed against New Haven by firefighters?	reverse discrimination
In what year did the city of New Haven deny all firefighters promotions citing the poor performance of black firefighters on performance tests ?	2003
What was the name of the 2009 case in which the U.S. Supreme Court awarded relief to New Haven firefighters against the city of New Haven?	Ricci v. DeStefano
Which Supreme Court Justice was a graduate of Yale Law School and was currently undergoing the nomination process at the time of the 2009 lawsuit filed by firefighters against the city of New Haven?	Sonia Sotomayor
The 2009 Supreme Court Case which had the City of New Haven versus who?	20 white and Hispanic firefighters
What was the date of the final ruling?	29 June 2009
The actual name for the case was what?	Ricci v. DeStefano
The court cast was rather popular due to which person on the case?	Sonia Sotomayor
Upon reaching a verdict the summary statement was that city denied the firefighter a promotion because of what?	because of their race
Who is the famous comic strip author of Doonesbury that attended Yale University in New Haven?	Garry Trudeau
For which long-time New Haven resident and former Yale student is Doonesbury named?	Charles Pillsbury
What was the Charles Pillsbury's nickname during college?	"The Doones"
What is the name of the international law theory, grounded in jurisprudence framed by a sociological normative approach?	the New Haven Approach
What sitting Connecticut U.S. senator graduated from Yale University in New Haven?	Richard Blumenthal
Which past U.S. senator had lived in New Haven and graduated from Yale?	Joe Lieberman
The term, the New Haven Approach was what exactly?	A theory of international law,
What is the name of the Green party member that also studied at Yale?	Charles Pillsbury
Analysis by what organization detailed that municipality-based rankings may be inaccurate?	Regional Data Cooperative for Greater New Haven, Inc
What constant in two cities can create disparities in analysis by way of distribution over differing land areas?	identical population
Neighborhoods and blocks, as opposed to municipalities, are both examples of what?	standard methodologies
What research organization did an city analysis on New Haven?	Regional Data Cooperative for Greater New Haven, Inc
The organization stated that analysis should be based on comparison of neighborhoods within the city and not what?	based on municipalities
According to the institution what leads to inaccurate analysis of the city?	cities of identical population
What private university is located in downtown New Haven?	Yale University
What community college is located in downtown New Haven?	Gateway Community College
What state university is located in New Haven?	Southern Connecticut State University
What school serves as the largest employer of New Haven?	Yale University
In what year did Gateway Community College open its newly consolidated downtown campus?	2012
Where is Yale University located.	heart of downtown
What the name of a state university also located in the city?	Southern Connecticut State University
Before relocating to downtown area, New Haven has a community college that used to be located where?	Long Wharf district
Other than Yale, New Haven has another private college in the city, it's name?	Albertus Magnus College
When was the new Gateway Community College open?	Fall 2012
What private school, with the notable distinction of being the fifth-oldest educational institution in the U.S., was founded in New Haven?	Hopkins School
In what year was Hopkins School founded in New Haven?	1660
What is the name of the environmental charter school located in New Haven?	Common Ground
What are the names of the two Achievement First charter schools located in New Haven?	Amistad Academy and Elm City College Prep
What magnet school in New Haven is centered around arts education?	ACES Educational Center for the Arts
As one of the oldest school which was founded in 1660, what is it's name?	Hopkins School
In terms of schools how old is it historically compare to others?	fifth-oldest
How many charters schools are available in New Haven?	two
What scholarship is awarded in New Haven by Yale University to public school students meeting specified criteria?	New Haven Promise
What is the cumulative GPA necessary for a student to be eligible for the New Haven Promise scholarship?	3.0
How many hours of community service must a student perform in order to be eligible for the New Haven Promise scholarship?	40 hours
What is the minimum attendance rate for a student to be eligible for the New Haven Promise Scholarship?	90-percent
In what year was the New Haven Promise scholarship initiated?	2010
What is the name of the scholarship is funded by Yale?	New Haven Promise
In terms of requirement what sort of service would one needs to fulfilled in order to apply?	40 hours of service to the city.
When did the scholar project begin?	2010
Currently how many students total have been approve by the program?	more than 500 Scholars
What distinction was afforded to New Haven in 2014 by Livability.com?	Best Foodie City
How many Zagat-rated restaurants are located in New Haven?	56
What city in Connecticut has the highest number of Zagat-rated restaurants?	New Haven
How many restaurants can be accessed within a two block radius of New Haven Green?	More than 120
What website gave critical acclaim to New Haven for the city's food?	Livability.com
How many restaurant are located in the center of New Haven's city?	More than 120 restaurants
There are about how many Zagat-rated restaurants located in the city?	56
Within the cities there are markets that focus on what sort of cuisines?	various foreign foods.
What dish is commonly considered to be penultimate culinary achievement in New Haven?	New Haven-style pizza
What is the colloquial term afforded to New Haven-style pizza?	"apizza"
At what New Haven establishment did "apizza" make it's inaugural appearance in 1925?	Frank Pepe Pizzeria Napoletana
What ingredient is notably absent from a New Haven-style pizza when ordered plain?	mozzarella cheese
In what section of New Haven would one expect to find an outstanding white clam pie pizza on Wooster Street?	Little Italy
New Haven, in terms of food is best known for what?	pizza
Where did New Haven pizza style originated from?	Frank Pepe Pizzeria Napoletana
In general what are "apizza" known for?	its thin crust
White clam pie is found in what district of New Haven?	Wooster Street in the Little Italy section
In what year was New Haven-style pizza found?	1925
What landmark New Haven fast food establishment is located on Crown Street?	Louis' Lunch
In what year did Louis' Lunch begin serving fast food in New Haven?	1895
Who is the founder of Louis' Lunch in New Haven?	Louis Lassen
What body of the federal government credits New Haven resident Louis Lassen with inventing the hamburger and steak sandwich?	Library of Congress
Which New Haven resident patented a cast iron stove using grid irons in 1939?	Luigi Pieragostini
Louis' Lunch is popular for serving what?	the hamburger
What specifically how does Louis' Lunch cooks its' food?	1898 cast iron stoves using gridirons
When was Louis's Lunch found?	1895
At what cross streets, marking the center of the Hospital Green of Yale - New Haven Hospital, do food carts congregate on weekdays?	Cedar and York streets
What college of Yale is located at Elm and York Streets in New Haven?	Trumbull College
What school of Yale is located nearest the intersection of Prospect and Sachem streets?	Yale School of Management
What New Haven non-profit manages the farmer's markets that service various neighborhoods weekly throughout the area?	CitySeed
How many lunch carts are there in Yale's Campus during lunchtime?	over 150
Who manages New Haven's farmers' market?	Fair Haven,
New Haven Hospital is located at where in Hospital Green?	Cedar and York streets
In addition to Yale Reparatory Theatre, what are two additional major theatre houses located in New Haven?	Long Wharf Theatre, and the Shubert Theatre
What is the name of the student-run group at Yale University provides theatrical productions in New Haven?	Yale Cabaret
What New Haven performance venue is hosted by Southern Connecticut State University?	Lyman Center for the Performing Arts
What was the original name of the College Street Music Hall?	Palace Theatre
In what year did the newly renovated College Street Music Hall reopen?	2015
What theater sits on Yale's campus?	Yale University Theatre
The Southern Connecticut State University has it own theater as while, it's name?	Lyman Center
What theater is currently under renovation in the city?	The shuttered Palace Theatre
What school in New Haven is known for it's theater being used by both students and church?	Cooperative Arts and Humanities High School
Yale also has a theater managed by its' own student, then name?	Yale Cabaret.
At what New Haven museum is an original copy of the Gutenberg Bible housed?	Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library
What New Haven landmark serves as the nation's oldest college art museum?	Yale University Art Gallery
What New Haven museum offers the largest collection of British art available outside of the UK?	Yale Center for British Art
What museum is located in Hamden on Whitney Street and dedicated to a notable New Haven inventor?	Eli Whitney Museum
With what major university are the majority of museums in New Haven associated?	Yale
Which museum feature the original copy of the Gutenberg Bible?	The Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript
Yale claim to have the oldest college art museum in the United States, what is the name of the place?	Yale University Art Gallery
There is a museum on Whitney Avenue that contain a variety of historical treasure, what is its' name?	New Haven Museum and Historical Society
What is the name of the museum that specifically focus on a single inventor located the city?	the Eli Whitney Museum
What is the name of a prominent contemporary art gallery on Orange Street in New Haven?	Artspace
What are two contemporary art galleries located in downtown New Haven?	City Gallery and A. Leaf Gallery
In what area of New Haven are Kehler Liddel, Jennider Jane Gallery, and The Hungry Eye Gallery located?	Westville
What New Haven gallery is housed in the Erector Square complex located in the Fair Haven neighborhood?	Parachute Factory
For what annual New Haven art event, held in early October, is the Erector Square complex used?	City-Wide Open Studios
What is the name of the art gallery that hosts multiple artist locally and around the world?	Artspace
This gallery contains works of artist such as The Hungry Eye, what is name of the place?	Westville galleries
The Erector Square complex is a gallery that is located where?	Fair Haven neighborhood houses
During which month is the complex particularly active?	October
What public area in New Haven is home to free concerts in the summer?	New Haven Green
What musical festival was initiated in 1982 in New Haven?	New Haven Jazz Festival
In what year was the New Haven Jazz Festival cancelled, thereby precluding it from being one of the longest running free outdoor festivals in the U.S.?	2007
Who sponsors the New Haven Jazz Festival?	Jazz Haven
What is the name for the concerts held on New Haven Green throughout the month of July?	July Free Concerts
What popular events that place in New Haven Green area?	free music concerts
When did the first Jazz Festival made it debut?	1982
In general how many people attend these music concerts?	30,000 to 50,000 fans
After being cancel in 2007, what organization currently support New Haven Jazz Festival?	Jazz Haven
To what annual art festival is the city of New Haven home?	International Festival of Arts and Ideas
What was the inaugural year of the New Haven St. Patrick's Day parade?	1842
In what historic New Haven neighborhood does the St. Andrew the Apostle Italian festival take place?	Wooster Square
What annual festival, celebrated on New Haven Green, memorializes the New Haven's passage into the Revolutionary War?	Powder House Day
In what year did Film Fest New Haven begin?	1995
What international event celebrating art is hosted in New Haven?	International Festival of Arts and Ideas
As one of the oldest and largest traditions, how long have the city been celebrating Saint Patrick's Day?	1842
Which event takes place every year in Wooster Square since the beginning of the 20th century?	St. Andrew the Apostle Italian Festival
What organization was responsible for the planting of several cherry blossom trees in 1973?	New Haven Historic Commission
In general how many people attend  the yearly Wooster Square Cheery Blossom Festival?	over 5,000 visitors
What is the name of the major daily editorial newspaper for the city of New Haven?	New Haven Register
What is the civic news forum that specifically reports on downtown New Haven?	Design New Haven
What weekly entertainment print news source for New Haven is backed by The Register?	PLAY magazine
Channel 65 is New Haven's home to what PBS affiliate?	Connecticut Public Television
What weekly publication in New Haven is issued by Yale University?	Yale Herald
What is the main newspaper company for New Haven?	New Haven Register
The other newspaper, New Haven Advocate is run by which company?	Tribune
There is newspaper company within the city that runs monthly, it's name ?	Grand News Community Newspaper
What is the name of the tabloid that is run by mainly college students?	Rumpus Magazine
In terms of news and sports does New Haven receive television broadcasting from other cities?	All New York City news and sports
What NFL team played at the Yale Bowl from 1973-1974?	New York Giants
In what year was the New Haven Arena demolished?	1972
At what currently defunct New Haven venues did minor league hockey and baseball teams play throughout the latter half of the 20th century?	New Haven Arena (built in 1926, demolished in 1972), New Haven Coliseum (1972–2002)
In what year was Yale field established in New Haven?	1928
The city of New Haven has been known for it various sport teams for how long?	19th century
What famous NFL team played in New Haven own stadium in the 70s?	New York Giants
The city has couple of sport stadium which one of them was torn down in 20th century?	New Haven Arena
In modern day which of the stadiums have continue to host minor sport leagues?	Yale Field
How long has  Yale Field been open and active?	1928–present
What 1995 mayor of New Haven sought to reinvent the area into a northeastern hub of art and culture?	John DeStefano, Jr.
What sports complex was shuttered in New Haven by the DeStefano administration in 2002?	New Haven Coliseum
What was New Haven's last professional sports team?	New Haven County Cutters
What indoor sporting complex in New Haven was constructed by the DeStefano administration in 1998?	New Haven Athletic Center
What is the approximate seating capacity of the New Haven Athletic Center?	over 3,000
Who was the mayor for the city in the late 90s?	John DeStefano, Jr
Due to the heavy upkeep, DeStefano decided to close what major infrastructure in the city?	New Haven Coliseum
When was the last time New Haven had a professional sport team?	2009
In terms of capacity how big was the new constructed New Haven Athletic Center?	over 3,000
In what year did New Haven host the Special Olympic Summer World Games?	1995
What major tennis event take place annually every August in New Haven?	Pilot Pen International
What is the name of the tennis complex, cited as one of the largest worldwide, located in New Haven?	Connecticut Tennis Center
What is the nickname of the historic football rivalry between Yale and Harvard hosted annually in New Haven?	"The Game"
What year did New Haven became a host for the Specials Olympics?	1995
The city also host a large international tennis event, when does it usually take place?	every August
"The Game" is a special event that focus on what sort of rivalry between the colleges?	college football
What is the name of major road race that places within the city?	USA 20K Championship
New Haven served as home to what two notable 19th century architects?	Ithiel Town and Henry Austin
What division of Yale University is credited with nurturing the architectural component of New Havens economy?	The Yale School of Architecture
Who is the notable artist of the Beaux-Arts school responsible for designing both New Haven's Union Station and New Haven Public Library?	Cass Gilbert
In what year did New Haven commission the City Beautiful plan?	1919
Who is responsible for designing Ingalls Rink at Yale University in New Haven?	Eero Saarinen
New Haven is also known for a very notable architecture institution, it's name?	Yale School of Architecture
Who was the architect that design the New Haven Free Public Library?	Cass Gilbert
What was the name of the building that was feature in America's Favorite Architecture list of 2007?	Ingalls Rink
How many properties in New Haven are featured on the National Register of Historic Places?	59
In 1868, which famous author is reported to have declared New Haven's Hillhouse Avenue to be "the most beautiful street in America?"	Charles Dickens
Of the three churches flanking New Haven Green, which is home to a notorious 17th century crypt?	Center Church on-the-Green
What famous American traitor has a first wife buried in a 17th century crypt in a New Haven church flanking New Haven Green?	Benedict Arnold
What structure of Yale University, listed on the National Register of Historic Places, holds the distinction of being the oldest building on campus?	Connecticut Hall
According to the National Register of Historic Places how many historical sites are there in New Haven?	59
In what year was the famous The New Haven Green founded?	1638
What tourist spot can be found directly underneath the New Haven Green?	a 17th-century crypt
Yale University also contains a historical site within it campus, the name of it?	Hillhouse Avenue
What structure was ordered to be built in New Haven in 1776 to protect the port at the outset of the Revolutionary War?	Black Rock Fort
In what year was Black Rock Fort captured by the British in New Haven and incinerated?	1779
After which revolutionary war hero and New Haven native was Black Rock Fort rechristened upon reconstruction in 1807?	Nathan Hale
What two fortifications distinguished the second Fort Hale built in New Haven during the Civil War?	bomb-resistant bunkers and a moat
In what year did the U.S. Congress afford Connecticut the deed to the site at Fort Hale in New Haven?	1921
Black Rock Fort was built in response to what event in the 18th century?	the American Revolutionary War
The fort was destroy during the fighting only to be rebuilt in what year?	1807
Why exactly was the fort rename to Fort Nathan Hale?	Revolutionary War hero
During the Civil War, New Haven needed to be further fortify incase of another invasion, what structure did the city built?	a second Fort Hale was built
The federal government pass the ownership of the fort to the state of Connecticut, what year was this?	1921
What cemetery in New Haven is situated next to the campus of Yale University and has been designated a National Historic Landmark?	Grove Street
In what architectural style is the gateway of Grove Street Cemetery notably designed?	Egyptian Revival
What Beaux Arts structure on New Haven's Chapel Street was built on the site believed to formerly feature the home of Roger Sherman?	The Union League Club of New Haven building
What former U.S. president is believed to have stayed in New Haven at the home of Roger Sherman?	George Washington
Which notable New Haven resident inventor, credited with the cotton gin, is buried in Grove Street Cemetery?	Eli Whitney
What is the name of the historical site that site next to Yale's campus?	Grove Street Cemetery
What is Grove Street Cemetery famously known for?	Egyptian Revival gateway
Roger Sherman once lived in Chapel Street, in modern day what is the name building that sit in its' place?	Union League Club
George Washington once paid visit to Sherman's house, what year was this?	1789
Throughout the Roaring Twenties, what public beach in New Haven was a favored destination for tourists?	Lighthouse Point Park
Which famed professional baseball player is known to have visited at Lighthouse Point Park in New Haven during the 1920's?	Babe Ruth
What notable New Haven attraction constructed in 1847 was located at Lighthouse Point Park?	Five Mile Point Lighthouse
In what year was New Haven's Lighthouse Point carousel constructed?	1916
In what year was Five Mile Point Lighthouse decommissioned upon construction of Southwest Ledge Lighthouse?	1877
What popular tourist site was particularly active during the 20s?	Lighthouse Point Park
In 1847, a new landmark was constructed at the park, what exactly was it?	Lighthouse
After 1877 another lighthouse was build to replace File Mile Point, what was its' name?	Southwest Ledge Light
Is Southwest Ledge Light still active today?	in service to this day
How many Amtrak lines service Union Station?	four
Which transit lines out of Union Station are ranked as the busiest routes in the U.S.?	Northeast Regional and the high-speed Acela Express
Which transit line out of Union Station provides service to Hartford and Springfield, Massachusetts?	New Haven–Springfield Line
Which transit line out of Union Station provides service between Vermont and Washington D.C.?	the Vermonter
With what airline does Amtrak codeshare for transit to Newark Airport that originates or terminates at Union Station?	United Airlines
What is the name of the train station within New Haven?	Union Station
The train line that connects Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont together is known as what?	New Haven–Springfield Line
In additions, the train line is also connected with which airline services?	United Airlines
What form of public transportation preceded the current New Haven Division bus routes?	trolley service
What decade ushered in the operation of horse-drawn carriages in New Haven?	the 1860s
What advancement was made to New Haven trolley lines in the mid 1890's?	all the lines had become electric
What mode of public transportation in New Haven phased out the trolley service in the 1920's and 1930's?	bus lines
In what year was the final trolley route in New Haven converted to a bus line?	1948
Buses in New Haven uses what kind of route for their service?	trolley
Before 20th century, what was the form of public transportation in the city?	Horse-drawn steetcars
What further ideas for public transportation is the city currently considering?	streetcar (light-rail) service
In what year were trolleys finally replaced completely by buses?	1948
What rail trail is slated to run between downtown New Haven and Northampton, Massachusetts?	The Farmington Canal Trail
What historic trail does the Farmington Canal Trail follow?	New Haven and Northampton Company
What canal lies adjacent to the Historic New Haven and Northamption company trail?	Farmington Canal
What proposed bike path, projected connect every major city on the eastern seaboard, is part of the Farmington Canal Trail?	East Coast Greenway
What is the name of the trail that runs from to New Haven all the way to Eastern Massachusetts?	Farmington Canal Trail
Part of the rail trail is also accessible by what form of transportation?	bicycle
Segments of the Farmington Canal is also part of which bicycle trail?	East Coast Greenway
In terms of length, how long is the East Coast Greenway trail if it stretches from Maine to Florida?	3,000-mile
In what year did Orange Street receive the first bike lane in New Haven?	2004
For which New Haven neighborhood did the Orange Street bike lane provide a connection to downtown?	East Rock
In addition to Orange Street, what is a bike route recommended for use by the city of New Haven?	Canal Trail
In what year were bike lanes added on Dixwell Avenue and Howard Avenue?	2012
When was the first bicycle lane created in New Haven?	2004
The lane stretch from East Rock park to what part of the city?	downtown
What year did New Haven finally integrated bike lanes to most of the city?	end of 2012
How is it possible to located the direction of bike lanes within the city?	bike map of the city
What major interstate provides access between New Haven and New York City?	Interstate 95
What major interstate in New Haven provides access northward into Massachusetts, Vermont, and eventually reaches the Canadian border?	Interstate 91
Over which New Haven river does 1-95 cross on the east side?	Quinnipiac River
What is the nickname given to the Pearl Harbor Memorial?	"Q Bridge"
Which New Haven interstate is less congested throughout times designated as peak travel?	I-91
New Haven is adjacent to what part of the national highway?	Interstate 95
Is I-91 similar to I-95 in terms of bad traffic?	is relatively less congested
Which of the nearby highway would take you north to Massachusetts?	Interstate 91
Interstate 95 is also infamous for what exactly?	traffic jams
What river crosses path with I-95?	Quinnipiac River
What downtown New Haven expressway spur intersects at exit 1 of 1-91?	The Oak Street Connector
What is another name for Connecticut Route 15, which provides an alternate route from traveling on 1-95/1/91?	The Wilbur Cross Parkway
What thoroughfare in New Haven features the only highway tunnel in Connecticut?	Route 15
What is the name of the highway tunnel on Route 15 in New Haven?	Heroes Tunnel
Through what neighborhood in New Haven does Route 15 run?	West Rock
Oak Street Connect crosses which interstate highway?	I-91 at exit 1
Connecticut Route 15 is next to which highway?	I-95 west of New Haven,
What is the name of the only highway tunnel in Connecticut?	Route 15
What east-west artery in New Haven serves Union Station?	U.S. Route 1
What road leading northwest from downtown New Haven comprises both Route 10 and Route 63 at various points?	Whalley Avenue
What two major thoroughfares lie to the north of New Haven towards Hamden?	Dixwell Avenue and Whitney Avenue
What northeast avenue in New Haven is signed as Route 17?	Middletown
What western road provides access from New Haven to the city of Derby?	Route 34
Where does U.S. Route 1 runs in terms of direction within the city?	east-west direction
What is the name of the route that heads north of downtown?	Whalley Avenue
What city does the western route 34 leads to?	Derby
What is another surface arteries that is located west of downtown New Haven?	Ella Grasso Boulevard
In what harbor is the Port of New Haven located?	New Haven Harbor
How many trucks does the Port of New Haven have the daily capacity to load?	200
In addition to ground service, what other function is available at the Port of New Haven for offloading truck cargo?	loading docks
Approximately how many square feet of interior storage is available at the Port of New Haven?	400,000
Approximately how many acres of outside storage does the Port of New Haven offer?	50
The name of New Haven harbor?	Port of New Haven
In terms of scale how big is the harbor?	400,000 square feet
How many forklift are available for use in it everyday production?	26
How many transport vehicle can the harbor actually hold?	200
How many major medical centers are located in downtown New Haven?	two
What overarching New Haven medical center is the Smilow Cancer Hospital a part of?	Yale – New Haven Hospital
What hospital in New Haven provides notable cardiac emergency care?	Hospital of Saint Raphael
How many pavilions comprise Yale -- New Haven Hospital?	four
What is the mental health facility is located in New Haven?	Connecticut Mental Health Center
How many pavilion are part of New Haven Hospital?	four pavilions
What hospital is located nearby a working class district within the city?	Hill Health Center,
What is the hospital located north of New Haven in Meriden?	MidState Medical Center
What is the name of the well known hospital specializes in young children patients?	New Haven Children's Hospital
What nearby city would you go to for war related injuries?	West Haven
Yale and New Haven are conjointly attempting to build the area into a research hub for what two industries?	medical and biotechnology
What large site is run by Yale, in conjunction with New Haven and the state, situated three blocks away from Yale's Science hill campus?	Science Park
To what corporation did the multi-block site comprising Science Park formerly belong?	Winchester's and Olin
In addition to Yale employees and financial services, companies in what industry can currently be found in the functioning areas Science Park?	biotech
What is the name of the collaborated project between Yale University, Connecticut and New Haven city?	Science Park
The area of Science Park was originally filled with what?	45 large-scale factory buildings
Although some of the Science Park area is used by multiple institutions and groups, what remains left over Winchester's and Olin company?	parking lots or abandoned structures
On the median strip of what road is New Haven planning to create a secondary biotechnology district?	Frontage
What was originally slated to be built at the site of the proposed area for the secondary biotechnology district?	Route 34 extension
What major pharmaceutical company is currently operating a drug clinic in New Haven within the new biotechnology corridor?	Pfizer
What is the former SNET building in New Haven currently being converted for in the effort of attracting new medical or biotechnology firms?	lab space
Where will the second planned biotechnology district located?	Frontage Road
What was the former name of the place now serving as a biotech building on 300 George Street?	SNET telephone building
When was the opening of first building in the second biotech district?	late 2009
What static inverter plant lies near New Haven?	HVDC Cross Sound Cable
How many PureCell Model 400 fuel cells can be found in New Haven?	three
How much money is each PureCell Model 400 fuel cell projected to save the city of New Haven in energy costs over the course of a decade?	$1 million
What company provided New Haven with the fuel cells currently in place throughout the city?	ClearEdge Power
The Cross Sound Cable company has what sort of structure located near New Haven?	static inverter plant
How many Model 400 fuel cell lies within New Haven?	three
What was the former name of the company that provided the fuel cells to the city?	UTC Power
In terms of budget, what is the estimated savings from using the fuel cell system?	$1 million in energy costs
At what former lodging facility in New Haven were scenes from the 1950's classic, All About Eve, filmed?	Taft Hotel
What Fred Astaire film depicts the reported history of New Haven theaters as "tryouts" for Broadway?	The Band Wagon
What Spielberg movie provided a fictional account of the slave ship mutiny trials that took place in New Haven?	Amistad
What movie produced in 2000 investigated conspiracy theories surrounding the notorious Skull and Bone Society in New Haven?	The Skulls
What is currently located at the site of the old Taft Hotel in New Haven?	Taft Apartments
What was the name of the movie that once film in the corner of College and Chapel streets?	All About Eve (1950)
The fim Amistad uses references to New Haven in the movie, who was the director of Amistad?	Steven Spielberg
New Haven was feature in what movie regarding secret society and conspiracy theories?	The Skulls (2000)
What 2003 movie featuring Julia Roberts was filmed in New Haven?	Mona Lisa Smile
What Spielberg franchise was filmed in New Haven in 2008?	Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull
What year were the streets of downtown New Haven redesigned to resemble for the filming of the Crystal Skull?	1957
How many New Haven locals were cast as extras throughout filming of the Crystal Skull?	500
In what New Haven landmark was the 2009 Robert De Niro movie, Everybody's Fine, filmed?	Union Station
What was the name of popular movie film in New Haven featuring Julia Roberts?	Mona Lisa Smile (2003)
The recent Indiana Jones movie feature how many of the local citizen in film?	500
Union Station was as a part of a set on a film, what was the name of the movie?	Everybody's Fine (2009)
In what Fitzgerald classic does the fictional protagonist make repeated references to New Haven?	The Great Gatsby
Who is the fictional Yale University alumnus, and ostensible former resident of New Haven, featured on The Simpsons?	C. Montgomery Burns
What fictional New Haven resident is featured in the novella, The Odd Saga of the American and a Curious Iceland Flock?	Alex Welch
At what New Haven university is The Gilmore Girls hypothetically set, at least in part?	Yale
The city of New Haven was often referenced several time by a character in a very popular novel which name was?	The Great Gatsby
The Simpson has a character that was set to graduated from Yale University, can you guess his name?	Montgomery Burns
What relations does the television show Gilmore Girls have to New Haven city?	is set (but not filmed) in New Haven
What infamous Doors frontman was once arrested in New Haven?	Jim Morrison
At what venue was Jim Morrison arrested in New Haven?	New Haven Arena
What Morrison song pays homage to his New Haven arrest while mentioning the town by name?	"Peace Frog"
What 1991 film depicts the 1979 Morrison arrest in New Haven?	The Doors
A popular 70s rock band group once played in New Haven, which result in an accident with one of it member, the man name was?	Jim Morrison
What was the song sung that lead to the arrest of Morrison?	"Peace Frog"
The event in 1967 later lead to inspiration of what movie in 1991?	The Doors
The movie The Doors however did not film at New Haven, instead where did they film the reenactment?	Los Angeles
How many students attend BYU on campus?	29,672
How many of the students are also members of the Latter Day Saints Church?	99 percent
What portion of students are native Utah residents?	one-third
Where is Brigham Young University?	Provo, Utah
What is BYU's ranking among private universities?	third
How many students currently attend BYU on-campus?	29,672
Where is BYU's main campus?	Provo, Utah
What is BYU's ranking among private universities?	third
How many of BYU's students are native Utah residents?	one-third
What percentage of BYU students are from Utah?	one-third
What percentage of BYU students are members of the LDS Church?	Approximately 99 percent
How is BYU's size ranked among all private university's in the U.S.?	the third largest
What does LDS stand for?	The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Who owns and operates Brigham University?	The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
For what reason to many student's postpone their enrollment to BYU?	to serve as Mormon missionaries
What is the source of much of BYU's funding?	the church's tithing funds
How many women at BYU do missionary work?	33 percent
What is the average amount of time men serve as missionaries?	two-years
What is the basis of the behavioral code at BYU?	LDS teachings
What is a significant portion of the BYU's operating costs subsidized by?	the church's tithing funds
What percentage of men delay their BYU enrollment to serve as a Mormon missionary?	88
What percentage of women delay their BYU enrollment to serve as a Mormon missionary?	33
How does the cost of attending BYU compare to the cost of attending similar universities?	less expensive
What do all students at BYU agree to abstain from consuming?	drugs and alcohol
What is BYU's main focal point?	undergraduate education
What foreign city holds a branch campus of BYU?	Jerusalem
What institution controls BYU?	Church Educational System
Where are BYU's sibling schools located?	Hawaii and Idaho
How many master's programs does BYU have?	68
How many colleges make up BYU at its main campus?	11
How many satellite campuses are run by BYU?	two
What is BYU's parent organization?	the Church Educational System (CES)
Where does CES sponsor BYU's sister schools?	Hawaii and Idaho
When was the first property for what would become BYU acquired?	October 16, 1875
Who was responsible for acquiring BYU's first building?	Brigham Young
Where was Brigham  Young's school originally believed to be located?	Draper, Utah
Who began the school that previously existed at the site where BYU is now located?	Warren Dusenberry
What year can BYU's origin be traced to with a building called Cluff Hall?	1862
Which president of the LDS church purchased the Lewis Building after hinting at the building of a school?	Brigham Young
What type of influences did Brigham Young hope to avoid with BYU?	atheistic
What is the commonly held founding year of BYU?	1867
Who did Brigham Young hope to educate via BYU?	children of the Latter-day Saints
What college did BYU separate from to become its own entity?	University of Deseret
When did BYU first open its doors to students?	January 3, 1876
Who was the head of the school for its first few months?	Warren Dusenberry
When did the Latter Day Saints Church acknowledge and begin to support BYU?	July 18, 1896
Who is responsible for proposing BYU's current name?	Benjamin Cluff, Jr
Which school did Brigham Young Acadamy, now BYU,  break off from in 1876?	University of Deseret
Who was the first Brigham Young Acadamy, now BYU,  principal chosen by Brigham Young?	Karl Maeser
What did Brigham Young Acadamy become at the end of Benjamin Cluff Jr's term at the helm?	a university
Who was BYU supported by before being sponsored by the LDS Church?	members of the community
What did Board opponent Anthon H. Lund say after Brigham voted to change their name to a University?	"I hope their head will grow big enough for their hat."
In what year was Brigham Young Academy split into two separate schools?	1903
What was the name of the land purchased by BYU in 1904?	Temple Hill
How old was George H. Brimhall when he completed High School?	forty
What topic was excluded from being taught at BYU?	evolution
Who was chosen to head BYU?	George H. Brimhall
In 1903, which two institutions was Brigham Young Univesity replaced with?	Brigham Young High School, and Brigham Young University
Who we responsible for the giant "Y" that is embedded on a mountain near the campus?	BY High School class of 1907
At what age did BYU's elected president in 1904, George H. Brimhall, receive his high school education?	forty
What brief crisis rose in the school at the time of Brimhall's presidency that caused the crises' theory to not be taught for a time?	the theory of evolution
What property was George Brimhall responsible for purchasing for the campus?	Temple Hill
What sort of credentials did Franklin S. Harris have?	doctoral degree
Who was responsible for getting BYU acknowledged as an official university?	Franklin S. Harris
What was purchased to accommodate more students?	an Air Force Base
Which president was responsible for the most amount of growth to the campus?	Ernest L. Wilkinson
How much did the student body expand under Howard S. McDonald?	nearly five times
What type of degree did BYU's appointed president of 1921, Franklin S. Harris have that no former BYU president had?	doctoral
Which BYU president was responsible for BYU becoming fully accredited under all major organizations?	Franklin S. Harris
What event prompted BYU Pres. Howard S. MacDonald to purchase a portion of an Air Force Base to house a sudden influx of students?	the Second World War had just ended
How much did the studen body of BYU increase under the term of Pres. Ernest L. Wilkinson to become the largest private school at the time?	six times
How many new LDS Church wards were added during Wilkinson's presidency?	over 100
Who was responsible for the BYU's first campus outside of the U.S.?	Jeffrey R. Holland
Which BYU president suffered from a terminal illness?	Rex E. Lee
Who succeeded Rex E. Lee?	Merrill J. Bateman
Who is responsible for the university's expansion into law and management schools?	Dallin H. Oaks
What did Jeffrey R. Holland believe to be BYU's strongest asset?	its religious nature
Which new BYU school was added under Pres. Dallin H. Oaks in 1971?	law
In which foreign country did Jeffrey R. Holland open a BYU campus during his presidency?	Jerusalem
What annual event at BYU is carried out in memory of former president Rex E. Lee, who built the Museum of Art on campus?	cancer fundraiser called the Rex Lee Run
What was believed to be one of the schools greatest strengths by Pres. Jeffrey R. Holland?	its religious nature
What is the name of the BYU campus in Jerusulem?	BYU Jerusalem Center
What infamous event occurred during Bateman's term as president?	the September 11th attacks
What was the name of the event the athletic program was involved with prior to the Mountain West Conference?	the Western Athletic Conference
In what year did the school begin a BYU television network?	2000
Who replaced Bateman's successor?	Kevin J Worthen
What type of BYU TV network opened in 2000 under Pres. Merrill J. Bateman?	satellite
What did Pres. Bateman replace a scheduled devotial to do following the Sept. 11th, 2001 attacks?	led the student body in a prayer for peace
What library was Pres. Bateman responsible for expanding?	Harold B. Lee Library
What did BYU's athletic program join under Pres. Bateman?	the Mountain West Conference
Which did BYU's athletic program belong to before joining the Mountain West Conference?	the Western Athletic Conference
What percentage of applicants did BYU accept for it's summer term and fall semester in 2013?	49
What was the average GPA for the accepted students in 2013?	3.82
What percentage of accepted BYU students went on to enroll in 2010?	78
What is BYU's ranking in colleges with the most freshman Merit Scholars?	26th
How many freshman at BYU were Merit Scholars in 2006?	88
Who ranked BYU as the best college in Utah?	Forbes Magazine
Who designated BYU as having high research activity?	Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
Who ranked BYU the vest value for college in 2007?	The Princeton Review
Where was BYU  ranked No. 12 in schools with the lowest student-incurred debt?	U.S. News and World Report's "Great Schools, Great Prices" lineup
In 2008-2009, how was BYU ranked nationally for the number of students who go on to earn PhDs?	No. 10
Who ranked BYU's Marriott School of Mangement as No. 5 for it's undergrad programs in 2009?	BusinessWeek
Who ranked BYU's MBA program No. 1 among regional schools in 2007?	The Wall Street Journal
Using 2010 data, how was BYU ranked as a university creating the most startup companies through campus research?	No. 3
Who ranked BYU as No. 11 of institutions whose grads were top-rated by recruiters in a 2010 article?	Wall Street Journal
How did Financial Times rank BYU among business schools worldwide in 2009?	No. 92
Which BYU college was founded by former alumnus Harvey Fletcher?	College of Engineering
What did alumnus Philo T. Farnsworth invent before receiving his honorary degree from the college?	the electronic television
Which notable former BYU student invented the man-made diamond?	Tracy Hall
What did former student Tracy Hall invent as a BYU professor of chemistry and Director of Research?	a new type of diamond press, the tetrahedral press
Which BYU student produced algorithm is found in Adobe Photoshop?	Magnetic Lasso
What percentage of the student body of BYU has some proficiency in a second language?	Over three quarters
What can be attributed to BYU's high percentage of second language proficient students?	45 percent of the student body at BYU has been missionaries for LDS Church
How many languages are offered as courses at BYU?	over 60
What designation does BYU's Russian language program hold?	largest of their kind in the nation
Who chose BYU as the location of the national Middle East Language Resource Center?	United States Department of Education
How manys students take advantage of BYU's study abroad programs?	Nearly 2,000
How did the Institute of International Education rank BYU in 2009 compared with U.S. universities that offer study abroad opportunities?	number one
Which foreign BYU campus was closed in 2000 due to security concerns?	BYU Jerusalem Center
When was the BYU Jerusalem Center reopened for students following it's closure in 2000?	Winter 2007 semester
What was the most recent conflict that affected the closure of BYU Jerusalem Center from 2000-2007?	2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict
What is the largest and longest-running university-run foreign film program in the U.S.?	BYU's International Cinema
What is the name of BYU's foreign language living experience?	Foreign Language Student Residence
As part of the Foreign Language Student Residence program, what do students commit to speak while in their apartments?	only their chosen foreign language
How many native speakers are in each apartment building in the Foreign Language Student Residence program?	at least one
Which BYU building features films in several languages?	International Cinema
In what year did BYU draft a new Statement on Academic Freedom?	1992
The new Statement on Academic Freedom allows students to analyze and discuss Church doctrine but does not allow student expressions that do what?	contradicts or opposes
What cannot be violated because the expression is dishonest according to the new Statement on Academic Freedom?	Honor Code
How many professors have been disciplined according to the new Statement on Academic Freedom?	several
Who claimed that infringements on academic freedom are distressingly common and that the climate for academic freedom is distressingly por?	The American Association of University Professors
Which system is BYU part of?	Church Educational System of LDS Church
Who acts as chairman of BYU?	President of the Church (currently Thomas S. Monson)
What board do the members of the BYU Board of Trustees also belong to?	Church Board of Education
When did BYU have a separate board of trustees?	Prior to 1939
How does the President of BYU report to the Board?	through the Commissioner of Education
Why does BYU's Winter semester end earlier than most colleges?	there is no Spring break
How many semesters is a typical BYU year broken up into?	two
How many shorter terms does BYU have during the summer?	two
What type of Doctor Program is offered at BYU?	Juris
What allows BYU students to pursue summer internships earlier than most college students?	Winter semester ends earlier than most universities
How many buildings are on BYU's main campus?	295
How many acres are included in BYU's main campus?	approximately 560
Where is BYU's main campus located?	Provo, Utah
How many miles of shelving are in BYU's Harold B. Lee Library?	98
Which BYU building is the tallest in Provost, Utah?	Spencer W. Kimball Tower
How many photographs are in BYU's Museum of Peoples and Cultures?	50,000
How many visitors does BYU Museum of Paleontology receive each year?	about 25,000
From which period does BYU Museum of Paleontology hold many artifacts from?	Jurassic Period (210-140 million years ago)
Who found many of the fossils displayed in BYU's Museum of Paleontology?	BYU's Dr. James A. Jensen
Which BYU building is one of the most attended art museus in the Mountain West?	Museum of Art
How many people does the de Jong Concert Hall seat?	1282
What building is named after Earl and Kathryn Pardoe?	The Pardoe Theatre
What building was named after prominent Utah theater figure Philip N. Margetts?	The Margetts Theatre
Who was the Nelke Theatre named for?	one of BYU's first drama teachers
What type of theater is Nelke Theatre primarily used for?	experimental
What is BYU working to increase by installing various speed drives on all pumps and fans?	energy efficiency of its buildings
Who spearheaded BYU's recent campaign to begin recycling plastics?	BYU Recycles
How long after student campaigning did BYU begin recycling plastics?	a year
What type of waste event is a top priority at BYU for becoming environmentally sustainable?	zero
What is BYU replacing it's incandescent lighting with?	fluorescent
What BYU group is known as one of the best formation ballroom dance teams in the world?	Ballroom Dance Company
What dance championships have been held at BYU for several years?	NDCA National DanceSport
How is BYU's collegiate ballroom dance program rated worldwide?	the largest
What types of dancing are performed by BYU's The Living Legends?	Latin, Native American, and Polynesian
How many NCAA varsity teams does BYU have?	21
What is the name of BYU's fight song?	Cougar Fight Song
Why are many BYU athletes older than other schools' players?	many of its players serve on full-time missions for two years
When does BYU refuse to play athletic games that got the attention of the sports networks?	Sunday
What violation can lead to a player being expelled from a sports team?	honor code
What is the stated mission of BYU?	"is to assist individuals in their quest for perfection and eternal life."
What did Brigham Young instruct Karl G. Maeser to not teach even the alphabet without?	the Spirit of God
What type of institution do BYU leaders consider it to be at heart?	religious
What two types of education does BYU strive to excel in while combining?	religious and secular
What phrase have some Latter-day Saints used in reference to BYU's mission as ambassador to the world for the LDS Church?	"The Lord's university"
Who has expressed dissatisfaction with the nickname "The Lord's University" in the past?	some students and faculty
What perception do some feel that the nickname "The Lord's University" gives about university officials?	always divinely inspired and never to be contradicted
What do the leaders of BYU say "The Lord's University" represents instead of being in reference to its current state of being?	more a goal
What does BYU mandate of it's student members of the LDS Church to be?	religiously active
Who are both LDS and Non-LDS students required to provide an endorsement from upon submitting their application?	an ecclesiastic leader
How many BYU campus rooms are used for the purposes of LDS Church congregations?	Over 900
How many congregations meet on the BYU campus every Sunday?	More than 150
Approximately how many people attend church services on BYU's campus?	24,000
At what age, since 2012, are men allowed to serve a mission after high school graduation?	18
At what age, since 2012, are women allowed to serve a mission after high school graduation?	19
How long is a full-time mission for males?	two years
How long is a full-time mission for females?	18 months
What percentage of graduates had taken a hiatus from their BYU studies to serve as an LDS missionary?	97
What group did President Maeser create that sent teachers to student's homes to verify they were following the school's moral rules?	Domestic Organization
When was the BYU Honor Code actually created?	about 1940
What was BYU's Honor Code mainly used for upon its creation?	cases of cheating and academic dishonesty
In what year was the Honor Code expanded to include other school standards, such as rules regarding drug use?	1957
Who must sign a comitment to live by the honor code as part of the application process?	all students, faculty, and staff
How was BYU ranked by The Princeton Review for having the happiest students and highest quality of life in 2008?	14th in the nation
What parts of the sometimes "too nice" BYU culture is often caricatured?	marrying early and being very conservative
What does BYU's high rate of enrollment by LDS members result in regarding LDS cultural norms?	amplification of
What is one of BYU's characteristics that is most often pointed out through reputation?	emphasizing a "marriage culture"
What percentage of BYU's class of 2005 were married?	Approximately 51
What is the national marriage average among college graduates?	11 percent
What is the average age that BYU students marry according to a 2005 study?	22
What type of marriage is highly valued by LDS members?	marriage within the faith
Who rated BYU as the #1 stone cold sober school in the nation for several years?	The Princeton Review
How does BYU feel about being rated the #1 stone cold sober school?	proud
How do robberies at BYU's Provo compare to the national average?	about 1/10
Who rated BYU as the #1 safest college campus in the nation?	Business Insider
What BYU environment seems to surprise many visitors to BYU as well as to the Utah Valley?	culturally conservative
How many television production studios is BYU Broadcasting Technical Operations Center home to?	three
How many radio studios is BYU BYU Broadcasting Technical Operations Center home to?	two
How many television control rooms is BYU Broadcasting Technical Operations Center home to?	two
Which BYU station offers content in both Spanish and Portugese?	BYU Television International
Which BYU station is available via cable throughout some areas of the U.S.?	BYUtv
What is former alumnus Paul D. Boyer known for being?	Nobel Prize winner
What did former BYU graduate Harvey Fletcher invent?	the hearing aid
Which famous clothing company was BYU alumnus Matthew K. McCauley CEO of?	Gymboree
What was BYU graduate Clayton M. Christensen known as?	two time world's most influential business thinker
Which Nobel Prize winner graduated from BYU?	Paul D. Boyer
Where did best selling author Stephenie Meyer graduate from in 1995?	BYU
Which former Miss America graduated from BYU?	Sharlene Wells Hawkes
Which former co-host of CBS's The Early Show graduated from BYU?	Jane Clayson Johnson
Which award winning ESPN sports writer graduated form BYU?	Sharlene Wells Hawkes
Which former CBS News correspondent graduated from BYU?	Art Rascon
Which three-time Olympic medalist and Hall of Famer graduated from BYU?	Krešimir Ćosić
Which Heisman Trophy winner graduated from BYU?	Ty Detmer
Which two-time Super Bowl winner graduated from BYU?	Jim McMahon
Which winner of the 2003 Golf Masters graduated from BYU?	Mike Weir
Which BYU graduate has won both the 1976 British Open and the 1973 U.S. Open?	Johnny Miller
What does MI stand for?	Myocardial infarction
WHat percentage of people suffer from atypical symptoms?	30%
What is the most common symptom of MI?	chest pain or discomfort
How long can the pain of MI last?	more than a few minutes
What can the discomfort of MI feel like?	heartburn
What can ECG confirm?	ST elevation
What type of blood tests are used?	troponin
How do most MIs come about?	coronary artery disease
What is the main mechanism for MI?	complete blockage of a coronary artery
Name one test used to recognize MI?	electrocardiograms (ECGs), blood tests, and coronary angiography
What can be used for immediate treatment for MI?	Aspirin
Nitroglycerin can be used to help what?	chest pain
WHat does NSTEMI stand for?	non-ST elevation myocardial infarction
When is bypass surgery recommended?	blockages of multiple coronary arteries and diabetes
What should be used for individuals with shortness of breath?	Supplemental oxygen
What is the most common symptom of MI?	Chest pain
What does ischemia refer too?	a lack of blood
What does the pain usually stem from with MI?	left arm
What is a tell tale sign of someone experiencing a cardiac chest pain?	clenching their fists over their sternum
When might an individual experience shortness of breath?	heart limits the output of the left ventricle
What does diaphoresis refer to?	excessive form of sweating
What might cause an individual to lose consciousness from MI?	inadequate blood flow to the brain
What sorts of departments might one see in a major department store?	clothing, furniture, home appliances, toys, cosmetics, gardening, toiletries, sporting goods
Who started influencing department stores in the 1970's?	discounters
What has begun pressuring department stores in more recent years?	online stores such as Amazon.
Other than at the check-out lanes at the front of a store, where may customers check out?	at sales counters within each department.
When did the idea of a "consumer society" begin?	at the turn of the 19th century.
What social group grew as a result of the industrial revolution?	the affluent middle-class
Who was Josiah Wedgewood?	entrepreneurs
What is one explanation for the rise of retail stores in earlier history?	urbanized social group
What group of people were suddenly free to go shopping without fears of being judged or reprimanded?	women
Who became the predominant shoppers for individual households in the nineteenth century?	women
What business in Manchester claims to be the first department store?	Kendals (formerly Kendal Milne & Faulkner)
What did Kendals change it's name to in 2005?	House of Fraser
What year did the Manchester institution begin?	1836
Who acquired the Manchester store in 1919?	Harrods
Who founded Selfridges in 1909?	Harry Gordon Selfridge
What made Selfridges different from many department stores at the time?	the radical notion of shopping for pleasure rather than necessity
How was the store most often presented to the public?	paid advertising
What sort of customers did Selfridges most often cater to?	shoppers with educational and scientific exhibits
What were the origins of the Paris department store?	magasin de nouveautés
What year was the first Paris department store founded?	1784
What book described the functionality and operation of a contemporary Paris department/novelty store?	César Birotteau
What factors influenced the increase of department stores in Paris?	the arrival of the railroads in Paris and the increased number of shoppers they brought
Where did department stores begin to advertise after the large influx of new shoppers?	newspapers
What store was founded in Paris, in 1838, which sold a wide variety of products?	Au Bon Marché
Who became a partner to this store in 1852 and drastically changed operations?	Aristide Boucicaut
What was the change in profit to Au Bon Marche after these changes?	increased from 500,000 francs in 1852 to five million in 1860
What engineering company helped the store expand in 1872	Gustave Eiffel
What was Boucicaut most widely known for?	marketing innovations
Where was The Grands Magasins Dufayel built?	the northern part of Paris
What were employees taught that made a shopping experience different?	exciting social activity not just a routine exercise in obtaining necessities
What sort of stores were The Grands Magasins Dufayel compared to?	bourgeois stores
How were these stores different than most during that time?	transform consumption from a business transaction into a direct relationship between consumer and sought-after goods
What is recognized as the "first" department store in America?	Arnold, Constable
Who founded Arnold, Constable?	Aaron Arnold
Where was the store moved in 1857?	a five-story white marble dry goods palace known as the Marble House.
What made Arnold, Constable stand out from other stores during the civil war?	was one of the first stores to issue charge bills of credit to its customers each month instead of on a bi-annual basis
When was the "Palace of Trade" built?	1869
Where was the "Marble Palace" built in 1846?	on Broadway, between Chambers and Reade streets
What policy did the Marble Palace introduce?	"free entrance" to all potential customers.
How many departments did the new store have, built in 1862?	nineteen
What selling methods did the Marble Palace use?	cash and not credit
What customer services did the Marble Palace offer?	waiting rooms and free delivery of purchases
Who opened the original "modern" department store in America?	John Wanamaker
What feature made Wanamakers different from other stores at the time?	fixed prices marked on every article
How were important documents and money transported throughout the store?	pneumatic tubes
When was electric lighting first installed and used in the store?	1878
In what state was Wanamakers established?	Pennsylvania
In what year was Marshall Field and company established?	1852
When did Marshall's convert to the Macy's name?	9 September 2006
What made Marshall's such a good example for other stores?	exceptional customer service
Where was Marshall's European buying office located?	Manchester, England
What free service did Marshall's provide customers until changing their name to Macy's?	personal shopper
What occupation did David Jones have?	merchant
Where did David Jones and Charles Appleton meet?	in London
Where did Appleton begin a store in 1825?	Sydney
What was the store in Sydney called after Jones moved to Australia?	Appleton & Jones
When did the partnership between Jones and Appleton end?	1838
What were some of the original Australian department stores?	Grace Bros. and Waltons
When did Sydney Myer come to Australia?	1899
Where did the Myer Retail Group open it's first store?	Bendigo, Victoria
What type of department stores are Myer and David Jones?	up-market chains
What department store brand is now out of business in Australia?	Venture
What business was the Hudson's Bay Company originally involved in?	the fur trade
What department store chain did Hudson's Bay Company own until it dissolved in 2013?	Zellers
How many stores did Woolco operate before selling their shares to Walmart?	160
Currently, what department store is most popular in Canada?	Walmart
What is one type of competition department stores face?	specialist stores
What types of stores have created even more competition?	superstores
What factor lead to a decrease in department store shoppers?	residents moved out of the downtown areas to the suburbs
In what year were department store sales beaten by larger stores?	2003
What began the influx of Chinese department stores?	opening policy in 1979
What area does INTIME department stores have the most influence in?	Zhejiang province
What department store has the most success in Jiangsu Province?	Jinying
How are these foreign department stores expanding so quickly?	by listing in the financial market.
What year did Lane Crawford open?	1850
Who established Lane Crawford?	Scots Thomas Ash Lane and Ninian Crawford
What was the store's original target customer base?	visiting ships' crews as well as British Navy staff and their families
Who opened the first Chinese-owned department store?	Ma Ying Piu
What are the 3 main department store companies in Denmark?	Magasin (1868), Illum (1891), Salling (1906).
Currently, what is the largest department store chain in Denmark?	Magasin
Where is Magasin's "flagship" store located?	Kongens Nytorv in Copenhagen
How many stores does Salling have in Jutland?	two
What are two main department stores in France?	Galeries Lafayette and Le Printemps
What year was the first department store open in France?	1852
Who currently owns Le Bon Marche?	LVMH
What apartment store in Paris was closed in 2005?	La Samaritaine
What French department store is part of the same group as Galeries Lafayette?	BHV (Bazar de l'Hotel de Ville)
What cities influenced how department stores in Germany operated?	London, Paris and New York.
What department store was taken over by Nicolas Berggruen in 2010?	Karstadt
What major department store operates in Berlin?	KaDeWe
What store is a part of the Metro AG?	GALERIA Kaufhof
Where did the Metro Department store originally begin?	Singapore and Sogo from Japan
When did Seibu, located in Jakarta, re-open?	2007
Where did Galeries Lafayette open in 2013, inside Indonesia?	Pacific Place Mall
Who operates the wide range of department stores in these areas?	PT. Mitra Adiperkasa.
What store led the Indonesian markets until 2010 when it closed?	Harvey Nichols
What store did Parkson buy in 2011?	Centro Department Store
Where did Centro open it's first store of 2014?	Medan
Who did Lotte partner with?	Ciputra Group
Where is the "Lotte Shopping Avenue" located?	Ciputra World Jakarta complex
What was Makro re-labeled as after it's purchase?	Lotte Mart
When did Ireland begin to see a growth in its middle class?	mid-nineteenth century.
What department store was founded in 1853?	Delany's New Mart
In what city was Delany's New Mart opened?	Dublin
What was Delany's originally called?	Monster House
In what year was the store destroyed?	1916
What Mexican department store typically caters to high-end goods?	El Palacio de Hierro
What company is responsible for over 100 stores in the country?	Sanborns
What company operates Sears Mexico?	Grupo Carso
What chains typically cater to bargain shoppers?	Coppel and Elektra
What sorts of goods do the most popular department stores in New Zealand offer?	high-end and luxury items
What city is Arthur Barnett in?	Dunedin
Where is H & J Smith's flagship store?	Invercargill
Where are H & J Smith stores typically located?	Southland
When was Laidlaw Leeds first established?	1909
How did Panama's department stores originally begin?	as textile retailers
When did Panama's Department stores first start?	at the turn of the nineteenth century
What department store is often called "Felix" by the local population?	Felix B. Maduro
What store has managed to survive despite much it's competition going under?	Cocos
When was the first department store in the Philippines opened?	1877
Who opened some of the first department stores in the Philippines?	Henry Hoskyn
Where were some of the original Philippine stores located?	Manila
What historical event led to many department stores in the area being destroyed?	Battle of Manila in 1945
When were the companies Shoemart and Rustan's established?	1950s
What department store in Puerto Rico is named after an American city?	La New York
When is the Mall of San Juan expected to open?	March 2015
How many tenants are expected to set up shop in the Mall of San Juan?	100 tenants
What two major retailers have plans to do business in the mall once it opens?	Nordstrom and Saks Fifth Avenue
When was Saint Petersburg established?	early 18th century
Who founded a shopping mall reserved for the most elites of society?	Count Essen-Stenbock-Fermor
What famous author described parts of the mall in his books?	Dostoyevsky
What historical site still operates within the mall?	Komissarzhevskaya Theatre
What group was established in 1921 in response to the clash between socialism and consumerism?	State Department Stores (GUM)
When did GUM begin to decline and lose power?	late 1920s
Who formed the State Department Stores, AKA GUM?	Lenin
When did they first establish the organization?	1921
Where is the most notable Russian department store located?	Moscow
In what city is the Passage located?	St. Petersburg
What movie demonstrates the operation of department stores in the former Soviet Union?	Behind Store Window
When was the movie depicting soviet department stores filmed?	1956
What department store chain operates the most stores?	Lotte Department Store
Where is the "field of distribution" most often associated with?	South Korea
What store was the largest department store in the world in 2010?	Shinsegae department store
Where is the largest department store in the world located?	Centum City, Busan
What was the name of the first Spanish department store?	Almacenes el Siglo
When was the first Spanish department store opened?	October 1881
What department store brand now owns most of the market in Spain?	El Corte Inglés
When was El Corte Ingles established?	1934
What is the former name of John Lewis Newcastle?	Bainbridge
What is the world's oldest department store?	John Lewis Newcastle
Who partnered with William Alder Dunn to open the first store?	Emerson Muschamp Bainbridge
What was the location of the first store?	Market Street, Newcastle
When did John Lewis purchase and take over the Bainbridge store?	1952
Who purchased a small shop in 1835, which would eventually become Kendals?	Kendal Milne and Faulkner
Where was the store located?	Manchester
How long did the store operate for?	over 200 years
Who eventually purchased and assumed operation of the store?	House of Fraser
When did Garfinckel's begin operating in Washington?	1905
In what year did Garfield's go bankrupt?	1990
How many major department stores did Baltimore have at the time?	four
By what year had most local stores been assimilated into larger chain operations?	2015
How many stores was J. C. Penny operating in 1930?	1452
What demographic were most stores focusing on?	middle-class audience
What store was one of the first to offer shopping choices for both men and women at the same time?	Sears
How many stores was Sears operating in 1940?	595
In what year did Hudson's address the issue of parking within cities?	1954
What was the store called in Southfield?	Northland Center
In what year did the Hudson's skyscraper close?	1986
What company purchased the Northland Center in 2006?	Federated Department Stores
What was the Northfield Center renamed after it's purchase by another company?	Macy's
Who opened Dayton's Dry Goods?	George Dayton
In what year was Dayton's Dry Goods established?	1902
When was the Southdale Center opened?	1956
What store did the Dayton-Hudson Corporation purchase in 1978?	Mervyn's
In what year did Horne began doing business?	1849
In what city did Horne begin their operations?	Pittsburgh
What company purchased Horne's in 1972?	Associated Dry Goods
How many Horne's stores did Federated Department Stores buy in 1994?	ten
Which constitution gave legislative power to protect intellectual property?	the North German Confederation
When was the Paris Convention?	1883
When was the Berne Convention?	1886
When did the Paris and Berne administrative secretariats merge?	1893
What name did the merged secretariats adopt?	United International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property
When was the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown ruled on?	October 1845
Which court ruled on the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown?	Massachusetts Circuit Court
Who wrote that "only in this way can we protect intellectual property"?	Justice Charles L. Woodbury
What year did the "discoveries are property" concept appear in French law?	1791
When did French author A. Nion mention intellectual property?	1846
Jewish law includes which principle used to justify copyright?	Hasagat Ge'vul (unfair encroachment)
When did Jewish law recognize copyright?	in the 16th century
How long was a patent valid in Sybaris?	one year
When did Sybaris offer patents?	500 BCE
Who grants a patent?	the government
Who is a patent granted to?	an inventor
How many requirements does an invention need to fulfill for a patent?	three
An invention is a solution to what type of problem?	technological
What is a patent offered in exchange for?	public disclosure of the invention
What is the stated objective of most intellectual property law?	Promote progress.
What do patents create an incentive for inventors to do?	create and disclose their work
Which view treats intellectual property as another type of "real" property?	absolute protection or full value
Which recent law stresses international harmonization?	America Invents Act
How much was the worth of intellectual property to the U.S. economy in 2013?	more than US$5 trillion
How many Americans did intellectual property create employment for in 2013?	18 million
Where has IP become a recognised asset class?	the UK
How many intangible assets are not being leveraged in the UK?	millions
What is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission?	Patent infringement
Where does the safe harbor to use a patented invention for research generally not exist?	in the US
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in the US?	civil
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in China?	criminal
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in Russia?	criminal
When was the ACTA trade agreement signed?	May 2011
Which countries signed ACTA?	United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the EU
Which doctrines allow limited use of copyrighted works?	fair use and fair dealing
What is the common term for copyright infringement?	piracy
What occurs when someone uses a trademark that is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark owned by someone else?	Trademark infringement
What does registering a trademark provide?	legal advantages for enforcement
Where is a trademark protected without registration?	In many countries
How is trademark infringement addressed in most jurisdictions?	civil litigation
How is trademark infringement addressed in a few jurisdictions?	criminal law
Which type of intellectual property is secret?	trade secrets
What law do most US states use to protect trade secrets?	Uniform Trade Secrets Act
What US federal law protects trade secrets?	Economic Espionage Act
Commonwealth common law regards trade secrets as what kind of right?	an equitable right
US law regards trade secrets as what kind of right?	a property right
Which term is criticized as vague?	intellectual property
What does the term 'intellectual property' disallow intelligent discussion about?	specific and often unrelated aspects of copyright, patents, trademarks, etc.
Critics criticize what type of validity of the term 'intellectual property'?	semantic
Which term is criticized as having abstract overreach?	intellectual property
Who founded the Free Software Foundation?	Richard Stallman
Who said the term 'intellectual property' should be rejected altogether?	Richard Stallman
Who said the term 'intellectual property' "operates as a catch-all"?	Richard Stallman
How does Stallman advocate referring to copyrights, patents, and trademarks?	in the singular
Stallman thinks what type of IP historically served as a censorship system?	copyright
What does Stallman think copyright served as a regulatory model for?	the printing press
What does Stallman think was meant to be optional and experimental?	copyright
What does Stallman think copyright was supposed to trade temporarily for public benefit?	property rights and free speech
Who pointed out that "if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time"?	Stallman
Who is one advocate of copyleft?	Lawrence Lessig
Who has objected to the idea of IP because "property" implies scarcity?	Stephan Kinsella
Having no natural scarcity makes IP different from what kind of property?	tangible
How much can IP be duplicated without diminishing the original?	indefinitely
What can be harmed by pharmaceutical patents?	health
IP benefits concentrated interests to whose detriment?	the masses
Whose interests are harmed by expanding IP?	the public
Developments in nanotechnology are being undermined by what type of IP?	patent
What type of monopolies does IP create?	intellectual
Who recognizes that conflicts may exist between IP and other human rights?	World Intellectual Property Organization
When was a document called "Human rights and intellectual property" issued?	2001
Who issued a document called "Human rights and intellectual property"?	the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Who said IP failures may infringe on human rights to food and health?	the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
When did the WIPO adopt 'The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization'?	2004
For what type of goods are IP's ethical problems most pertinent?	socially valuable
What is an example of socially valuable goods?	life-saving medicines
What cost does IP rights allow companies to charge higher than?	the marginal cost of production
Who might a higher price exclude from the market?	anyone who cannot afford the cost of the product
What type of creativity is excluded from the US definition of IP?	community creativity
What doesn't current US IP law recognize the uniqueness of?	indigenous cultural "property"
Requiring written records enforces what kind of bias?	Western
The Western bias is that what form is more authoritative?	written
What is the American film industry's trade organization?	Motion Picture Association of America
The Motion Picture Association of America is which industry's trade organization?	film
Which country is the world's largest producer of films?	United States
The MPAA has advocated strong protection of what kind of rights?	intellectual-property
What does the recording industry call piracy?	copyright infringement
What type of company was Napster?	file-sharing
What law enforces digital rights management systems?	Digital Millennium Copyright Act
Which articles of the EU Copyright Directive address circumvention of copyright protection?	Article 6 and 7
When was the Conditional Access Directive passed in the EU?	1998
When was the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ratified?	1994
What type of law handled IP rights before 1994 in TRIP signatories?	common law
What type of IP did the TRIP agreement harmonize the definition of?	trademark
What is any sign which is capable of distinguishing one business's product from another business's?	a trademark
What does Florida stand for	Florida i/ˈflɒrɪdə/ (Spanish for "flowery land")
What states border Florida	to the west by the Gulf of Mexico, to the north by Alabama and Georgia, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, and to the south by the Straits of Florida
What is the state capital of Florida	Tallahassee is the state capital
Where does Florida rank in US population	the 3rd most populous
What city has the most people in Florida	Jacksonville is the most populous city in Florida
What is the longest Contiguous Coastline in the US	it has the longest coastline in the contiguous United States, approximately 1,350 miles
What level is most of the land in florida	Much of the state is at or near sea level
What is the florida climate	The climate varies from subtropical in the north to tropical in the south
Some animals and reptiles native to Florida	American alligator, American crocodile, Florida panther, and manatee
Name a National Park in Florida	Everglades National Park
What conquistador landed in Florida in 1539	Hernando de Soto
Who established early settlements in Florida	Both the Spanish and French established settlements
Who established 1 of the first Us settlements in Florida	Don Tristán de Luna y Arellano
What people were discovered by early settlers of Florida	Native ancestors of the Seminole
What did Spanish settlers introduce to Florida	Christianity, cattle, horses, sheep, the Spanish language, and more
What did Spain trade Florida for	In 1763, Spain traded Florida to the Kingdom of Great Britain for control of Havana, Cuba
Who did the Spanish take from Florida to Cuba	Almost the entire Spanish population left, taking along most of the remaining indigenous population to Cuba
What road did the British construct	the King's Road connecting St. Augustine to Georgia
What river does the Kings road cross	the St. Johns River
What were the names of the 2 British colony's in Florida	British East Florida and British West Florida
Who was given Florida land grants	officers and soldiers who had fought in the French and Indian War in order to encourage settlement
Where did a large number of British Colonist come to florida from	coming from South Carolina, Georgia and England though there was also a group of settlers who came from the colony of Bermuda
The first Permanent Colony in Florida is Now known as	what is now Duval County, Baker County, St. Johns County and Nassau County
What did the Colonist cultivate	the cultivation of sugar cane, indigo and fruits as well the export of lumber
What legal system was introduced by the British in Florida	British governors were directed to call general assemblies
Did Florida send Representatives to Philadelphia for the Declaration of Independence	Neither East Florida nor West Florida would send any representatives to Philadelphia to draft the Declaration of Independence
Who did Florida side with during the revolution	Florida would remain a Loyalist stronghold for the duration of the American Revolution.
What legal system is still used by florida	English-derived legal system which Florida still has today including trial by jury, habeas corpus and county-based government
Where did English and Scotch Irish descent move to Florida from	English descent and Americans of Scots-Irish descent began moving into northern Florida from the backwoods of Georgia and South Carolina
Backwoods settlers of Northern Florida are known as	Florida Crackers
Were the Spanish able to police the backwoods settlements	Spanish were never able to effectively police the border region and the backwoods settlers
What led to the rebellion in 1810	Spanish rule
What did the rebellion lead to	the so-called Free and Independent Republic of West Florida on September 23
What is known as the Bonnie Blue Flag	a single white star on a blue field
What did the rebels overthrow during the rebellion	Spanish garrison at Baton Rouge
Where did Seminole Indians raid	Seminole Indians based in East Florida began raiding Georgia settlements
Who did the Indians offer haven to	runaway slaves
What is the first Incursion led by Jackson known as now	First Seminole War
Why did the US president say the Incursion of Florida was neccessary	orida had become "a derelict open to the occupancy of every enemy, civilized or savage
Why did Madrid cede the territory to the US	Florida had become a burden to Spain, which could not afford to send settlers or garrisons
What was the name of the treaty which ceded florida to the US	Adams-Onís Treaty, which took effect in 1821
Which president was given control of Florida	James Monroe was authorized on March 3, 1821 to take possession of East Florida and West Florida for the United States and provide for initial governance
When did East and West Florida Merge	On March 30, 1822, the United States merged East Florida and part of West Florida into the Florida Territory
What was an issue in the early 1800's	Indian removal was a significant issue
What did congress pass in 1830	In 1830, the U.S. Congress passed the Indian Removal Act
Who did Seminoles harbor	runaway blacks, known as the Black Seminoles
What was the name of the treaty of 1832	Treaty of Payne's Landing
What did Paynes Landing promiss	the Seminoles lands west of the Mississippi River if they agreed to leave Florida. Many Seminole left at this time.
What tempers the Florida Climate	somewhat by the fact that no part of the state is distant from the ocean
What divides Florida two climates	Lake Okeechobee
What are Florida's Mean temperatures in  late July	Mean high temperatures for late July are primarily in the low 90s
Low temperatures in Florida average	mid January range from the low 40s Fahrenheit (4–7 °C) in northern Florida to above 60 °F (16 °C) from Miami on southward
The average daily temperature in Miami	With an average daily temperature of 70.7 °F (21.5 °C), it is the warmest state in the country
What is Florida's nickname	Sunshine State
What is central Florida known as	lightning capital of the United States
Hours of annual sunshine in florida	2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually. The rest of the state, including Miami, receives between 2,800 and 3,200 hours annually
What posses a threat each year to Florida	Hurricanes pose a severe threat
What percentage of category 4 storms hit Florida	category 4 or higher storms that have struck the United States, 83% have either hit Florida or Texas
How many storms hit Florida from 1851 to 2006	Florida was struck by 114
What is found in Florida	Extended systems of underwater caves, sinkholes and springs
What did the last glacial period provide	lower sea levels and a drier climate revealed a much wider peninsula, largely savanna.
What are the Everglades	an enormously wide, slow-flowing river encompasses the southern tip of the peninsula
How much sink hole damage did Florida suffer recently	Sinkhole damage claims on property in the state exceeded a total of $2 billion from 2006 through 2010
What is the population of Florida	The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Florida was 20,271,272 on July 1, 2015
Where did florida rank in population growth	Florida was the seventh fastest-growing state
What is the center of the Florida population	Polk County since the 1960 census
What state did Florida pass in population recently	surpassing the population of the state of New York
How severe are Florida disenfranchisement laws	Florida is among the three states with the most severe felony disenfranchisement laws.
What doe s the law require for criminals	felons to have completed sentencing, parole and/or probation, and then seven years later, to apply individually for restoration of voting privileges
Who does this law effect most	this law has disproportionate effects for minorities
How does it effect elections	one in ten Floridians – and nearly one in four African-American Floridians – are shut out of the polls because of felony convictions
What percentage of the population considers themselves American	6.9% of the population (1,269,765) considered themselves to be of only American ancestry
In the 1980 census the largest ancestry group in Florida was	largest ancestry group reported in Florida was English with 2,232,514 Floridians claiming that they were of English or mostly English American ancestry
How far back did some of the Ancestry go	back to the original thirteen colonies.
As of 2010 what percentage of Florida was white / non Hispanic	those of (non-Hispanic white) European ancestry accounted for 57.9% of Florida's population
What percentage of florida was white Non Hispanic in 1970	In 1970, non-Hispanic whites were nearly 80% of Florida's population
What do many white long term floridian families identify with	long-time Florida families, may refer to themselves as "Florida crackers
Most  white  Florida Immigrants descend from	mainly from English and Scots-Irish settlers, as well as some other British American settlers
What percentage of the Florida population in 2010 was Hispanic	Hispanic or Latino ancestry ancestry accounted for 22.5% (4,223,806) of Florida's population
What Origin makes up most of the Hispanics in Florida	Out of the 22.5%, the largest groups were 6.5% (1,213,438) Cuban
What percentage of Cuban Americans live in Florida	Nearly 80% of Cuban Americans live in Florida, especially South Florida
What is percentage of Puerto Ricans in Florida	the second largest Puerto Rican population after New York, as well as the fastest-growing in the nation
What percentage of Florida was African american in 2010	As of 2010, those of African ancestry accounted for 16.0% of Florida's population
what percentage of florida was black in the early 1900's	During the early 1900s, black people made up nearly half of the state's population
What did many black migrate from florida	response to segregation, disfranchisement and agricultural depression, many African Americans migrated from Florida to northern cities
Where does the African population in florida have ancestry roots	African slaves brought to the US south, there are also large numbers of blacks of West Indian, recent African, and Afro-Latino immigrant origins
Voter demographics of florida in the 1950's	1952 to 1964, most voters were registered Democrats, but the state voted for the Republican presidential candidate in every election except for 1964
what did the voting rights act provide for	Voting Rights Act of 1965, providing for oversight of state practices and enforcement of constitutional voting rights for African Americans and other minorities
what president signed the voting right act	President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965
What party dominated florida politics from 1930 to 1960	1930s through much of the 1960s, Florida was essentially a one-party state dominated by white conservative Democrats
Does Florida benefit from taxes	Florida residents have received more federal monies than they pay in taxes: the state is a net beneficiary
What party political party dominates Florida now	Since the 1970s, the conservative white majority of voters in the state has largely shifted from the Democratic to the Republican Party
How does Florida vote in presidential elections	continued to support Republican presidential candidates through the 20th century, except in 1976 and 1996, when the Democratic nominee was from the South
What do these candidates that Florida supports pledge	the luxury of voting for presidential candidates who pledge to cut taxes and halt the expansion of government
The first post- reconstruction era republican elected to florida	William C. Cramer in 1954 from Pinellas County
What is Cramer credited for	Cramer built a different Republican Party in Florida, attracting local white conservatives and transplants from northern and midwestern states
Who was Claude R Kirk	966 Claude R. Kirk, Jr. was elected as the first post-Reconstruction Republican governor, in an upset election
Who was Edward j Gurney	968 Edward J. Gurney, also a white conservative, was elected as the state's first post-reconstruction Republican US Senator
What did the Democrat party do in the 1970	1970 Democrats took the governorship and the open US Senate seat, and maintained dominance for years
What did democrat voters do in 1998	In 1998, Democratic voters dominated areas of the state with a high percentage of racial minorities and transplanted white liberals
What are snowbirds	white liberals from the northeastern United States, known colloquially as "snowbirds
What party dominates South Florida and Miami	racial minorities and white liberals. Because of this, the area has consistently voted as one of the most Democratic areas of the state
which party dominates most of the rest of florida	Republicans, made up mostly of white conservatives, have dominated throughout much of the rest of Florida
What is the make up politically of florida's fastest growing area	Daytona Beach, Orlando, and Tampa/St. Petersburg, has had a fairly even breakdown of Republican and Democratic voters
The area is viewed as what politically	The area is often seen as a merging point of the conservative northern portion of the state and the liberal southern portion
The vote in this area since the late 20th century decides what	the voting results in this area, containing 40% of Florida voters, has often determined who will win the state of Florida in presidential elections
What has reappointment done to florida	Reapportionment following the 2010 United States Census gave the state two more seats in the House of Representatives
What was challenged in 2012	The legislature's redistricting, announced in 2012, was quickly challenged in court, on the grounds that it had unfairly benefited Republican interests
How did the Florida supreme court rule on the challenge	Florida Supreme Court ruled on appeal that the congressional districts had to be redrawn because of the legislature's violation of the Fair District Amendments
What hapend to the Florida congressional map in 2015	it accepted a new map in early December 2015.
What hapend in the 2000 election	Out of more than 5.8 million votes for the two main contenders Bush and Al Gore, around 500 votes separated the two candidates
How severe is Florida's Disenfranchisement law	Florida's felony disenfranchisement law is more severe than most European nations or other American states
What did this mean in the 2000 election	if the state’s 827,000 disenfranchised felons had voted at the same rate as other Floridians, Democratic candidate Al Gore would have won Florida
Why did the 2 districts have to be redrawn in 2014	that at least two districts had to be redrawn because of gerrymandering
How many were ruled to be redrawn in 2015	lawmakers had followed an illegal and unconstitutional process overly influenced by party operatives, and ruled that at least eight districts had to be redrawn
What was the court vote on the new congressional map in 2015	a 5-2 majority of the Court accepted a new map of congressional districts
Are there any more changes coming to the map	There are likely to be additional challenges to the map and districts.
What was Florida's GDP in 2010	Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Florida in 2010 was $748 billion
Where does Florida's GDP rank	Its GDP is the fourth largest economy in the United States
What are some major contributors to states output	were general services, financial services, trade, transportation and public utilities, manufacturing and construction respectively
What was Florida named in 2011	Chief Executive Magazine name Florida the third "Best State for Business" in 2011
What was the mortgage delinquency rate in 2008	Florida had the highest mortgage delinquency rate in the country, with 7.8% of mortgages delinquent at least 60 days
How many vacant homes in Florida in 2009	300,000 vacant homes in 2009
What percentage of  personal income was spent of Housing in florida	Floridians spent an average 49.1% of personal income on housing-related costs
Where did housing spending ranking nationally	the third highest percentage in the country
What did Hurricane Andrew cause Florida to do	the state of Florida began investing in economic development through the Office of Trade
What did Govenor Bush Realize	that watershed events such as Andrew negatively impacted Florida's backbone industry of tourism severely
What industry was targeted	Medical/Bio-Sciences
Who chose to expand their corporation in Florida	The Scripps Research Institute (TSRI) announced it had chosen Florida for its newest expansion
What architectural styles are in Florida	architectural styles including Spanish revival, Florida vernacular, and Mediterranean Revival Style
When did the art deco area of Miami boom	Miami Beach's Art Deco District, constructed as the city was becoming a resort destination
What does Florida have the largest collection of	the largest collection of Art Deco and Streamline Moderne buildings in both the United States and the entire world, most of which are located in the Miami
What other Unique Architecture started in Miami after world war 2	Miami Modern, which can be seen in areas such as Miami's MiMo Historic District.
What train line connects florida to the North	Amtrak, operating numerous lines throughout, connecting the state's largest cities to points north in the United States and Canada
Where does the Auto train originate	Auto Train, which originates at Lorton, Virginia, south of Washington, D.C
Who does sunset limited service	Sunset Limited, which travels across the southern United States via New Orleans, Houston, and San Antonio to its western terminus of Los Angeles
Two othe ramtrak trains that serve Florida	Amtrak trains (the Silver Star and the Silver Meteor), which operate between New York City and Miami
What is headquartered in Daytona	NASCAR (headquartered in Daytona Beach) begins all three of its major auto racing series in Florida at Daytona International Speedway in February
Name another race in florida	Daytona also has the Coke Zero 400 NASCAR race weekend around Independence Day in July
What is the 24 hours of Daytona	The 24 Hours of Daytona is one of the world's most prestigious endurance auto races
What does St Pete feature for a race	The Grand Prix of St. Petersburg
What was the name of Brian May and Roger Taylor's band before Queen?	Smile
What was the stage name adopted by Farrokh Bulsara?	Freddie Mercury
What was the name of the album Queen released in 2014?	Queen Forever
What was the name of Queen's 1977 album?	News of the World
In what year did Freddie Mercury die?	1991
Tim Staffell left the band Smile in what year?	1970
What band did Tim Staffell join after leaving Smile?	Humpy Bong
What was the name of the college Tim Staffell attended when he met Farrokh Bulsara?	Ealing Art College
In what year did Smile change their name to Queen?	1970
What was the English first name Farrokh Bulsara adopted?	Freddie
John Deacon played what instrument?	bass
In what year did John Deacon join Queen?	1971
What did Freddie from Queen change his last name to?	Mercury
What song inspired Freddie from Queen's surname?	My Fairy King
On what date did Queen play their first show?	2 July 1971
Who designed Queen's logo?	Mercury
What was Freddie Mercury's zodiac sign?	Virgo
Which zodiac sign did Deacon and Taylor share?	Leo
What was Brian May's zodiac sign?	Cancer
The early Queen logo resembled the coat of arms of what country?	United Kingdom
Who offered Queen a management deal in 1972?	Norman Sheffield
Which singer used Trident studios in addition to Queen and the Beatles?	Elton John
What was the name of Trident's subsidiary?	Neptune Productions
Where was Queen spotted before entering discussions with Trident?	De La Lane Studios
In what year did Queen enter discussions with Trident studios?	1972
In what year was Queen's first album released?	1973
What was the name of Queen's first album?	Queen
What was the lead single from Queen's first album?	Keep Yourself Alive
Which Queen song ranked as the 31st greatest guitar song in a 1998 Rolling Stone article?	Keep Yourself Alive
Which critic called Queen's debut superb?	Gordon Fletcher
What was the name of Queen's second LP?	Queen II
What year was Queen's second album released?	1974
Who designed the cover of Queen's second album?	Mick Rock
Who wrote the song Seven Seas of Rhye?	Freddie Mercury
How long is the song The March of the Black Queen?	six-minute
What was Brian May diagnosed with after collapsing in 1974?	hepatitis
What was the name of Queen's third album?	Sheer Heart Attack
What Queen album was released after Sheer Heart Attack?	A Night at the Opera
Queen's Sheer Heart Attack reached what number on the United Kingdom charts?	two
What was the name of the venue where Brian May collapsed?	New York's Uris Theatre
Which song was Queen's first US hit?	Killer Queen
Queen's song Now I'm Here reached what number on the British charts?	eleven
What Queen song is known as an early speed metal song?	Stone Cold Crazy
What music style was found along with camp and vaudeville on the song Killer Queen?	British music hall
Killer Queen reached what number on the Billboard Hot 100?	12
Who created the costumes for Queen's 1975 tour?	Zandra Rhodes
What country did Queen play in for the first time in 1975?	Canada
Queen had a bitter split with what management company in 1975?	Trident Studios
What manager of Led Zeppelin tried to sign Queen?	Peter Grant
Whom did Queen eventually sign with after rejecting the Swan Song records contract?	John Reid
Which Queen album was released in 1975?	A Night at the Opera
Queen's 1975 album took it's name from a movie from which comedy act?	Marx Brothers
How long was Queen's The Prophet's Song?	eight-minute
Which Queen ballad featured a harp and overdubbed harmonies?	Love of My Life
Which Queen song was number one on the UK charts for nine weeks?	Bohemian Rhapsody
What is the third best selling single of all time in the UK?	Bohemian Rhapsody
What Queen single sold a million copies on two separate occasions?	Bohemian Rhapsody
In what year did Queen's A Night at the Opera Tour begin?	1975
Queen's 1975 tour included Europe and what three countries?	United States, Japan, and Australia
What Queen album was released in 1976?	A Day at the Races
What was the major hit from Queen's 1976 album?	Somebody to Love
Which heavy Queen song is a favorite at live shows?	Tie Your Mother Down
Which comedian invited Queen to visit him in 1977?	Groucho Marx
Which Queen members layered their voices on Somebody to Love?	Mercury, May, and Taylor
Where did Queen host a free concert in 1976?	Hyde Park, London
Who organized a free concert by Queen in 1976?	Richard Branson
How many people helped Queen set a 1976 attendance record?	150,000
Which US venue did Queen sell out in 1977?	Madison Square Garden
Which British venue did Queen sell out in 1977?	Earls Court
Queen's sixth album was released in what year?	1977
How many times platinum did Queen's News of the World go?	four
Queen's News of the World contained which two rock anthems?	"We Will Rock You" and the rock ballad "We Are the Champions"
Queen's News of the World Tour took place in what year?	1977
In what year did Queen release the album Jazz?	1978
What number did Queen's Jazz reach on UK charts?	two
What number did Queen's Jazz reach on the Billboard 200?	six
What were the two hit singles off of Queen's album Jazz?	"Fat Bottomed Girls" and "Bicycle Race"
Queen rented what venue for a music video in 1978?	Wimbledon Stadium
Who organized the Concert for the People of Kampuchea?	Paul McCartney
In what year was Queen's Live Killers released?	1979
How many times platinum did Queen's Live Killers go in the US?	twice
Queen's Crazy Little Thing Called Love was an ode to which singer?	Elvis Presley
In what year did Queen play the Concert for the People of Kampuchea?	1979
Queen performed several sold out shows at what US venue?	Madison Square Garden
Queen recorded the soundtrack to what show?	Flash Gordon
What Queen song won the award for best Pop/Rock single?	Another One Bites the Dust
Which musical artist suggested Queen release Another One Bites the Dust as a single?	Michael Jackson
Which Queen album kicked off the 1980s?	The Game
What band was the first major band to play in Latin American stadiums?	Queen
The Game Tour of the band Queen included how many shows in Argentina?	five
How large was Queen's record audience in Argentina?	300,000
What was the final track on Queen's The Game?	Save Me
What sold out venue did Queen play in Canada?	Montreal Forum
What album did Queen release in 1982?	Hot Space
Where did Queen record their 1982 album?	Munich
What was the name of Freddie Mercury's personal manager?	Paul Prenter
Queen left what label before signing with EMI?	Elektra Records
On which season of Saturday Night Live did Queen perform?	the eighth season
Which Queen tour was the first to feature Spike Edney?	Spike Edney
Queen's Spike Edney plays what instrument?	keyboardist
Who fined Queen for donating to a school for the deaf and blind?	British Musicians' Union
Where did Queen play during the height of Apartheid?	South Africa
What date was Live Aid?	13 July 1985
Where was Live Aid held?	Wembley
How big was Live Aid's TV audience?	1.9 billion
How long was Live Aid's stadium audience?	72,000
Who organized Live Aid?	Bob Geldof and Midge Ure
The audience at Live Aid clapped to what Queen Song?	Radio Ga Ga
Which magazine interviewed Brian May about Live Aid?	Brian May
What medium helped Queen fans get used to their songs before Live Aid?	(music) video
What year was Queen's One Vision released?	1985
How many band members wrote Queen's One Vision?	four
What was the mid 1980s Queen boxed set called?	The Complete Works
What was Queen's 1984 Christmas song called?	Thank God It's Christmas
Queen's final tour with Freddie Mercury was in what year?	1986
What was the name of Queen's final tour with Freddie Mercury?	A Kind of Magic
How many fans saw Queen in Knebworth park?	120,000
How many fans saw Queen at the Nepstadion in Budapest?	80,000
How many fans saw Queen at Slane castle?	95,000
Who did Freddie Mercury collaborate with in 1988?	Montserrat Caballé, Barcelona
When did Queen release The Miracle?	1989
Which Queen album had more shared writing credits?	The Miracle
When did Queen end their contract with Capitol?	1990
After leaving Capitol, who did Queen sign with?	Disney's Hollywood Records
What year was Freddie Mercury's final public appearance with Queen?	1990
Which Queen album was released in 1991?	Innuendo
What was one single from Queen's Innuendo that charted in the UK?	The Show Must Go On
What was the name of Queen's second greatest hits compilation?	Greatest Hits II
Which Queen album is the eighth best-selling album in the UK of all time?	Greatest Hits II
Which band member of Queen was seriously ill in 1991?	Mercury
Queen's Greatest Hits II has sold how many copies worldwide?	16 million
When was Freddie Mercury's deathbed confession made?	23 November 1991
What disease did Freddie Mercury disclose he had?	AIDS
What did Freddie Mercury die of?	bronchial pneumonia, which was brought on as a complication of AIDS
Where was Freddie Mercury's funeral service held?	Kensal Green, West London
Which music video contains the last footage of Freddie Mercury?	These Are the Days of Our Lives
Which movie featured Queen's Bohemian Rhapsody?	Wayne's World
What year did Queen get a boost in North American sales due to being featured in a movie?	1992
In what year did Queen win an MTV award?	1992
How high did the album Classic Queen chart on the Billboard 200?	four
How many times platinum did Classic Queen go in the US?	three times
When was the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert held?	20 April 1992
Where was the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert held?	London's Wembley Stadium
How many people attended the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert?	72,000
Which band was he largest benefit concert in history about?	Queen
How many viewers did the largest rock star benefit concert attract?	1.2 billion viewers worldwide
What was Queen's final album featuring Mercury vocals compiled from earlier recordings called?	Made in Heaven
How many copies worldwide has Queen's 1995 album sold?	20 million
In what year was a statue dedicated to Freddie Mercury unveiled in Montreux?	1996
Where was Queen's studio located in Switzerland?	Montreux
In what year did Queen release No-One but You	1997
Who was No-One but You dedicated to?	Mercury
Which compilation did Queen release in 1997?	Queen Rocks
Who performed live with Queen on The Show Must Go On in 1997?	Elton John and the Béjart Ballet
Which Queen member retired in 1997?	John Deacon
Which two members of Queen performed together at several charity concerts?	Brian May and Roger Taylor
Who performed with Brian May in 1998 at a benefit concert?	Pavarotti
Where did Queen play in 2003 with a famous opera singer?	Modena, Italy
Which artist provided vocals for the Queen song found on the soundtrack to A Knight's Tale?	Robbie Williams
What year was Queen's third greatest hits album released?	1999
Who performed a rap version of Another One Bites The Dust?	Wyclef Jean
Alive version of Somebody to Love featured what artist?	George Michael
Which artist guested on a live version of Queen's The Show Must Go On?	Elton John
In 2003 Queen performed for what Nelson Mandela hosted benefit?	the 46664 Concert
Paul Rodgers joined Queen in what year?	2005
Paul Rodgers used to be the lead singer of what two bands?	Free and Bad Company
Which retired Queen member did not join the reunion?	John Deacon
In what year was Queen inducted in the UK Hall of Fame?	2004
Between what years did Queen and Paul Rodgers first embark on a world tour?	Between 2005 and 2006
Where was the first leg of Queen's mid 2000s tour with Paul Rodgers?	Europe
What is the name of Queen's drummer?	Roger Taylor
Where did Queen receive the inaugural VH1 Rock Honors?	Mandalay Bay Events Center in Las Vegas
Which band performed at Nelson Mandela's 90th birthday?	Queen + Paul Rodgers
When did Queen + Paul Rodgers release their debut album?	2008
What was the name of Queen + Paul Rodgers debut album?	The Cosmos Rocks
How many people were at the Queen + Paul Rodgers concert in 2008 in Kharkiv?	350,000
In 2008 what disease did Queen perform benefit concerts for?	HIV/AIDS
On 20 May 2009 which Queen members performed We are the Champions on American Idol?	May and Taylor
What was the name of the Greatest Hits compilation Queen released after the split from Paul Rodgers?	Absolute Greatest
Which two American idol contestants performed a duet with Queen on American Idol?	winner Kris Allen and runner-up Adam Lambert
What day in 2009 was Queen's Absolute Greatest released?	16 November
Which member of Queen wrote a letter to fans in 2009 regarding touring for 2010?	May
What date did May and Taylor of Queen perform Bohemian Rhapsody on X-Factor?	15 November 2009
In 2009, what was the first name of the former Queen member Brian May told fans he had a better understanding with?	Roger
Which country had made an offer to Queen for a one off performance in 2010?	USA
What record label did May and Taylor leave in 2010?	EMI
What label did Queen join in August 2010?	Universal Music
What program interviewed Queen on 22 September 2010?	Hardtalk
Island records is a subsidiary of what group?	Universal Music Group
Which artist presented the Global Icon Award to Queen in 2011?	Katy Perry
Which artist performed with Queen at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards?	Adam Lambert
Where were the BMI awards held in 2011?	London
What band was worried Queen would steal their live performance bassist?	Jane's Addiction
Which Queen members were appearing on American Idol in the late 2000s?	May and Taylor
Where was Queen's final concert with Freddie Mercury held in 1986?	Knebworth
Queen and Adam Lambert played two shows where in July 2012?	Hammersmith Apollo, London
Elena Pinchuk has what kind of a foundation?	ANTIAIDS Foundation
Where did Queen perform with Adam Lambert on 3 July 2012?	Moscow's Olympic Stadium
When did Queen + Adam Lambert perform at the iHeartRadio Music Festival?	20 September 2013
Where was the iHeartRadio Music Festival held in 2013?	MGM Grand Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas
On what show did Queen announce they would be touring with Adam Lambert?	Good Morning America
When was the first Queen tour with Adam Lambert scheduled?	Summer 2014
Who did Queen members say they were open to making a regular member of the band in 2014?	Lambert
Which guitarist inspired Queen?	Jimi Hendrix
What gospel singer did Freddie Mercury cite as an inspiration?	Aretha Franklin
Queen's sound has been described as a mix of Led Zeppelin and what other band?	Yes
What nationality were the rock groups that influenced Queen?	British
What band named after a floating vehicle influenced Queen?	Led Zeppelin
Which Queen song inspired audience clapping?	Radio Ga Ga
Which two Queen songs were written with audience participation in mind?	"We Will Rock You" and "We Are the Champions"
What kind of metal has Queen been associated with?	heavy metal
What 70s style of pop music was Queen associated with?	dance/disco
What was the name of Brian May's signature guitar?	Red Special
What year was Brian May's signature guitar made?	1963
Which producer influenced Queen's feedback heavy sound?	Roy Thomas Baker
What engineer helped with Queen's feedback heavy sound?	Mike Stone
How many vocal overdubs are in Queen's Bohemian Rhapsody?	over 180
Which King of Pop was influenced by Queen?	Michael Jackson
Several groups from which type of metal were influenced by Queen?	heavy metal
This band named after an animal was inspired by Queen?	Def Leppard
This band with a flower in their name was influenced by Queen?	Guns N' Roses
What song was voted the UK's favorite hit of all time in 2002?	Bohemian Rhapsody
What Queen song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2004?	Bohemian Rhapsody
Which Queen video was credited with launching the MTV video age?	Bohemian Rhapsody
A 2005 poll stated that which band's performance at Live Aid was the best ever?	Queen
How many number one singles did Queen release?	eighteen
How many number one DVD's has Queen released?	ten
How many albums has Queen sold worldwide?	over 150 million
When was Queen inducted into the Hall of Fame?	2001
How many number one albums has Queen released?	eighteen
How many Queen bootleg sites were discovered in 2001?	12,225
Where did Queen rank on Rolling Stone's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time in 2001?	number 52
In 2010 VH1 ranked Queen at what number on their Greatest Artist of All Time List?	17th
What country is a popular site for Queen bootlegs because it is outlawed?	Iran
When was Queen's London production scheduled to end in 2006?	Saturday, 7 October
Where was Queen's 2006 London production held?	Dominion Theatre
When did Queen's 2006 London production actually end?	May 2014
What is the longest running show at the Dominion Theatre?	We Will Rock You
What is the second longest show at the Dominion Theatre?	Grease
Queen's Live at Wembley Stadium DVD covered what year?	1986
Queen on Fire included this 1982 concert?	Milton Keynes
When was Queen's A Night at the Opera re-released?	2005
When was the first Queen Bluray released?	2007
Which band members were involved in the restoration of Queen's prior projects?	May and Taylor
Which music video game featured a plethora of Queen songs?	Guitar Hero
Who collaborated with Freddie Mercury on the song Under Pressure?	David Bowie
Which member of Queen discussed a possible Queen Rock Band video game?	Brian May
What Heavy Metal band had a video game in which Queen was featured?	Metallica
Which 1980 movie contained song contributions from Queen?	Flash Gordon
Which 1986 movie contained a Queen theme song?	Highlander
In what year was Bohemian Rhapsody re-released in the US?	1992
How high did the 1992 Bohemian Rhapsody chart?	two
ho sang a version of Queen's Somebody to Love in 2004's Ella Enchanted?	Anne Hathaway
Which actress recorded a Queen song for 2006's Happy Feet?	Brittany Murphy
Which movie featured a cover of Queen's The Show Must Go On?	Moulin Rouge!
Which film had Robbie Williams performing a cover of Queen's We Are the Champions?	A Knight's Tale
On what date in 2006 did May and Taylor of Queen appear on American Idol?	11 April
What month and year was the season  finale of American Idol?	May 2009
Who were the season 8 finalists on American Idol?	Adam Lambert and Kris Allen
On what date did Queen's May and Taylor appear on UK X-factor?	15 November 2009
Which Queen song was featured in the autumn of 2009 on Glee	Somebody to Love
What Queen song did the Glee choir perform in June 2010?	Another One Bites the Dust
What Queen song was performed on a May 2012 episode of Glee?	We Are the Champions
What Queen song is featured on Glee's The Graduation Album?	We Are the Champions
Who was originally chosen to play Freddie Mercury in the movie bearing his name?	Sacha Baron Cohen
Who was the replacement to play Freddie Mercury in the film of the same name?	Ben Whishaw
Who is writing the Freddie Mercury film?	Peter Morgan
Which actor is producing the Freddie Mercury film?	Robert De Niro
In what year did Queen perform at Live Aid?	1985
Where can you trace back the origins of Presbyterianism back to?	British Isles
What does the Presbyterian church typically emphasize?	sovereignty of God
Which act created the kingdom of Great Britain?	Great Britain
Where do most presbyterian churches trace their history back to?	Scotland
When did the reformation during the roots of Presbyterianism take place?	16th century
Which group did Presbyterian churches union with?	Congregationalists, Lutherans, Anglicans, and Methodists
What other religion has history as being part of Presbyterian?	Christianity
Which frenchman greatly influenced Presbyterianism?	John Calvin
In what year did the parliament of Scotland adopt the Scots Confession?	1560
Which book was touted for establishing regulations for church and government?	First Book of Discipline
What term described the method used to regulate common practice and or order?	Book of Order
Which document is an important confessional document second only to the Bible?	Westminster Confession of Faith
What other name is used when referring to the origins of the Presbyterian Church?	Calvinism
What do Presbyterians put importance into?	education and lifelong learning
What do their studies consist of?	scriptures, theological writings, and understanding and interpretation of church doctrine
How do Presbyterians exhibit their faith?	by generosity, hospitality, as well as proclaiming the gospel of Christ.
What is the Presbyterian government known as?	councils (known as courts) of elders
What are the responsibilities of the elder pastors?	teaching, worship, and performing sacraments
When the congregation issues a call for service by a pastor, who has to ratify it?	local presbytery
Who elects the ruling elders?	the congregation
In very large congregations, what do the elders delegate?	practicalities of buildings, finance, and temporal ministry
There's a group of officers in the congregation, what other names are they also known by?	deacons
Which group from the Presbyterian church in rank is above sessions?	presbyteries
What responsibilities so Presbyterians have?	area responsibilities
What are the area of responsibilities made up of?	teaching elders and ruling elders
In the American and Ireland Presbyterian church, which step is generally skipped?	Synod
Which step was recently abolished by Scotland?	Synod
Presbyterianism is based on this type of tradition, what is it?	confessional tradition
Confessional churches express this form of confession, what is it named?	confessions of faith
What is not a sole matter individually in a confessional church?	theology
How is theology carried out in a confessional church?	by the community as a whole
What traditions do some Presbyterian churches only adopt as their doctrinal standard?	Westminster Confession of Faith
Many Presbyterian churches in America have adopted this doctrine as their standard, what is it?	Westminster Standards
The Presbyterian church in Canada has retains which Doctrine in its original form?	Westminster Confession of Faith
To the church of Scotland, what is the sub standard doctrine?	The Westminster Confession
Who was one person who did not fully believe the struggle of conscience?	William Robertson Smith
The Free Church in Scotland  has something in place that only a few churches have implemented, what is it called?	conscience clause
Which book has the Presbyterian church of America adopted?	Book of Confessions
The Book of Confessions reflects the inclusion of another confession, what is it called?	Westminster Standards
Which statements did these other documents include from the Westminster Standards?	the Nicene Creed, the Apostles' Creed
I what year was the The Theological Declaration of Barmen document created?	1967
The Presbyterian denominations from the British Isles were inspired by these principles in what document?	Directory of Public Worship
When was the Directory of Public Worship developed?	1640s
Which government enacted the Directory of Public Worship teachings into law?	Scottish Parliament
What did many Presbyterian churches introduce as a result of modifying prescriptions?	hymnody, instrumental accompaniment, and ceremonial vestments
What is favored by most American Presbyterian churches that is semi-formal service for the "lords Day"?	hymns, preaching, and congregational participation
What do reformed Presbyterians practice?	cappella exclusive psalmody
Among the emerging Protestant and Evangelical churches what are clergy moving away from?	black Geneva gown
A Cassock and Surplice typically consisted of?	full length Old English style surplice
Which movement was representative of the ecumenical past?	Liturgical Renewal Movement
Presbyterians had to distinguished between "Church" and "Meeting house" What was "Church" referring too?	the members
What did "Meeting house" refer to?	building
What were churches called before the 19th century?	meeting house
Early churches were extremely plain, what did most churches not have in them?	No stained glass, no elaborate furnishings, and no images
What did Presbyterian churches have in them?	communion table
What is the alter called in the Presbyterian church?	communion table
What is the alter area refered to as in the Presbyterian church?	Chancel
What is a decorated cross called in a Presbyterian church?	Celtic cross
What did the Celtic Cross represent?	the resurrection
What year did John Knox past away?	1572
What did John Knox do when he returned to Scotland after studying under Calvin?	to reform the Church in line with Calvinist doctrines
The church of Scotland was organized by this person, whats his name?	Andrew Melville
In what year was the Government of church reinstated?	1660
In what year was the Church of Scotland recognized as a Presbyterian institution by the moncarh?	1688
Which group was formed when ministries seceded from The Church of Scotland in 1733?	Associate Presbytery
What year were most Presbyterians in Scotland reunited?	1929
Which two groups were involved in the reuniting of Scotland's Presbyterian churches?	Church of Scotland and the United Free Church of Scotland
In what year was the Presbyterianism church formed in England?	1592
Who was the first known Presbyterian in England?	Thomas Cartwright
Between what years were the ordinances enacted Presbyterianism as the polity of the Church of England?	1645 and 1648
In what year did Salter's Hall controversy, occur that would lead to a split?	1719
When did the result in English Presbyterian congregations becomingUnitarian in doctrine?	18th century
When was the earliest Presbyterian churches founded by Scotland in England?	19th century
In what year during the Presbyterian movement in England was referred to as the "Disruption"?	1843
In what year did the Church of England and the Congregational Church in England  and Waled unite?	1972
What are the two former Presbyterian congregations in England?	St Columba's, Cambridge (founded in 1879), and St Columba's, Oxford
What was the name of the group that was created whenPresbyterian Church of England (PCofE) united with the Congregational Church in England and Wales were united?	United Reformed Church
What is the largest Protestant denomination in Northern Ireland?	Presbyterianism
What is the largest denomination of the entire Ireland Island?	Anglican Church of Ireland
How many Scottie Presbyterians moved to the northern counties in Ireland?	100,000
When was he Presbytery of Ulster formed?	1642
When did Presbyterianism arrive in America?	1703
In what city was the first Presbytery formed?	Philadelphia
In what year would the original churches evolve into the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America?	1789
What is the name of the largest denomination of the Presbyterian Church in America?	the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)
What is the name of the first three listed reformed Presbyterian Church's in the United States?	Presbyterian Church of North America (RPCNA), the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church (ARP), the Reformed Presbyterian Church in the United States (RPCUS)
What is the name of the Asian Presbyterian Church in the United States?	Korean American Presbyterian Church
What is the full name of this American Presbyterian church under this abbreviation (ARP)?	Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church
Around when did Presbyterian missionaries arrived in New Mexico?	1800s
The established Presbyterian church in New Mexico provided an alternative to which religion?	Catholicism
Who brought Catholicism into New Mexico?	Spanish Conquistadors
What is the largest Presbyterian church denomination in Canada?	Presbyterian Church in Canada
In what year was the United Church of Canada formed?	1925
When was the Presbyterian Church in Canada formed?	1875
What is the name of the largest Presbyterian church in Mexico?	National Presbyterian Church in Mexico (Iglesia Nacional Presbiteriana de México)
How many members are in the National Presbyterian Church in Mexico?	2,500,000
When was the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church in Mexico formed?	1875
How many members are in the Presbyterian Church of Brazil?	1,011,300
As of 2011, how many members were in The Renewed Presbyterian Church in Brazil?	131 000
When was Conservative Presbyterian Church formed?	1940
What is the name of the Presbyterian church in Brazil with Dutch origins?	The Evangelical Reformed Church in Brazil
Which  services to most African Presbyterian churches offer?	social services, emergency relief, and the operation of mission hospitals
The Southminster Presbyterian Church in Pittsburg has partnerships with churches in which two countries?	Malawi and Kenya
Which two missionaries help bring Presbyterian churches in the south eastern states?	Mary Slessor and Hope Waddel
The Reformed Presbyterian Church in Malawi has a range of members between what amounts?	17 000–20 000 members
Which church is affiliated with the Evangelical Presbyterian Church in Malawi?	Church of Central Africa-Presbyterian
The Church of Central Africa-Presbyterian often offers what services?	education, health ministries as well as worship
Most of the churches in Korea carry the same name, what is it?	Presbyterian Church of Korea
What year did the second schism take place?	1953
What was the main reason for the latest schism?	whether the PCK should join the WCC
What year was the Chosun Seminary founded?	1947
In what year did the Korean church celebrate the 100th class?	2007
Korean Presbyterian missionaries being sent over seas are second in numbers to only which other country?	United States
What is the name of the largest Presbyterian missionary organization in Korea?	General Assembly of Presbyterian Churches of Korea
Which muslim country does Korea have a Presbyterian church in?	Saudi Arabia
What is the name of the largest Presbyterian church in Taiwan?	The Presbyterian Church
How many members make up The Presbyterian Church denomination?	238,372
Who was the first person to bring Presbyterianism into Taiwan?	James Laidlaw Maxwell
In what era did The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan experience a large growth in members?	era of Guomindang
What year was the largest Presbyterian denomination brought to Mizoram?	1894
Before Mizoram, what was the name of the group of  missionaries that  ventured into east india?	Welsh Presbyterians
Where did the Welsh Presbyterians build there first church?	Sohra
How many members make up the Presbyterian church in Australia?	600,000
Which Australian church follows the traditions of Scotland Presbyterians?	The Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia
Most of the churches in Australia merged in which years?	1859 and 1870, and in 1901
In what year did the Presbyterian Church of Australia , the Congregational Union of Australia , and all the Methodist Church of Australasia merge?	1977
In what year was ordination of woman ministries recsinded?	1991
The approval of women elders which was given in 1960 has been rescinded in all of the Australian states except one, which state did not?	New South Wales
What is the name of the largest denomination of Presbyterian church in Vanuatu?	The Presbyterian Church in Vanuatu
From which country did the Presbyterian Church of Vanuatu originate from?	Scotland
What is the largest denomination church in Vanuatu?	The Presbyterian Church in Vanuatu
Missionaries from which country started The Presbyterian Church in Vanuatu?	Scotland
Which two towns have Presbyterian people, but no churches?	Penama and Torba
What is the most common Christian denomination in Thuringia?	Lutheranism
How much of the Thuringia population is non-religious?	Today over two thirds of the population
Which church in the state has the largest amount of members?	The Protestant Evangelical Church in Germany
How much of the Thuringia population are Catholic?	7.8% of the population
How many Jews live in Thuringia?	750 Jews
Where does the name Thuringia come from?	the Germanic tribe Thuringii
When did Thuringii emerge?	the Migration Period
Who are the theoretical allies of the Thuringians?	the Huns
When were the thuringii first mentioned?	around 400
How long did the Thuringian realm exist?	until 531 and later
Which state was the largest in the region?	the Landgraviate of Thuringia
Where is Thuringia located?	the region between the Harz mountains in the north, the Weiße Elster river in the east, the Franconian Forest in the south and the Werra river in the west.
Which dynasty formed after the Treaty of Leipzig?	the Ernestine Wettins
Which Prussian territories joined Thuringia in 1945?	Prussian territories around Erfurt, Mühlhausen and Nordhausen
When did Thuringia become a landgraviate?	in 1130 AD
Which years were the War of the Thuringian Succession fought?	1247–1264
When did the western half of the state become Hesse?	1247
Where was the Wettin dynasty from?	Margraviate of Meissen
Who did the Saxon Duchies consist of?	the states of Saxe-Weimar, Saxe-Eisenach, Saxe-Jena, Saxe-Meiningen, Saxe-Altenburg, Saxe-Coburg, and Saxe-Gotha
When did Roman Catholicism become suppressed?	as early as 1520
What happened to loyal Roman Catholicism priests?	were driven away
When were most churches and monasteries destroyed?	during the German Peasants' War of 1525
Who was Thomas Muntzer?	a leader of some non-peaceful groups
Which Thuringian district did the Roman Catholic faith survive in?	the Eichsfeld district
When was the German Mediatisation?	1795 to 1814
When were the mediatisation changes confirmed?	The 1815 Congress of Vienna
Which kingdom acquired some Thuringian territory?	the Kingdom of Prussia
Who led the unification of Germany in 1871?	Prussian-led
Which city became the capital of Thuringia after World War 1?	Weimar
When did nazis gain power in Thuringia?	1930
Who was the minister of the Interior for Thuringia in 1930?	Wilhelm Frick
How many delegates did the nazi party win in 1930?	six delegates
Who did Frick remove from the police force?	anyone he suspected of being a republican
Who did Frick replace republican police with?	men who were favourable towards the Nazi Party
Where are the Harz mountains located?	The far north
What is the landscape of Eichsfeld?	hilly and sometimes forested
What is Thuringia's highest mountain?	Großer Beerberg
Where is Orlasenke located?	in the middle
How many big rivers flow through Thuringia?	The Saale in the west and the Weiße Elster in the east
Which river in Thuringia is the most important?	the Saale
Are there any large lakes in Thuringia?	There are no large natural lakes in Thuringia
What are some of the large dams located in Thuringia?	the Bleiloch Dam and the Hohenwarte Dam
Which tributary is located on the southern border?	the Main (a tributary of the Rhine)
Why is Thurnigia's landscape shaped by human influence?	Due to many centuries of intensive settlement
What type of nature is common in the highlands of Thuringia?	a mixture of beech and spruce
What is the original natural vegetation of Thuringia?	forest with beech as its predominant species
Where do most landscape problems come from?	increasingly prolonged dry periods during the summer months
What has been the aim for the Thuringian forests since 1990?	more natural and tough vegetation
Since when has environmental damage in Thuringia been reduced?	1990
What is one thing that helped to improve condition of forests, rivers and air?	modernizing factories
What has been done to former Uranium surface mines around Ronneburg?	Uranium surface mines around Ronneburg have been remediated
What are today's big environmental problems?	the salination of the Werra river
What is causing the salination of the Werra river?	discharges of K+S salt mines around Unterbreizbach
Where was Thuringia in the Middle Ages?	the border between Germanic and Slavic territories
What was the result of the Ostsiedlung movement?	the assimilation of Slavic people between the 11th and the 13th century under German rule
When did population growth in Thuringia peak?	World War I
In what year did many cities in Thuringia lose half of their population?	1950
How many non-Germans lived in Thuringia in 2013?	41,000
What was the increase in non-German population between 2011 and 2013?	24%
How much of the Thuringian population are migrants?	4%
What is the largest group of foreigners?	Russians
Which towns have the highest immigrant population?	Erfurt, Jena, Weimar and Ilmenau
What is the sex ratio gap in Thuringia?	115 to 120 men per 100 women
What caused the wide sex ratio gap in Thuringia?	emigration of young women
How many citizens of Thuringia are over the age of 65?	more than 30%
What is the problem facing the job market in Thuringia?	there are twice as many people leaving as entering the job market annually.
How many people migrated to Thuringia between 2008 and 2012?	+6,700 persons
How many migrants went to Eisenach?	+1,400
Is the migration to Thuringia steady or fluctuating?	The international migration is fluctuating heavily
How many municipalities are in Thuringia?	850
How many municipalities in Thuringia are classified as towns?	126
How many towns have populations greater than 30,000?	ten
What was the latest a town was established in Thuringia?	the 20th century
Which regions of Thuringia have the most political power?	Independent cities (i.e. urban districts) have greater powers (the same as any district) than towns within a district.
What is something more important to Thuringia than most areas of Germany?	Agriculture and forestry
How much of Thuringia's territory is in agricultural use?	54%
What is the largest fertile area of Thuringia?	the large Thuringian Basin
Where do they grow tomatoes in Thuringia?	greenhouses
Which regions value agriculture most?	rural regions
How far back does Thuringia's industrial sector go back?	the mid-19th-century industrialisation
What was the result of the economic transition after the German reunification in 1990?	the closure of most large-scale factories and companies
Where in Thuringia are there fewer industrial companies?	the northern and eastern parts of the Land.
When did traditional industries like glass and toy making collapse?	between 1930 and 1990
Where in Thuringia did BMW get it's start in the 1920's?	Eisenach
Which towns in Thuringia are known as mining towns?	Schmalkalden, Suhl and Ilmenau
Why did the iron, copper and silver mines fail?	because the competition from imported metal was too strong
What is one of the two mining districts were established around 1900?	the Südharzrevier
What did the Thuringian miners do to help the Soviet Union?	uranium mining was also important to cover the Soviet Union's need for this metal
When did the Südharzrevier close?	After the reunification
Where is the GDP of Thuringia?	below the national average
For how long was Thuringia one of the weakest regions in the EU?	Until 2004
What has helped to improve Thuringia?	The accession of several new countries, the crisis in southern Europe and the sustained economic growth
When will government subsidies to Thuringia end?	around 2020
When did the unemployment rate of Thuringia peak?	20% in 2005
What is the current state of unemployment in Thuringia?	it has decreased to 7%
How do wages in Thuringia compare to their neighbors?	The wages in Thuringia are low compared to rich bordering Lands like Hesse and Bavaria.
What do many Thuringian workers do to earn better wages?	working in other German Lands and even in Austria and Switzerland as weekly commuters
What has lead to a lack of workers in some sectors?	demographic transition
When were the first motorways built in Thuringia?	During the 1930s
When were the two motorways expanded?	Both highways were widened from four to six lanes (three each way) after 1990
When were three additional roads built?	during the 1990s and 2000s
Which motorway is Thuringia's most expensive?	The crossing of the Thuringian Forest by the A71
  What is the top priority of the federal trunk road programme 2015?	The upgrading of federal highways
What is Thuringia's traditional energy supply?	lignite
Where does Thuringia get it's lignite?	mined in the bordering Leipzig region
How is most of Thuringia's clean gas consumption carried out?	carried out as Cogeneration in the municipal power stations
What are Thuringia's most important renewable energy sources?	Wind power and Biomass
What is Hohenwarte Dam?	big pumped storage stations
Which hospitals are being expanded?	bigger ones in centres like Jena and Erfurt
Why are there too many hospital beds?	rationalisation processes in the German health care system
Where is it the most difficult to find a family doctor?	rural regions with increased need of health care provision because of overageing.
How long is Thuringian primary school?	four years
For how long have Thuringian children been using the current education system?	Since the 1950s
When do children graduate from primary school in Thuringia?	At the age of ten
Who invented the early years education in Thuringia?	Friedrich Fröbel
How many years of school do students attend after primary?	eight years
What is the biggest school in Thuringia?	The University of Jena
How many universities are there in Thuringia?	four
How many students attend The University of Erfurt?	5,000
What is Germany's leading art school in Thuringia?	The Bauhaus University Weimar
When was The Bauhaus University Weimar founded?	1860
Where is the civil service college of Thuringia?	Gotha
How many students attend the college of music in Thuringia?	800
How many schools offer polytechnics?	Erfurt (4,500 students), Jena (5,000 students), Nordhausen (2,500 students) and Schmalkalden
What is the focus of Thuringia's research center, Jena?	life sciences and optics
Which universities are known for their historic and cultural aspects?	Weimar and Gotha
How is most research in Thuringia funded?	publicly funded
  What is one company that is able to get investments from large companies?	the optics sector at Jena.
When was Thuringia's first railway built?	the 1840s
When were most of the branch lines of the railway abandoned?	Between 1950 and 2000
When will the new high speed train be open?	In 2017, a new high speed line will be opened,
What must a species do in order to be classified as a predator?	direct impact on the prey population
How would you describe a predator that primarily eats plants?	herbivory
A predator must do what to the prey after it is killed?	absorption of the prey's tissue through consumption
A species that uses a host body to survive and reproduce is classified as a what?	parasitic species
How would you describe a diet of a species that eats primarily dead organic material?	detritivory
What does an herbivore eat?	plants
Do detritivores have a direct impact on "donor" organisms?	no
What term is given to an organism that is being hunted?	prey
What term is given to the biological interaction where a predator feeds upon prey?	predation
What is the key characteristic of predation?	the predator's direct impact on the prey population
What do detritivores eat?	dead organic material
What is the key characteristic of predation?	predator's direct impact on the prey population
How many synergetic qualities are there in the predator-prey mechanism?	Two factors
Proximity and the ending of life is called?	true predation
If the prey is not killed the predator-prey interaction is called?	parasitoidism
Instead of what predators eat, how else can they be classified?	the way in which they eat
Certain death is involved with true predation and what other classification?	parasitoidism
The study in which ecologists examine the way predators interact with their prey is called what?	predation
What do household animals prey upon?	large and small prey
Name an exemplar of an predator that uses digestion to kill and gain nutrients from it's prey.	Baleen whales
To be classified as a predator, what action must be performed?	harm their prey in some way
What requirement must a true predator fulfill?	kills and eats another living thing
What is different about a true predator?	Whereas other types of predator all harm their prey in some way, this form kills them
All types of predators do what?	harm their prey in some way
How do ambush predators hunt?	sit and wait for prey to approach within striking distance
What do box jellyfish use to hunt their pray?	venom
Animals that consume parts of their prey are considered to be	Grazing organisms
Prey that can regrow leaves or arms have learned to deal with what?	browsing pressure
Give an example of a predator that specializes in eating autotrophic species	zooplankton
Give an example of an animal that feeds off of other animals for reproduction?	mosquitos
What is an organism that grazes upon other animals?	female mosquitos
What is an organism that can regrow lost arms?	Starfish
Do grazing organisms often kill their prey?	seldom
How do grass and kelp deal with being grazed upon?	regrows at the base
Species that rely on few or a single prey are called?	Parasites
Predator and prey relationships that improve fitness for both species are classified as this type of relationship.	mutualism
Give an example of an animal that will travel several miles in a single day.	elephant
What plant associated with kissing during the holidays is also parasitic?	mistletoe
How are parasites distiguished from grazers?	close association with their host species
How many hosts do parasites typically have?	one or at most a few in their lifetime
How should parasite classification be viewed instead of as four isolated forms?	a continuum
What does the term symbiosis mean?	living together
This species relies on other species to provide a reproductive host for their offspring.	ichneumon wasps
It is believed that parasitoids account for what percentage of the total insect population?	10%
During a parasitoid-host interaction what will happen to the host?	death
What is the term given to organisms living and feeding on their host?	Parasitoids
How many organisms in the insect species are Diptera or Cleoptera parasitoids?	10%
Which type of wasp is a well-known example of a parasitoid?	ichneumon
How do the larvae of the parasitoid wasps kill their prey?	devouring the internal organs until finally destroying the nervous system
Species that aren't considered specialized are called what?	opportunistic
Predator and prey interactions that involve specialization result in a balance called?	equilibrium
When a specialized species resorts to foraging and eating other diets, it's like because it's primary food source is?	scarce
What do specialized predators and prey rely on to get the upper hand?	evolution
What are some predators that will kill and eat nearly anything?	humans, leopards, dogs and alligators
What term is used for predators and prey being well suited to hunt and evade each other?	evolutionary arms race
What is the purpose of an evolutionary arms race?	keep the populations of both species in equilibrium
If scavengers' food becomes scarce, they may turn to what type of diet?	herbivorous
What is the the strata of predator prey interaction called?	trophic level
What is the top predator in an environment called?	apex predator
When a new apex predator moves into an area this changes.	trophic pyramid
What limits the size of a trophic pyramid?	energy
Which organisms are known as primary consumers?	Organisms that feed on autotrophs
What makes an organism a secondary consumer?	feed on heterotrophs
What is an organism at the top of the food chain called?	apex predator
How many levels does a predatory pyramid or heirarchy typically climb?	five or six levels
In what pyramid position is an organism not preyed upon by any other predators?	the top
Dead animals that died as a result of natural causes or non-fatal injuries are called?	carrion
Why are species can be difficult to classify because they?	eat from multiple levels of the food chain
What are plants that eat both living species and consume sunlight for energy called?	Carnivorous plants
What are organisms called that show carnivory and herbivory?	omnivores
What can make classification of predators problematic when using a food pyramid?	Many organisms (of which humans are prime examples) eat from multiple levels of the food chain
Why would carnivourous plants be difficult to classify into a food pyramid?	producing their own food but also digesting anything that they may trap
Would it be easy or difficult to classify organims that eat parasites in a food pyramid?	difficult
Intraguild species consumer other species within?	the same trophic level
Who proposes the concept of the "survival machine?"	Richard Dawkins
The argument of the "survival machines" proposes that what two species are competing for the same genes?	both the predator and prey
Intraguild species may try to consume each other because they are?	potential competitors
Who described predation by describing competing genes within the predator?	Richard Dawkins
To what part of the prey does Richard Dawkins refer to as the "survival machine"?	the body
What are intraguild predators?	those that kill and eat other predators of different species at the same trophic level
Which version of evolutionary theory is easiest to use when explaining predation as competition?	gene centered view
What term is used to decribe predators that prey on their own competition?	Intraguild
What is the title of a predator that maintains balance with an ecosystem?	keystone species
What is the driving force for maintaining an equilibrium within an ecosystem?	biodiversity
When a keystone species is lost another species might become?	dominant
What is increased by keeping a single species from being dominant in an ecosystem?	biodiversity of communities
Predators that prevent others from becoming dominant are called what?	keystone species
What changes to a keystone predator can seriously affect an ecosystem's equilibrium?	Introduction or removal of this predator, or changes in its population density
What animal's food sources were greatly affected with the loss of wolves in Yellowstone National Park?	beavers
Broader ecological impacts can occur when an apex predator is removed, in the case of Yellowstone, this includes alteration to the?	hydrological features
Loose soil from lack of trees along the river bed resulted in?	channel incision
The removal of what animal from Yellowstonw National Park affected beaver populations?	wolves
How did the removal of wolves from Yellowstone affect beaver habitats?	habitat became territory for grazing.
Why were plant populations affected after wolves were eliminated from Yellowstone?	Without predation, herbivores began to over-graze many woody browse species
How did wolves in Yellowstone help beavers eat well?	wolves often kept animals from grazing in riparian areas, which protected beavers from having their food sources encroached upon
At most there are how many step of predator-prey interaction?	maximum of four stages
What is the first step of the predator-prey interaction?	Detection of prey
How does the prey improve their evolutionary abilities through predator-prey interaction?	array of adaptations
Who doesn't benefit from the predator-prey interaction?	the individuals preyed upon
How many stages can predation be divided into?	maximum of four stages
What are the four stages of predation?	Detection of prey, attack, capture and finally consumption
What dilemma has resulted in many predatory adaptations?	obtain food or avoid being eaten
In predation's four stages, in what stage is consumption?	final
Which adaptation helps both predators and prey?	camouflage
What term is used for an adaptation that enables species to blend into the background?	camouflage
Camoflauge consists of what else, in addition to color?	shape and pattern
Ogranisms use camoflauge to blend with their habitat and what else?	other organisms
What is the phenomenon where an organism looks like another species called?	Mimicry
Which organism looks like a bee but cannot sting?	drone fly
A moth that has markings resembling an owl's eyes is an example of what phenomenon?	Mimicry
What is a defensive way that mimicry can be used?	startling the predator and giving it time to escape
How can predators use mimicry?	to lure their prey
What makes predation successful?	gain of energy
Treating the hunt as a cost-benefit scenario is referred to a what?	optimal foraging theory
In optimal foraging theory, how are costs and benefits measured?	energy gain per unit time
What hunting style allows chimpanzees to prey upon colobus monkeys?	Social predation
What is an example of co-coperation between predators of different species?	humans with the aid of falcons or dogs, or fishing with cormorants
What is a species that does not perform social predation?	domestic cats)
What are some species that use social predation to prey on animals much larger than themselves?	Lions, hyenas, wolves, dholes, African wild dogs, and piranhas
Well-fed animals in captivity can become friends with prey animals due to what motivation?	mutual advantage or fear of reprisal from human masters
Why would cats and dogs potentially become companions in captivity?	warmth, companionship, and even protection
Captive animals can distinguish co-inhabitats from what other group?	wild ones outside the area
What are some predators of the electric eel?	(anacondas, caimans, egrets, jaguars, mountain lions, giant otters, humans, dogs, and cats
What defense does a zebra have against predators?	strong kick that can maim or kill
What defenses does a domestic cat have against predators?	formidable teeth and claws
The electric eel uses electric shock for defense and what other purpose?	to kill prey
Is a species always the antagonist in a mobbing attack, or can it play roles on both sides?	species can be on both ends of a mobbing attack
Which bird is an example of being both a predator and defender in mobbing attacks?	Crows
Will birds often mob animals that do not pose a threat?	On occasion
Crows will cooperate with small birds to drive away what predators?	hawks or larger mammalian predators
What scientific term is used to describe  organisms that are brightly colored as a warning to predators?	Aposematism
Does aposematism benefit only the organism ddirectly, or the entire population as a whole?	species as a whole
How does aposematism help a species population?	Upon being harmed (e.g., stung) by their prey, the appearance in such an organism will be remembered as something to avoid
What visual cues are characteristic of aposematism?	bright, easily recognizable and unique colors and patterns
What do predators depend on for survival?	prey
Prey that is eaten is simply replaced by anohter when the population is close to what?	carrying capacity
Predators lower what aspects of their prey?	survival and fecundity
What physical disadvantages do humans have against other apex predators?	speed, bone density, weight, and physical strength
For how long have humans been using stone tools and weapons?	well over a million years
What are humans' primary competitors?	other humans
What is one known istance of cannibalism?	the Donner party
With what species do humans hunt in partnership?	domestic dog
What two apex predators do not have a small population size?	humans and dogs
Do apex predators generally have a large or small population?	small
Which principle states that if two species ecologicl niches/ overlap, both species are likely to be in competition with one another?	competitive exclusion principle
What other factor is relevant to the competitive exclusion principle?	prey abundance
When a predator hunts too much of its prey, causing both populations to dissappear, the phenomenon is called what?	coextinction
Are predator's effects on prey easiest to see in the short-term or long-term?	longer period of time
The rise and fall of predator and prey populations are similar to what, in the US economy?	boom and bust cycle of economics
How can natural predators benefit crops?	reducing damage to crops, and are one alternative to the use of chemical agents such as pesticides
How are predators beneficial to agriculture?	controlling pests
If removing an introduced species entirely isn't a posibility, what is the next best outcome?	keeping its abundance down
Predators are used in conservation to reduce what type of species from the environment?	introduced species
Captain America, Thor and Ultron all inhabit what fictional milieu?	Marvel Universe
Fictional placements within this setting are modeled off what?	real-life cities
Spiderman's fictional city is based off what real American location?	New York
What Marvel character's stories are set in an area resembling the American Southwest?	Hulk
Which two groups of Marvel crimefighters are based in a fictional version of New York City?	the Fantastic Four, the Avengers
Who originally founded Marvel Comics?	Martin Goodman
What was the original name of Marvel Comics?	Timely Publications
When was Marvel founded?	1939
In what city was Marvel based when it was founded?	New York City
What was Abraham Goodman's official title when Marvel was founded?	publisher
What was the cover date on Marvel Comics #1?	Oct. 1939
Who was Marvel/Timely's first true full-time editor?	Joe Simon
Besides Simon, who co-created Captain America?	Jack Kirby
What is the name of the character created by Carl Burgos?	the Human Torch
In what issue was Namor, The Sub-Mariner introduced?	Marvel Comics #1
What cartoon humorist did some high profile stories for Marvel in the early years?	Basil Wolverton
What was the name of the humorous feature penned by Wolverton?	"Powerhouse Pepper"
What duo of kid-themed characters were featured in early Marvel issues?	Ziggy Pig and Silly Seal
What early Marvel character may have been envisioned as a female counterpoint to Captain America?	Miss America
The most popular early Marvel heroes were collectively and colloquially known as what?	"big three"
Marvel Comics was part of many entities having what relationship with Timely?	shell companies
When were all of Goodman's comic entities officially put under the moniker of Marvel Comics?	1961
By what other name were some Marvel-related comic books published?	"A Marvel Magazine"
Under what handle were Marvel's detective fiction comics published?	Marvel Mystery Comics
Which writer and artist was behind the Sub-Mariner?	Bill Everett
What was Marvel's major offshoot with Westerns, war stories, and monster comics called?	Atlas
What was Dan DeCarlo's spooky but humorous comic aimed at kids called?	Homer the Happy Ghost
DeCarlo also penned a knock-off of what teen comic superstar?	Archie Andrews
What was the name of DeCarlo's main character in his humorous teen series?	Homer Hooper
Marvel's first team of superheroes was known by what alliterative name?	The Fantastic Four
What was the issue date when this superhero team debuted?	Nov. 1961
What Marvel executive helped change the focus of Marvel's stories and characters?	Stan Lee
In the Marvel Universe, the public treated conferred what response on the Fantastic Four?	celebrity status
What is Marvel's best-selling comic?	The Amazing Spider-Man
Who joined with Stan Lee in creating the Fantastic Four?	Jack Kirby
What historic era did the Fantastic Four initially inhabit?	Cold War
What traditional superhero element did the Fantastic Four initially do without?	costumes
None of the Fantastic Four had what hidden element so common to other superheroes?	secret identities
The emphasis on relatable settings and character motivations in Marvel's 1960s comics is called what?	"superheroes in the real world"
What magazine featured two Marvel Characters in a college campus heroes feature?	Esquire
What two Marvel characters were part of that campus heroes section?	Spider-Man and the Hulk
Which publisher is Marvel's biggest rival?	DC Comics
Writer Geoff Boucher compared DC to what dull 1960s crooner?	Pat Boone
What two real life persons were also part of the magazine feature alongside fictional Marvel characters?	John F. Kennedy and Bob Dylan
What actual US cities have fictional equivalents in Marvel's comic milieu?	New York, Los Angeles and Chicago
What Marvel hero is related to a tiny insect?	Ant-Man
The shared milieu inhabited by all Marvel heroes and villains is known as?	the Marvel Universe
Which two comic book titles were the precursors to the widening of this overall setting?	Spider-Man and the Fantastic Four
How many comics did Marvel sell during 1968?	50 million
What company was distributing Marvel's titles at that point?	Independent News
To whom was Marvel sold in 1968?	the Perfect Film and Chemical Corporation
What wholly-owned affiliate of this company did Marvel operate within?	Magazine Management Company
What distributor took over Marvel's titles in 1969?	Curtis Circulation Company
What government agency asked Marvel to do a series of stories to publicize an issue?	United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
What issue was Marvel asked to tackle for this agency?	drug abuse
What comic book series did stories related to this issue appear in?	Spider-Man
What industry censorship and standards organization tried to block publication of this series?	Comics Code Authority
What were the issue dates of the three-episode series on this public health issue?	May–July 1971
What situation allowed Marvel to expand into more adult-themed genre stories?	the updating of the Comics Code
What were two of Marvel's comic heroes in fantasy, swords and magic settings?	Conan the Barbarian, Red Sonja
What waterfowl character had his own satire series of comic books?	Howard the Duck
In what year did Marvel's sales overtake rival DC?	1972
How were some of Marvel's genre titles published in the 1970s?	larger-format black and white magazines, under its Curtis Magazines imprint
What new venture did Marvel's founder begin after leaving the company in the 1970s?	Seaboard Periodicals
What former Marvel title imprint did Goodman attempt to revive?	Atlas Comics
What new retail outlet came on board at the end of the 1970s to rival newsstands for comic sales?	comic book stores
How long was the 1970s revival of Atlas Comics in business?	a year and a half
During what era did newsstand distribution begin to tail off markedly for Marvel?	the mid-1970s
What was Marvel's self-hosted comic book convention called?	Marvelcon
What artist's return to Marvel was announced at this event?	Jack Kirby
What Marvel character was specifically created to appeal to the UK market?	Captain Britain
When was the first Marvel-sponsored comics convention?	spring 1975
When did Marvel's British-themed superhero first appear?	October 1976
Who took over as head of Marvel in 1978?	Jim Shooter
What is an example of a bad practice eliminated under Shooter's regime at Marvel?	repeatedly missed deadlines
What noted artist and writer made brought Daredevil to the forefront during the 1980s?	Frank Miller
What team of artist and writer helped popularize the Uncanny X-Men line of comics in the 1980s?	Chris Claremont and John Byrne
Secret Wars was an early example of what Marvel comics story trope?	crossover story arcs
What 1990s comic line featured futuristic, sci-fi stories?	2099 line
What was the name of the specialty comics line created by Clive Barker for Marvel?	Razorline
In what year did Marvel introduce trading cards based on their characters?	1990
What trading card company did Marvel team up with to license these trading cards?	SkyBox International
What was affected by the increasing use at Marvel of crossover stories between comic characters?	overall continuity of the fictional Marvel Universe
What studio helped to relaunch and revamp classic marvel teams The Fantastic Four and the Avengers?	Image Comics
What two Marvel veterans founded Image?	Jim Lee and Rob Liefeld
How was the setting for the Image versions of Marvel characters different from the official comics?	a parallel universe with a history distinct from the mainstream
How long did the Image run of Marvel characters last?	a one-year run
What three titles were part of the darker, grimmer Marvel Knights comics?	the Inhumans, Black Panther and Daredevil
What channel did Marvel buy to self-distribute its own comics in the 1990s?	Heroes World Distribution
When did Marvel purchase this distribution network?	1994
Exclusive deals for distributing comics during the 1990s left this company as the only unaffiliated one.	Diamond Comic Distributors Inc
What year did Diamond Comic Distributors team up with Marvel?	1997
The failure of what high profile business initiative caused Marvel to approach Diamond?	Marvel's Heroes World
What was the business state of Marvel by 2000?	bankruptcy
When did Marvel withdraw from the Comics Code Authority?	2001
What in-house standards system did Marvel replace the Comics Code with?	Marvel Rating System
What was the first book published under this new ratings system?	X-Force #119
What was the name of the adult themed comics imprint for Marvel with more explicit content?	MAX
What entertainment company purchased Marvel at the end of the 2000s?	The Walt Disney Company
When was the sale of Marvel to this entertainment conglomerate announced?	August 31, 2009
What was the sale price of Marvel?	$4 billion or $4.2 billion
What is the readership market share enjoyed by Marvel and DC comics?	80%
In 2010, Marvel switched to what distributor for bookstore comic book sales?	Hachette Distribution Services
When did the Marvel Adventures line cease publishing?	March 2012
Infinite Comics is related to what comics media platform?	digital comics
What are two new titles under the Marvel NOW! line of comics?	Uncanny Avengers and All-New X-Men
Marvel NOW!, Infinite Comics, and Marvel AR are under the umbrella of what in house business endeavor?	Marvel ReEvolution
What does the AR in Marvel AR stand for?	augmented reality
What TV network shares a parent with Marvel?	ABC
What series on this network was given a Marvel graphic novel?	Once Upon a Time
What is the Marvel and Disney line of comics called?	"Disney Kingdoms"
What was the first title published in that joint line of comics?	"Seekers of the Weird"
What movie sci-fi franchise returned to Marvel in 2015?	Star Wars
What publisher did Marvel first license its characters to for novelization?	Bantam Books
What was the first novel published under this deal?	The Avengers Battle the Earth Wrecker by Otto Binder
What was the name of the short-lived Marvel novelization book publisher during the 2000s?	Marvel Press
In 2005, Marvel dropped it's own publishing rights for novelization and instead partnered with what publisher?	Pocket Books
Marvel Press was relaunched in what year?	2011
What Disney theme park will become the first to feature Marvel-specific attractions?	Hong Kong Disneyland
Because of a prior contract, what two Disney parks are barred from featuring Marvel characters?	Walt Disney World and Tokyo Disney
The contract with what non-Disney studio prevents some parks from using Marvel characters?	Universal Studios
What Marvel movie featured Star-Lord and Gamora?	Guardians of the Galaxy
What movie features the characters Baymax and Hiro?	Big Hero 6
The United Kingdom ruled what empire?	British
Which empire was the largest in history, at its height?	British
When did 458 million people live in the British Empire?	1922
How much of the world's population did the British Empire rule in 1922?	one-fifth
How many square miles did the British Empire rule in 1922?	13,000,000
In which centuries was the Age of Discovery?	15th and 16th centuries
Which countries pioneered European exploration of the globe?	Portugal and Spain
When did England become Great Britain?	1707
Which countries began colonizing because they envied the empires of Portugal and Spain?	England, France, and the Netherlands
Which country combined with England to form Great Britain?	Scotland
When did the Thirteen Colonies become independent from Britain?	1783
Which war caused Britain to lose some of its oldest and most populous colonies?	American War of Independence
In which wars was France defeated?	the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars
What did Pax Britannica mean?	British Peace
When was Britain called the "workshop of the world"?	1851
Which countries challenged Britain's economic lead by the start of the 20th century?	Germany and the United States
Which country was Britain's most valuable and populous possession?	India
When did Britain transfer Hong Kong to China?	overseas territories remain under British sovereignty
How many overseas territories remain under British sovereignty?	Fourteen
Who is the Commonwealth's monarch?	Queen Elizabeth II
When was John Cabot's voyage commissioned?	1496
Who commissioned John Cabot's voyage?	King Henry VII of England
Where was Cabot trying to find a route to via the North Atlantic?	Asia
Where did Cabot make landfall?	Newfoundland
Which explorer did Cabot make a mistake similar to?	Christopher Columbus
What had turned England and Catholic Spain into implacable enemies?	the Protestant Reformation
When did John Hawkins and Francis Drake attack Spanish and Portuguese slave ships?	1562
Where did John Hawkins and Francis Drake attack Spanish and Portuguese slave ships?	off the coast of West Africa
Who gave their blessing to further privateering raids against Spanish ports?	Elizabeth I
Which author was the first to use the term "British Empire"?	John Dee
When did Humphrey Gilbert first set sail for the West Indies?	1578
When was Humphrey Gilbert's second attempt to set sail?	1583
What was Humphrey Gilbert's second destination?	Newfoundland
Who was Humphrey Gilbert's half-brother?	Walter Raleigh
What colony did Walter Raleigh found?	Roanoke
What was James I's name/title before taking the English throne?	James VI, King of Scots
When did James I negotiate the Treaty of London?	1604
Which country did England negotiate the Treaty of London with?	Spain
In what century did the English East India Company form?	17th
What period ended towards the end of the 18th century?	the "First British Empire"
When did England first establish a colony in Guiana?	1604
When did England first establish a colony in St. Lucia?	1605
When did England annex the island of Jamaica from the Spanish?	1655
When did England colonize the Bahamas?	1666
What was the goal of England's colony in Guiana?	to find gold deposits
When was England's first permanent settlement in the Americas founded?	1607
Where was England's first permanent settlement in the Americas?	Jamestown
Who led England's first permanent settlement in the Americas?	Captain John Smith
When did the Somer Isles Company take over managing Bermuda?	1615
What did England rename New Netherland to?	New York
Which company had monopoly of the trade to supply slaves to the British colonies of the Caribbean?	Royal African Company
When was the British slave trade abolished?	1807
How many African slaves did Britain transport to the Americas?	3.5 million
The triangular slave trade was between Africa, the Americas, and which British cities?	Bristol and Liverpool
What was the death rate during the Middle Passage?	one in seven
When was the Company of Scotland granted a charter?	1695
When was Panama colonized by Scotland?	1698
How long did the Scottish Panama colony survive?	two years
How much Scottish capital was lost in the Panama colony attempt?	a quarter
When was the Treaty of Union?	1707
When was the British East India Company chartered?	1600
When was the Dutch East India Company chartered?	1602
When had the British East India Company overtaken the Dutch East India Company in sales?	1720
How many Anglo-Dutch Wars were there in the 17th century?	three
The Dutch East India Company focused on trade in which industry?	spice
Which country became Britain's main rival in the 18th century?	France
When did England and the Netherlands make peace?	1688
In which war were England and the Netherlands allies?	Nine Years' War
In which century did Britain become the world's dominant colonial power?	18th
King Philip renounced his right to the throne after what treaty?	Treaty of Utrecht
Which country did Britain acquire Newfoundland and Acadia from?	France
Which country did Britain acquire Gibraltar and Minorca from?	Spain
Which colony allowed Britain to control the Atlantic entry and exit point to the Mediterranean?	permission to sell slaves in Spanish America
What was the Spanish term for permission to sell slaves in Spanish America?	asiento
What was the French equivalent of the English East India Company?	Compagnie française des Indes orientales
When was the Battle of Plassey?	1757
Who led the British in the Battle of Plassey?	Robert Clive
Where were the Carnatic Wars?	British Indian Army
What was the British Indian Army mostly composed of?	Indian sepoys
When was the Seven Years' War?	1756–1763
When was the Treaty of Paris?	1763
Which country acquired New France from France?	Britain
Which country acquired Louisiana from France?	Spain
Which country acquired Florida from Spain?	Britain
British relations with which area became strained in the 1760s-1770s?	the Thirteen Colonies
What was the American colonists' anti-tax slogan?	"No taxation without representation"
When did the US declare independence?	1776
When did France enter the American Revolution war?	1778
When did Britain recognize American independence?	1783
What book by Adam Smith was published in 1776?	Wealth of Nations
The growth of trade between the US and Britain after 1783 seemed to confirm whose views?	Smith
In the 'second' British Empire period, Britain refocused on which areas?	Asia, the Pacific and later Africa
What had been Britain's most populous overseas possession?	British America
Who argued that colonies were redundant?	Adam Smith
How many British loyalists moved from the US to Canada?	between 40,000 and 100,000
New Brunswick was split off from which province?	Nova Scotia
Which act created the Upper Canada provinces?	The Constitutional Act of 1791
What language did most of Upper Canada speak?	English
What language did most of Lower Canada speak?	French
How many convicts per year had Britain been sending to the American colonies?	one thousand
Where did Britain switch to sending their convicts after the loss of the American colonies?	Australia
Who discovered Australia in 1606?	Willem Jansz
What had the Dutch East India Company initially named Australia?	New Holland
When did the first shipment of British convicts leave for Australia?	1787
When was New Zealand discovered by the Dutch?	1642
Who discovered New Zealand for the Dutch?	Abel Tasman
When did Cook visit New Zealand and claim the North Island?	1769
What is New Zealand's native population called?	Māori
Who signed a treaty with the Maori?	Captain William Hobson
The British Royal Navy blockaded which ports?	French
Where did the British Royal Navy defeat the French and Spanish in 1805?	Trafalgar
When were the Netherlands' colonies annexed by Napoleon?	1810
When was Napoleon finally defeated?	1815
The Napoleonic peace treaty had Ceylon given to which country?	Britain
When was the Slave Trade Act enacted?	1807
What abolished the British slave trade?	the Slave Trade Act
Which colony was the official British colony for freed slaves?	Sierra Leone
What abolished slavery throughout the British Empire?	The Slavery Abolition Act
How long of an 'apprenticeship' did slaves need to have before being fully freed?	4 to 6 years
How many square miles of territory were added to the British Empire between 1815 and 1914?	10,000,000
How many people were added to the British Empire between 1815 and 1914?	400 million
Who was Britain's last serious rival after Napoleon?	Russia
What was the period of Britain acting as the world's police called?	Britain's dominant position in world trade
Britain's dominant position in world trade over some countries' economies has been called what?	Informal Empire
What illegal trade was the British East India Company involved in?	opium
How many chests of opium did China confiscate in 1839?	20,000
The First Opium War led to Britain seizing what island?	Hong Kong
Which dynasty outlawed opium trade?	Qing
When did China outlaw opium trade?	1729
When did Britain pass the Regulating Act?	1773
When did Britain pass Pitt's India Act?	1784
When did Britain pass the Charter Act?	1813
The British East India Company was dissolved by which act?	Government of India Act
Who was crowned the Empress of India?	Queen Victoria
Britain competed with which country to fill the Asian power vacuum in the 19th century?	Russian
When did Britain first invade Afghanistan?	1839
What was the British-Russian rivalry called?	the "Great Game"
Britain feared Russia would invade what country/territory?	India
Russian victories against which countries increased British fears?	Persia and Turkey
When did Russia invade the Turkish Balkans?	1853
What was took place in 1854-1856?	Crimean War
Who lost the Crimean War?	Russia
When did Britain take over Baluchistan?	1876
Which country took over Kazakhstan?	Russia
When was the southern tip of Africa colonized?	1652
Which entity founded the Cape Colony?	The Dutch East India Company
When did Britain formally acquire the Cape Colony?	1806
What African people moved northwards to escape British rule?	Boers
When did the Second Boer War end?	1902
When did the Suez Canal open?	1869
Which ocean did the Suez Canal connect the Mediterranean to?	Indian Ocean
Which French leader ruled when the Suez Canal opened?	Napoleon III
How much did Britain spend to buy Egypt's share of the Suez Canal?	£4 million
The Suez Canal became neutral territory by what treaty?	Convention of Constantinople
Where did France try to invade in 1898?	Fashoda
What army did Britain and Egypt defeat together?	Mahdist
When did Britain withdraw from Sudan?	1885
What was the period of European empires competing to control Africa called?	the "Scramble for Africa"
Where was a conference held in 1884 to regulate European competition for Africa?	Berlin
When was it proposed to unify Upper and Lower Canada?	1839
The Act of Union unified Canada into a territory by what name?	Province of Canada
When was the British North America Act passed?	1867
When did Australia achieve self-government?	after 1900
When did New Zealand achieve self-government?	after 1900
Which British Prime Minister first supported home rule of Ireland?	William Gladstone
The first Home Rule bill would have given Ireland less self-control than what other territory?	Canada
When was the Easter Rising?	1916
When was a Home Rule bill passed?	1914
The passed Home Rule Bill wasn't implemented because of which war?	the First World War
Which country seemed like Britain's most likely threat in the early 20th century?	Germany
Which country did Britain ally with in 1902?	Japan
Which country did Britain ally with in 1904?	France
Which country did Britain ally with in 1907?	Russia
When did the First World War begin?	1914
When WW1 began, Britain took the opportunity to take over most of which country's colonies?	Germany
Who took over German New Guinea?	Australia
Who took over Samoa?	Sykes–Picot Agreement
The Sykes–Picot Agreement was signed in what year?	1916
When was the Gallipoli Campaign?	1915
Which British Prime Minister recognized the Dominions' contributions in 1917?	David Lloyd George
The Gallipoli Campaign fought against which country?	the Ottoman Empire
The Imperial War Cabinet was created by which British Prime Minister?	Gallipoli Campaign
How many people were in the Dominions' armies?	Over 2.5 million
When was the Treaty of Versailles signed?	1919
How many square miles did the Treaty of Versailles add to the British Empire?	1,800,000
Which countries' colonies were given to the Allied powers in 1919?	Germany and the Ottoman Empire
What modern-day country is South-West Africa?	Namibia
How many people did the Treaty of Versailles add to the British Empire?	13 million
When did Britain sign the Washington Naval Treaty?	1922
The Great Depression helped which countries' governments become more militaristic?	Japan and Germany
When Britain had to choose between its Japanese alliance or the US, which did it choose?	United States
British imperialism was being reconsidered in light of which territories' independence movements?	India and Ireland
When did Ireland establish their own assembly?	1919
What political party established Ireland's assembly?	Sinn Féin
When did the Anglo-Irish War end?	1921
What treaty was signed after the Anglo-Irish War?	Anglo-Irish Treaty
How many counties of Ireland are in Northern Ireland?	six
When was the Government of India Act passed?	1919
What event stoked fears of communist plots in India?	the Ghadar Conspiracy
In what region was the Amritsar Massacre?	Punjab
The Chauri Chaura incident led to the end of what movement?	Non-Co-Operation
When did Egypt regain formal independence from Britain?	1922
When did Egypt stop being a British client state?	1954
What treaty was signed in 1936?	Anglo-Egyptian Treaty
When did Iraq gain independence from Britain?	1932
Britain became more pro-Arab in the 1930s at the expense of which race?	Jewish
When was the right of Dominions to determine their own foreign policy recognized?	1923
Which treaty did Canada ignore?	Treaty of Lausanne
When was the Balfour Declaration issued?	1926
When was the status of Dominions as equal autonomous communities given legal force?	1931
When did Ireland issue a new constitution?	1937
When was France occupied by Germany?	1940
When was the Atlantic Charter signed?	August 1941
Which British Prime Minister signed the Atlantic Charter?	Churchill
Which US President signed the Atlantic Charter?	Roosevelt
Which country first entered World War 2 after France's defeat?	Soviet Union
Which country attacked British Malaya in 1941?	Japan
Which country attacked Hong Kong in 1941?	Japan
When was the ANZUS Pact formed?	1951
Which countries were in the ANZUS Pact?	Australia, New Zealand and the United States
Which territory had been compared to Gibraltar?	Singapore
How much money did the US loan to Britain after WW2?	$US 4.33 billion
When did Britain finish paying back the US loan?	2006
When did the US make a large loan to Britain?	1946
Though the US and the Soviet Union were both against colonialism, what was the US more afraid of?	communism
How many people outside the UK were under British rule in 1945?	700 million
Who led the British government elected in 1945?	Clement Attlee
What were India's two largest political parties in the 1940s?	the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League
What was India's majority religion in the 1940s?	Hindu
When India was split into Hindu and Muslim areas, what country did the Muslim area become?	Pakistan
When did Burma get its independence?	1948
What race was the majority in Palestine in the 1940s?	Arab
When did Britain announce plans to withdraw from Palestine?	1947
Which entity decided to partition Palestine into Jewish and Arab states?	The UN General Assembly
Where did many Jewish refugees want to move because of the Holocaust?	Palestine
When did the Malayan Emergency begin?	1948
When did Britain give the Federation of Malaya its independence?	1957
When did Singapore leave the Federation of Malaya?	1965
What race was the majority of Singapore's population?	Chinese
When did Brunei get its independence?	1984
What party regained power in Britain in 1951?	Conservative Party
Which party was Winston Churchill in?	Conservative Party
Who ruled Egypt in 1952?	Gamal Abdul Nasser
When did Sudan receive independence?	1 January 1956
Britain wanted to retain control of the Suez Canal to help its importance in what region?	Middle East
When was the Suez Canal nationalized?	July 1956
Who became British Prime Minister after Winston Churchill?	Anthony Eden
Which country did Eden conspire with to cause an attack on Egypt?	France
Who decided to sell US reserves of the British pound to cause the pound to collapse?	Eisenhower
What country did Britain convince to attack Egypt?	Israeli
Where did 'Britain's Waterloo' occur?	Suez
Who referred to 'Suez Syndrome'?	Margaret Thatcher
When did Britain retake the Falkland Islands?	1982
From whom did Britain retake the Falkland Islands?	Argentina
A British minister thought which country was becoming an 'American satellite'?	Britain
When did Britain withdraw from Aden?	1967
When did Britain withdraw from Bahrain?	1971
When did Britain withdraw from the Maldives?	1976
Who was Harold Wilson's Defense Secretary?	Denis Healey
Where did Britain's army attack in 1961?	Kuwait
What was the last British colony remaining in Africa?	Southern Rhodesia
When was the second-to-last British colony in Africa granted independence?	1968
When was the Unilateral Declaration of Independence of Rhodesia?	1965
What new country did the Lancaster House Agreement recognize?	Mau Mau Uprising
Where was the Mau Mau Uprising?	Kenyan
Which British territory received independence in 1961?	Jamaica
Which British territory received independence in 1962?	Trinidad
When did Barbados get independence?	1966
Which islands decided to return to British rule after receiving independence?	Anguilla and the Turks and Caicos
What was Britain's last American mainland colony?	British Honduras
When was Canada given full control of its constitution?	1982
When did Rhodesia become Zimbabwe?	1980
What were the remaining British territories called in 1981?	British Dependent Territories
What were the remaining British territories called in 2002?	British Overseas Territories
Which 1980s war victory helped Britain seem more like a world power again?	Falklands War
Who was the British Prime Minister in 1982?	Margaret Thatcher
Which treaty had given Hong Kong to Britain?	Treaty of Nanking
When did Britain hand over Hong Kong to China?	1997
When was the Sino-British Joint Declaration?	1984
Which territory did Margaret Thatcher compare Hong Kong to?	Falkland Islands
How many overseas territories does Britain still have?	14
When did Britain decide to call its territories the British Overseas Territories?	2002
Which country besides Britain claims Gibraltar?	Spain
Which country besides Britain claims the Falkland Islands?	Argentina
Which country besides Britain claims the South Sandwich Islands?	Argentina
How many Commonwealth nations are there?	53
What is the population of the Commonwealth?	2.2 billion
How many Commonwealth nations still consider the British Queen their head of state?	Sixteen
Who is the British Queen?	Elizabeth II
In which countries did the British Isles provide most of the founding settlers?	the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
Where did many Indians move to?	Malaysia and Fiji
Many people of which ethnicity moved to Malaysia, Singapore and the Caribbean?	Chinese
When did many former colonies' citizens begin immigrating into Britain?	after the Second World War
What is botany?	science of plant life
What does the word botany mean?	"to feed" or "to graze"
What is  a plant scientist called?	A botanist
Does botany only study plants?	included the study of fungi and algae
What science led to botany?	herbalism
What kind of plants did monasteries cultivate?	plants of medical importance
When did universities start growing gardens?	1540s onwards
Why did universities have these gardens?	facilitated the academic study of plants
Why was plant taxonomy developed?	to catalogue and describe their collections
What is are the main themes of present-day botany?	molecular genetics and epigenetics
How can botany be applied to combating world hunger?	providing staple foods
How can botany be applied to the construction industry?	synthesis of chemicals and raw materials
Is botany a narrow science?	a broad, multidisciplinary subject
What is the name of an ancient Greek work impacting botany?	De Materia Medica
What was the De Materia Medica written about?	herbal medicine
What was the profession of the man who wrote De Materia Medica?	physician and pharmacologist
Besides the Greeks, what other culture contributed to the study of botany?	medieval Muslim world
How long a book is the De Materia Medica?	five-volume
What was the first botanical garden at an Italian university?	Padua
Where is the Padua garden?	its original location
Why did monasteries have gardens?	for medical use
What science was botany considered to be a part of?	medicine
Where was the first European botany garden at a university?	University of Oxford
Who wrote Historia Plantarum in 1544?	Physician Valerius Cordus
What herbalist wrote about medicinal plants in the 16th century?	John Gerard
Who is considered the father of natural history?	Ulisse Aldrovandi
Who coined the term cells?	Robert Hooke
In what plant were cells first discovered by microscope?	cork
What is the meaning of dichotomous keys?	choices between pairs
What is the term for keys used for identification?	diagnostic keys
Why were new plants arriving in Europe in the 18th century?	newly discovered countries
What book is still used for nomenclature?	Species Plantarum
How are the plants classified?	number of their male sexual organs
What led scientists to believe that plants should be classified according to something other than just sexual system?	Increasing knowledge of plant anatomy
In what year to Candolle introduce the Candollean system?	1819
On what did Candolle base his classification system?	morphological complexity
What did Darwin introduce that changed classification systems?	concept of common descent
What was the first modern text book?	Grundzüge der Wissenschaftlichen Botanik
What was Schleiden's profession?	microscopist
What do Fick's laws do?	calculation of the rates of molecular diffusion
What theory did Schleiden co-found?	cell theory
What did Warming believe that plants can do?	form communities
What is the term for the most complex plant life in a specific environment?	climax vegetation
Who created the concept of ecosystems?	Arthur Tansley
Whose earlier work did Nicholas Vavilov build upon?	Alphonse de Candolle
What history did Vavilov write about?	history of economic plants
What is transpiration?	the transport of water within plant tissues
What influences water evaporation on leaves?	temperature
What influences the rate of gas produced by plants?	rate of photosynthesis
What enables the regulation of plant growth?	auxin plant hormones
What can auxin plant hormones also be used as?	herbicides
What enables scientists to better study plants now?	modern techniques of organic chemical analysis
What opened the door to plant genetic engineering?	all plant cells are totipotent
Who introduced the idea that cells could be grown in vitro?	Gottlieb Haberlandt
What kind of relationships does systematics aim to discover?	phylogenetic
What does phylogenetics use to determine plant categories?	DNA sequences
What did the Angiosperm Phylogeny group use determine a phylogeny of flowering plants?	Molecular analysis of DNA
Modern Morphology recognizes the structural dynamics of what?	the major morphological categories
Why are plants important to human life?	oxygen and food
What is the process that converts sunlight to energy?	photosynthesis
What is used to rebuild cells?	organic molecules
What vital element is a byproduct of photosynthesis?	oxygen
What do plant roots prevent?	soil erosion
What is the scientific name for seed plants?	gymnosperms
What is the study of algae called?	phycology
What two phases are included in the life cycles of embryophytes?	haploid and diploid
What is the study of ancient, fossilized plants?	Paleobotanists
What organism is credited with starting the oxygen-rich atmosphere on Earth?	cyanobacteria
What can scientists learn from the fossil record?	evolutionary history of plants
What was the first organism to produce oxygen through photosynthesis?	Cyanobacteria
Why do food chains start with plants?	energy from the sun and nutrients from the soil
What do ecologists call the start of the food chain?	first trophic level
How can the yield of food plants be increased?	plant breeding
Why would botanists study weeds?	problem in agriculture
what parts of algae are unique to them?	chloroplasts
From what ancient oxygen producing plant are chloroplasts descended?	cyanobacteria
What color is chlorophyll?	blue-green
What organelles are unique to algae?	chloroplasts
From what ancient source are chloroplasts descended?	cyanobacteria
What color does a plant with chlorophyll appear to be?	green
What is the function of ATP and NADPH molecules?	store and transport energy
When is the raw form of glucose formed?	first product of photosynthesis
What is stored in the chloroplast?	starch
What is used instead of glucose in sunflowers?	fructose
Why is table sugar produced?	for export to the rest of the plant
What polymer is used to strengthen cell walls?	lignin
What weakens cell walls?	water stress
What gas is in lower concentration now due to plants?	carbon dioxide
What polymer is found in spores and pollen?	Sporopollenin
What polymer is a major part of wood?	Lignin
What is the study of the chemicals that plants produce?	Phytochemistry
Hemlock is what kind of chemical produced from a plant?	toxins
Where do some medicines and recreational drugs come from?	from plants
Where did aspirin originally come from?	bark of willow trees
Where does morphine come from?	the opium poppy
How is charcoal made?	pyrolysis of wood
Besides fire, what else is charcoal used for?	one of the three ingredients of gunpowder
Plant oil is used for what kind of fuel?	biodiesel
Rayon comes from what plant product?	cellulose
What are plant habitats?	environments where they complete their life
What is the goal of plant ecology?	to understand
What is the study of plants and the environment in which they live?	Plant ecology
What do plants do in their environment?	interactions with other species
On what do plants depend in their environment?	edaphic (soil) and climatic factors
How do plants interact with other species in their environment?	for resources
What is the collection of plants in the environment called?	vegetation
What are groupings of similar plants?	biomes
How can historical changes in the environment be detected?	plant phenology
How can climate changes be determined from soil?	fossil pollen deposits in sediments
What atmospheric gas can be determined from fossilized leaf sizes and shapes?	CO2
What causes lower growth in plants?	Ozone depletion
What does ozone depletion allow?	higher levels of ultraviolet radiation-B
Does inheritance work differently in plants?	same fundamental principles of genetics
What plant did Mendel use to demonstrate inheritance?	Pisum sativum (peas)
What other plant was used in the discovery of different genes?	maize
Are plants and animals genetically the same?	distinctive genetic differences
Are plants able to mate across species?	hybrids are often possible
What common grain is the result cultivated wild hybrids?	wheat
How do some plants avoid cross pollination?	pollen either fails to reach the stigma
Do all plants have male and female parts?	separate individuals
Why do plants develop bulbs?	opportunities for fertilisation of flowers by animals are rare
What do plants do when the environment makes fertilization especially difficult?	replacing sexual reproduction with asexual reproduction
How different are the children produced by asexual parents?	genetically identical to the parent
What is the term for asexual cloning?	Apomixis
Does apomixis only occur in the parent?	can also happen in a seed
What can cause the doubling of chromosome pairs?	errors in cytokinesis
Are the plants produced by this error, able to reproduce?	often reproduce normally
Can these plants cross breed with the parent population of plants?	unable to cross-breed successfully
What happens to these new plants if they are able to reproduce?	form a new species
What is a yellow example of a sterile,hybrid plant with no seeds?	commercial banana
What was the first plant to have its genome sequenced?	Thale cress, Arabidopsis thaliana
In what year was this genome sequenced?	2000
Why was this plant chosen for sequencing?	one of the smallest genomes
Why is sequencing done on plants?	understanding the genetics
What results from  sequencing of DNA pairs?	new knowledge about plant function
Why is a plant chosen for the study of its cells?	small genomes
What mechanism can be studied through chromosome sequencing?	photosynthesis
What common plant has been used for studying the production of sugar?	Corn
What simple plant has been used to study plant cells?	red alga
How can a bacteria in the soil affect a plant?	can attach to plant cells
How can scientists use bacteria in the study of plants?	introducing the Nif gene
How are genes transferred to a plant by scientists?	in the root nodules
What is this kind of introduction and transfer used for?	creation of genetically modified crops
Who developed the procedures used in this transfer?	Schell and Van Montagu
What does epigenetics study?	changes in gene function
How do DNA changes affect plants?	express themselves") differently
When DNA has different markers, how it that presented in plants?	prevent that region of the DNA code
What is a result of changes in DNA markers within a plant species?	differences
Are the changes then presented, permanent?	may be temporary
What process causes changes in plant cells?	Epigenetic changes
What is the original cell of the plant?	the zygote
How are the different cells formed?	continues to divide
How is it determined, which cells will be formed?	activation of some genes and inhibition of others
Does cell division end in plants?	remaining totipotent
What happens when a plant remains totipotent?	ability to give rise to a new individual plant
Why do phloem sieve tubes stop forming?	lack nuclei
Why are plants able to stop and start dividing cells?	information from the environment
Are lignified cells able to continue dividing?	dead at maturity
Are all algae different from land plants?	some more closely related
What algae is the ancestor of true plants?	Charophyta
Are all species of algae similar?	many differences
To what species of algae is Charophyta related?	Chlorophyta
What makes mosses different from other land plants?	lack the vascular tissues
What protects the young plant in the seed?	one or two sheathing layers
How does the plant escape the seed?	splits to release it
What is the term for plants whose seeds do not have a protective ovary?	Gymnosperms
What event led to the diversification of seed plants?	evolution of the seed habit
What does the plant use for internal processes?	Chemicals obtained from the air, soil and water
Where do plants get their energy?	sunlight
How do animals use plants?	in the construction of cells and tissues
Is respiration in animals similar to photosynthesis in plants?	opposite of photosynthesis
What is the basis of plant physiology?	internal chemical and physical activities
How is water transported into plants?	from roots
IN what form are mineral acquired by the roots?	as soluble ions
From where does the plant get the required minerals?	chemical breakdown of soil
Where is sucrose produced in a plant?	the leaves
How are hormones moved around a plant?	by a variety of processes
When was the theory of plant hormones introduced?	late 19th century
To what did Darwin compare the top of the plant radical?	the brain of one of the lower animals
Why did Darwin feel plants had something comparable to a brain?	movements of plant shoots
What do auxins do?	promotes cell growth
What can plant callus be coaxed into doing?	form roots and shoots
What are cytokinins responsible for in plants?	control of cell division
Where are cytokinins produced?	in roots
How is bud development determined?	cytokinesis
How is the height of a plant determined?	gibberelins
What acid slows or stops cell division?	Abscisic
What is the study of the inside of plants?	Plant anatomy
What is the study of the outside of plants?	plant morphology
How are plants different from animals?	primary cell wall composed of the polysaccharides cellulose
Where do plants store their DNA?	in nuclei
Are the vacuoles of plant cells larger or smaller than animal cells?	larger
What makes up the bodies of vascular plants?	stems bearing green photosynthesising leaves
Do roots contain chlorophyll?	generally lack chlorophyll
What makes a plant non-vascular?	do not produce ground-penetrating vascular roots
How much of a non-vascular plant is involved in photosynthesis?	most of the plant
How are sporophytes generated in liverworts?	nonphotosynthetic
Do the roots and shoots need each other?	interdependent
What do the roots get from the shoots?	food
What are roots used for in beets and carrots?	to store food
What happens if a plant looses roots or its shoots?	can often regrow it
What do the shoots get from the roots?	water and minerals
What are the stems used for in cacti?	store water
For what are leaves used?	gather sunlight
What are angiosperms?	plants that produce flowers and have enclosed seeds
What kind of plants are gymnosperms?	woody plants
What kind of leaves are large and flat?	foliage leaves
How did Linnaeus group organisms?	shared physical characteristics
How did Darwin change the grouping pioneered by Linnaeus?	by ancestry rather than superficial characteristics
How are grouping determined currently?	DNA sequences
Who maintains a standard of grouping for naming purposes?	International Botanical Congress.
What is the main grouping of a plant know as?	Kingdom
What is the most narrow grouping of a plant?	Species
Do different countries refer to plants by different names?	single world-wide name
What part of the name is always capitalized?	the genus
How is the entire name usually presented in scientific texts?	italicised
What does the phylogeny of a group represent?	relationships and heredity
How are the relationships within the group determined?	shared inheritance
What would be an indication of a shared inheritance in two cacti?	spines produced from areoles
What are areoles?	pad-like structures
Why might two plants be similar but not actually be in the same group?	convergent evolution
How can two different plants acquire the same traits?	arisen independently
What traits show a shared ancestry?	derived characters
How are common ancestries represented for plant families?	tree-like diagrams
What is used now to group plants?	DNA sequences
What was previously used to group plants?	morphological characters
How is DNA grouping superior?	genetic code itself is used
Are fungi more like plants or animals?	closely related to animals
When was DNA sequencing first used for grouping plants?	1990s
What was the first plant grouping based on DNA sequencing?	flowering plants
What can be learned from DNA sequencing of plants?	evolution in plants
How has technology improved the study of botany?	greatly increased the level of detail
What have scientists learned about angiosperms from DNA sequencing?	which families represent the earliest branches
What is Madonna's real name?	Madonna Louise Ciccone
When was Madonna born?	August 16, 1958
Which is the other name that Madonna is always referred as?	Queen of Pop
Madonna became a fixture on which TV channel?	MTV
Who is known for maintaining her autonomy and reinventing her image in the music industry?	Madonna
Where was Madonna born?	Bay City, Michigan
In which year did Madonna move to New York City?	1977
Which record label did Madonna sign with in 1982?	Sire Records
What was the name of the album she released in 1983?	Madonna
Name Madonna's Grammy award album in 1998?	Ray of Light
Name a film role that Madonna acted in.	Desperately Seeking Susan
Which movie earned Madonna a Golden Globe Award?	Evita
Name one of Madonna's other business ventures?	fashion design
What is the name of the entertainment company that Madonna founded?	Maverick
Which year did Madonna sign a $120 million deal with Live Nation?	2007
How many records did Madonna sell worldwide?	more than 300 million
Madonna is recognize as the best selling female music artiste by who?	Guinness World Records
How many certified albums does Madonna have?	64.5 million
Since 1990, how much did Madonna make in her concerts?	$1.31 billion
Who is one of the founding members of the UK Music Hall of Fame?	Madonna
Madonna was born to which religion?	Catholic
Where were Madonna's paternal grandparents come from?	Pacentro, Italy
Madonna's mother was from which ancestry?	French-Canadian
What was Tony's occupation?	engineer designer
What was Madonna's nickname when she was younger?	Little Nonni
Which name did Madonna adopted as her confirmation name?	Veronica
Which disease did her mother passed away from?	breast cancer
Where was Madonna raised?	Detroit suburbs of Pontiac and Avon Township
What was Madonna's mother's reaction to her questioning about her illness?	cry
Who did Madonna turn to for comfort during her mother's illness?	paternal grandmother
How did the Ciccone siblings behaved towards anyone brought to their home to replace their beloved mother?	rebelled
Who did Madonna tell in an interview that as a young girl, she was lonely and always searching for something?	Vanity Fair
Afraid that Tony would be taken from her, what does she do?	unable to sleep unless she was near him
In 1966, who did Tony married?	Joan Gustafson
Name one child from the union of Tony and Joan?	Mario
When was Mario born?	1968
What is the name of the middle school that Madonna attended?	West Middle School
Madonna achieved a name for herself in school by her unusual behavior and also for what other reason?	high grade point average
When did Madonna drop out of college?	1978
Which restaurant did Madonna work in New York City?	Dunkin' Donuts
Where did Madonna take dance classes at in New York City?	Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater
How much did Madonna have when she first went to NYC?	$35
What did she also work as for other established artists?	backup dancer
Which year was Patrick Hernandez's world tour held?	1979
Who did Madonna started seeing when she worked as a back up singer/dancer during Patrick Hernandez's tour?	Dan Gilroy
What was the name of the band which Madonna and Dan Gilroy started?	Breakfast Club
When did Madonna leave the Breakfast Club?	1980 or 1981
After leaving the Breakfast Club, who did she formed the band Emmy with?	Stephen Bray
What was Madonna's debut single called?	Everybody
When was "Everybody" released?	October 1982
What was the name of the second single called?	Burning Up
Who produced Madonna's debut album?	Reggie Lucas of Warner Bros
Madonna's dance singles reached which number in the "Hot Dance Club Songs" by the Billboard Magazine?	three
Who was the boyfriend that Madonna moved in with?	John "Jellybean" Benitez
Who remixed most of Madonna's album tracks?	Benitez
Which song was Madonna's first global hit?	Holiday
When was Madonna's album released?	July 1983
Which number did Madonna's album peaked at the Billboard 800 six months later?	eight
Who did Madonna's look and style of dressing influence?	young girls and women
When did Madonna's style become a fashion trend?	1980s
Who is the stylist and jewellery designer that created Madonna's look?	Maripol
When did Madonna achieve global recognition?	November 1984
How long did "Like a Virgin" stayed on the Billboard 100?	six consecutive weeks
Madonna was criticized for her performance of which song in the VMA?	"Like a Virgin"
What was Madonna wearing during the performance of "Like A Virgin" at the VMA?	a wedding dress
Her video of "Material Girl" was an imitation of which singer's song, "Diamonds are a girl's best friend?"	Marilyn Monroe
When did Madonna married Sean Penn?	on her birthday in 1985
When did Madonna audition for a dance role in the show "A Chorus Line?"	February 1984
When did Madonna enter mainstream films?	February 1985
What is the name of the romantic drama film that Madonna starred in?	Vision Quest
When did Madonna appear in the comedy Desperately Seeking Susan?	March 1985
What is the name of Madonna's two new singles?	"Crazy for You" and "Gambler"
What song did the comedy Desperately Seeking Susan promote?	"Into the Groove"
When was Madonna's first concert tour in North America?	Beginning in April 1985
Who were the opening act for Madonna's concert The Virgin tour?	Beastie Boys
When did Madonna have nude photos taken of her in New York?	1978
How much was Madonna's nude photos were finally sold for?	up to $100,000
When was the Live Aid Charity Concert held?	1985
When was Madonna's third album released?	June 1986
Who was the album True Blue dedicated to?	Sean Penn
Madonna's album topped in how many countries chart worldwide?	28 countries
What award did Madonna receive for her role in the film Shanghai Surprise?	Golden Raspberry Award
Name a soundtrack in the film Who's That Girl?	Causing a Commotion
When did Madonna sign an endorsement deal with Pepsi?	January 1989
With Madonna's new video, Like A Prayer, the blasphemy that she portrayed in the video led to what consequences?	canceled her sponsorship contract
Who co-written and co-produced the song, Like A Prayer?	Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray.
How many copies did Like A Prayer sell worldwide?	15 million copies
When was Madonna named "Artist of the Decade" by MTV, Billboard and Musician Magazine?	end of the 1980s
In the film Dick Tracy, who did Madonna starred as?	Breathless Mahoney
Madonna's role in Dick Tracy led to which award nomination?	Saturn Award
Who earned an Academy Award for the song "Vogue" and "Sooner or Later?"	Stephen Sondheim
When did Madonna and Beatty's relationship end?	end of 1990
Who did Madonna have a relationship with while shooting the film?	Beatty
What is Madonna's compilation album called?	The Immaculate Collection
How many albums did it sell worldwide?	over 30 million copies
What is one of the title of the songs that was released in the Immaculate Collection?	Justify My Love
Why did MTV ban the video for Justify My Love?	too sexually explicit
Justify My Love reached which number in the US charts?	number one
Who did Madonna play in the role A League Of Their Own?	Mae Mordabito
What is the film's theme song?	This Used to Be My Playground
When did Madonna open her own entertainment company, Maverick?	1992
How much was the royalties paid to Madonna for the music proceedings?	20%
What was the name of the erotic thriller that shows scenes of sadomasochism and bondage?	Body of Evidence
When was The Girlie Show World Tour?	September 1993
What was Madonna dressed in for the tour?	whip-cracking dominatrix
In which country did Madonna rubbed the country's flag between her thighs that anger the public?	Puerto Rico
What did Madonna give to Letterman to smell in his late night show that created an uproar?	a pair of her panties
What did the critics call Madonna after the Letterman show?	a sexual renegade
Which biographer described her song "I'll Remember" as trying to clean up Madonna's image?	J. Randy Taraborrelli
The song "I'll Remember" was recorded for which film?	With Honors
What was Madonna's sixth album named?	Bedtime Stories
The single "Take A Bow" was at the Hot 100 for how many weeks?	seven weeks
Who was the fitness trainer that Madonna was involved with?	Carlos Leon
In the film Evita, who did Madonna play?	Eva Perón
Which director did Madonna write to saying that she was perfect for the part of Eva Peron?	Alan Parker
When was Madonna pregnant?	During shooting
After securing the role of Evita, what kind of training did Madonna have?	vocal training
Who from Times magazine gave an excellent critique of the film Evita?	Zach Conner
What award did Madonna win for the film Evita?	Golden Globe Award
When was Madonna's daughter born?	October 14, 1996
What is the name of Madonna's daughter?	Lourdes Maria Ciccone Leon
When did Madonna's relationship with Carlos Leon ended?	May 1997
What is the name of Madonna's seventh album?	Ray of Light
What year was "Ray of Light" released?	1998
Which electronica producer did Madonna team up with for Ray of Light?	William Orbit
Which type of music was popular during the 90s?	Techno and rave
How many Emmy awards did Ray of Light won?	four
Who listed Ray of Light as "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time?"	Rolling Stone
How many albums did Ray of Light sell worldwide?	16 million copies
Which single in the album made it to the UK number one?	Frozen
The single Ray of Light debut at which number of the Billboard Hot 100?	five
Which edition of the Guinness Book of World Record states that no female artist sold more records than Madonna?	1998
Which film project did Madonna leave because of differences with the director?	Music of the Heart
Who was the director of Music of the Heart?	Wes Craven
Which film did Madonna record the single Beautiful Stranger for?	Beautiful Stranger
Which award did Madonna win for the single "Beautiful Stranger?"	Grammy Award
What was the film that Madonna starred in 2000?	The Next Best Thing
What was the name of the film's soundtrack called?	Time Stood Still
What was Madonna's eighth album called?	Music
When was "Music" released?	September 2000
How many albums did "Music" sell in the first 10 days?	four million
Who is Madonna's second husband?	Guy Ritchie
When did Madonna marry Guy Ritchie?	December 21, 2000.
When was Rocco John Ritchie born?	August 11, 2000
What type of birth complications did Madonna suffer at birth?	placenta praevia
When did Madonna's Drowned World Tour start?	June 2001
Which film did Madonna starred in that was directed by Ritchie?	Swept Away
When did Madonna appear in the play Up For Grabs at the Wyndhams Theatre?	May 2002
What was Madonna's title song for the James Bond movie?	Die Another Day
Die Another Day reached which number in the Billboards Hot 100?	eight
What is the name of the exhibition installation that Madonna teamed up with fashion photographer Chris Klein called?	X-STaTIC Pro=CeSS
What was Madonna's ninth album called?	American Life
When was American Life released?	2003
American Life reached which number at the Hot 100?	37
How many copies did the album sell worldwide?	four million
Who did Madonna kiss at the MTV Video Music Awards?	Spears and Aguilera
When did Madonna collaborated as guest vocals for Spears single?	October 2003
Madonna signed a contract with Callaway Arts and Entertainment to be a writer of what type of books?	children's books
What was the title of the first book Madonna penned?	The English Roses,
When was the The English Roses published?	September 2003
Madonna and Maverick sued which company for poor bookkeeping and mismanagement of resources?	Warner Music Group
Warner filed a countersuit stating that who lost 10 of millions of dollars on its own?	Maverick
Warner resolved the dispute by buying whose shares?	Madonna and Ronnie Dashev
Maverick became a wholly owned  subsidiary of which company?	Warner Music
When was the Re-Invention World Tour kick off?	mid-2004
HOw much did the tour earn?	around $120 million
What was Madonna's documentary called?	I'm Going to Tell You a Secret
When was Madonna inducted into the UK Hall of Fame?	November 2004
When did Madonna perform at the Live 8 benefit concert in the UK?	July 2005.
What was the name of Madonna's tenth studio album?	Confessions on a Dance Floor
When was Confessions on a Dance Floor released?	November 2005
Which award the the album win?	Grammy Award
Which pop group allowed Madonna to sing a cover of their song Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!	ABBA
What was the name of the single that was Madonna's twelfth number one hit in the UK?	Sorry
When did the Confessions Tour start?	May 2006
How much did the Confessions Tour make?	over $193.7 million
Why did the Russian Orthodox Church and Federation of Jewish Communities of Russian asked members to boycott the concert?	used religious symbols
It was confirmed by IFPI that Madonna officially sold how many albums worldwide?	over 200 million
What was the charity that Madonna was involved in when in Malawi?	Raising Malawi initiative
When did Madonna adopt David Banda?	October 2006
What was Banda suffering from when Madonna first met him?	pneumonia
What was the name of Banda's biological father?	Yohane
When was the adoption finalized?	May 2008
What song did Madonna release for the Live Earth series of concerts?	Hey You
Madonna had a new 10 year, $120 million record deal with which company?	Live Nation
What was the documentary Madonna produced and wrote about the Malawis?	I Am Because We Are
What is the name of the first film Madonna directed?	Filth and Wisdom
Who was one of the five inductees of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame?	Madonna
What was the name of Madonna's eleventh album?	Hard Candy
When was Hard Candy released?	April 2008
Hard Candy debuted at number one in how many countries?	thirty seven
Madonna worked with Justin Timberlake, Timbaland, Pharrell Williams and Nate Hills for which album?	Hard Candy
Which single was released as the album's lead single?	4 Minutes
Madonna surpassed which artist with the most top-ten hits?	Elvis Presley
4 minutes became Madonna's which number one single in the UK?	thirteenth
What is the name of the first tour with Live Nation?	Sticky & Sweet Tour
How much did Stick and Sweet Tour grossed?	$280 million,
What is the title of the book by Madonna's brother?	Life with My Sister Madonna
The book debuted at number two on which best seller's list?	The New York Times
When was the divorce finalized between Madonna and Ritchie?	December 2008
When did the High Court of Malawi gave the right for Madonna to adopt her second son?	June 12, 2009
When did Madonna appear in MTV for the tribute to Michael Jackson?	September 13, 2009
When was Mercy adopted?	June 2009
Madonna known Mercy since going to adopt which child in Malawi?	David
Who initially protested the adoption?	Mercy's grandmother
Who insisted that Mercy should be adopted?	The men
Who stated that he could not support the adoption since he was alive??	Mercy's father
When did Madonna perform at the Hope for Haiti Now?	January 2010
What album did Madonna released in April 2010?	Sticky & Sweet Tour
Madonna granted which TV show the rights to her entire catalog of music?	Glee
What is the name of the episode of Glee that featured Madonna's songs?	Glee: The Music, The Power of Madonna
What is the name of the clothing line Madonna released with her daughter?	Material Girl
Material Girl clothing line is released under which brand?	Macy's
What is the name of the fitness gyms that Madonna opened?	Hard Candy Fitness
When did Madonna released her second clothing line?	November 2011
What is the name of the second film that Madonna directed?	W.E.
Which year did Madonna performed at the Super Bowl?	2012
How many viewers did the half-time show attract?	114 million viewers
Madonna signed a three album deal with which record company?	Interscope Records
What was the name of Madonna's twelfth album?	MDNA
When was MDNA released?	March 2012
Where did the MDNA Tour start?	Tel Aviv, Israel
When did MDNA Tour begin?	May 2012
How much did the Tour grossed?	$305.2 million
How many shows were sold out?	88
Who named Madonna as the top-earning celebrity of the year?	Forbes
By 2013, how many did Madonna's Raising Malawi organization built?	ten schools
When did Madonna visit Malawi's school?	April 2013
Who criticized Madonna's charity efforts, stating that she exaggerated her contributions?	President of Malawi Joyce Banda
What was the name of the 17 minute film called?	secretprojectrevolution
Which company was selected to release the film?	The BitTorrent company
When was secretprojectrevolution released?	September 24, 2013
What initiative did Madonna launched with her film?	Art for Freedom
How many submissions does the initiative have?	over 3,000
What award ceremony did Madonna appeared in?	56th Annual Grammy Awards
What song did Madonna sing at the ceremony?	Open Your Heart
Which singer did she join on MTV Unplugged to sing?	Miley Cyrus
When did Madonna premiered her MDNA skincare line?	February 2014
Which city did Madonna contribute funds to help poverty?	Detroit
When did Madonna's album demo leaked online?	December 2014
What is Madonna's thirteenth album called?	Rebel Heart
When was Rebel Heart released?	March 10, 2015
When did Madonna embark on the Rebel Heart Tour?	September 2015
How much did Rebel Heart Tour grossed?	$169.8 million
Whose music had been the subject of a lot of scrutiny?	Madonna's
Who is the author of Contemporary Strategic Analysis?	Robert M. Grant
Who has established herself as a Queen of Popular Music?	Madonna
Who writes and creates most of her own music?	Madonna
Who was Madonna's first producer?	Mark Kamins
Whose music speak about taboo and unconventional subjects?	Madonna's
Madonna was nominated to be inducted twice which year to the Songwriter Hall of Fame?	2014 and 2016
Which magazine stated that Madonna was the greatest songwriter of all time?	Rolling Stone
Which genre did Madonna started out in?	rock music
When performing with Emmy, how many songs did Madonna produce?	12-14
Who popularize dance music as mainstream music?	Madonna
What is Madonna's second album?	Like a Virgin
Which 2 album show Madonna's artistic statement?	True Blue (1986) and Like a Prayer (1989)
True Blue has what type of music Incorporated in it?	classical
Which 2 albums explored the New Lack Swing?	Erotica (1992) and Bedtime Stories (1994)
Madonna brought which type of music to mainstream with Ray of Light?	electronic music
What type of music did Madonna experimented with in Music?	folk and acoustic
Most of the songs in Music are what type of songs?	simple love songs,
What type of songs are in Confessions of a Dance floor?	dance songs
What type of songs does Hard Candy have?	urban direction
MDNA focuses on which type of music?	electronic dance music
Madonna has which vocal range?	mezzo-soprano
What was the title of Madonna's Book?	Blonde Ambition
Who stated that Madonna's voice are key to her rock roots?	Tony Sclafani
When did Madonna take voice lessons?	filming of Evita
Which instruments can Madonna play?	drum and guitar
Who taught Madonna how to play the drum and guitar?	Dan Gilroy
What instrument does Madonna play on her demo recordings?	guitar
How long did Madonna spent learning to play the violin?	three months
Who was the guitarist that Madonna learnt from to improve on her skills?	Monte Pittman
According to who was the defining moment of Madonna's childhood with her mother's death?	Taraborrelli,
Which psychiatrist said that when a parent dies when the child is young, it leaves a lasting impact?	Keith Ablow
Who believes that the rape Madonna experienced is the driving force in life?	Lucy O'Brien
Who felt deep sadness as the death of their mother fades away?	Madonna and her sisters
Who does Madonna's mum resemble?	poet Anne Sexton
Who is Madonna's favorite poet?	Sylvia Plath
Who felt that her mother death was the driving force behind her success?	Madonna
Which song made a strong impression on Madonna?	These Boots Are Made for Walkin
Who sang the song these boots are made for walking?	Nancy Sinatra;
Whose favorite style is baroque?	Madonna
Who grew up listening to David Bowie?	Madonna
Name one of Madonna's major influence?	Karen Carpenter
What is Madonna's religious background?	Italian-Catholic
Like a Prayer reflects Madonna's relationship with who?	her parents
In which video did Madonna wear a rosary?	La Isla Bonita"
In which video does it show Madonna being scolded by her boss in Italian?	Open Your Heart
She dedicated Papa Don't Preach to whom?	Pope John Paul II.
Name one actor that Madonna was inspired by?	Marilyn Monroe
Madonna's Material Girl recreated whose look?	Monroe's
The video Express Yourself was inspired by which silent film?	Metropolis
Who stated that Madonna was a bad actress to watch?	Stephanie Zacharek
Which one of Madonna's movie is a box office bomb?	Swept Away
Whose art influence Madonna?	Frida Kahlo
Which video featured art from Kahlo and Remedios Varo?	Bedtime Story
Madonna collects whose painting?	Tamara de Lempicka
Her video Hollywood was a homage to which photographer?	Guy Bourdin
Which religion was Madonna dedicated to?	Kabbalah
Which year did she adopt the name Esther?	2004
The influence of Kabbalah is seen in which album?	Ray of Light
Where did Madonna attend Catholic services in 2011?	Opus Dei center
Who are the Madonna Companion Biographers?	Allen Metz and Carol Benson
Madonna used which TV company to help with her career?	MTV
The most remarkable creation in MTV is whom?	Madonna
What influence did Madonna music video reflects?	American and Hispanic mixed street style
She transmit her avant garde style to which audience?	American audience
Which look of Madonna became a fashion trend?	Spanish look
What type of Spanish clothings were worn for the video La Ista Bonita?	boleros and layered skirts
Who noted that Madonna was reversing the gender role?	Academics
In which video was it the most obvious?	"Like a Prayer
Who named Madonna the Greatest Music Video star ever?	MTV
When was Madonna awarded the accolade?	2003
Who had new standards of showmanship?	Madonna and Janet Jackson
Who earned a reputation of lip synching in the Blond Ambition Tour?	Madonna
What came as an expense of live singing?	highly athletic dancing
What did Madonna use in her concerts?	hands-free radio-frequency headset microphones
What was the microphone coined as?	"Madonna mic"
Who is first to have reenactment of her music videos in concerts?	Madonna
Whose concerts are extravagant live shows?	Madonna's
Who is the most influential recording artist of all time?	Madonna
Who wrote the book, Madonna and Me?	Laura Barcella
Who said that Madonna changed the world social history?	William Langley from The Daily Telegraph
Who said that Madonna is like post-moderm art?	Alan McGee from The Guardian
Who changed the dynamics of the singers back to mostly female?	Madonna
Who is the director of the curator of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum?	Howard Kramer
A lot of modern pop artist grew up listening to whom?	Madonna,
Who included Madonna as the most powerful woman of the century?	Time magazine
Who is the other woman who earned the title?	Aretha Franklin
Madonna used what to benefit her career?	sexual imagery
Who started a revolution in music with women?	Madonna
Who wrote that Madonna is an almost scared feminist icon?	Professor Sut Jhally
Who is regarded as a feminist during her time?	Madonna
Who is an acclaim role model business woman?	Madonna
Madonna generated how much in sales in the first 10 years of her career?	$1.2 billion in
Who called Madonna a dynamic entrepreneur?	London Business School academics
Who wrote that Madonna is opportunistic, manipulative and ruthless?	Morton
Madonna sold how many albums worldwide?	300 million records
Who is the best selling female rock artist in the 20th century?	Madonna
Who named Madonna as the top female touring artist of all time?	Billboard
How much did Madonna make in all her concerts together?	$1.31 billion
How many MTV video music awards does Madonna have?	20
Who holds the record for the most number 1 hits?	Madonna
How many songs does Madonna have on the Hot Dance Club Songs Chart?	45
Who has the most number one songs in an active BiIlboard chart?	Madonna
How many top 10 singles on the Hot 100 does Madonna have?	38
Who is the most successful solo artist in the history of American singles chart?	Madonna
What city is the capital of England?	London
Who founded the city of London?	the Romans
As of 2011, what was the population of London?	7,375
What part of London constitutes the bulk of the city?	county of Greater London
When founded by the Romans, what was the name they gave the city of London?	Londinium
As of 2011 what was the population of the core of London?	7,375
On what river is London situated?	River Thames
What was London's original name, as founded by the Romans?	Londinium
What bodies govern Greater London?	the Mayor of London and the London Assembly
What is the approximate area of the core of the City of London?	1.12-square-mile (2.9 km2)
Where does London rank in the world in terms of Metropolitan GDP?	fifth-or sixth-largest
Based on international arrivals, where does London rank in terms of most-visited cities?	world's most-visited
How many universities are located in London?	43
Where does London rank in the world's university rankings?	first
How many times has London hosted the Summer Olympics?	three times
Where does London rank in terms of metropolitan area GDP?	fifth-or sixth-largest
How many times has London hosted the Summer Olympic Games?	three
What measurement designates London as the world's most visited city?	international arrivals
How many universities does London boast?	43
When did London most recently host the Summer Olympics?	2012
How many different languages are spoken in London?	300
What was the population in London in 2014?	8,538,689
Where does London's urban area rank in terms of population within the EU?	second most
How many people are in London's Metropolitan area?	13,879,757
What years was London considered the world's most populous city?	1831 to 1925
From the 2011 census, London is second in population in the EU to which city?	Paris
During what time did London have the world's largest population, city-wise?	around 1831 to 1925
Approximately how many languages are spoken in the Greater London area?	more than 300
As of mid-2014, London's population forms what percentage of the entire United Kingdom population?	12.5
What is the population of metropolitan London?	13,879,757
What is one of London's World Heritage Sites?	Westminster Abbey
Where is the British Museum located?	London
Are there any bridges located in London?	Tower Bridge
What is the name of one of the libraries located in London?	British Library
What is the name of the oldest underground railway in the world?	The London Underground
How many theaters does London's West End have?	40
Where does Greenwich Mean Time marked?	the Royal Observatory, Greenwich
What famous palace is located in London?	Buckingham Palace
What is the name of the world's oldest underground railway?	The London Underground
How many World Heritage Sites can be found in London?	four
Early consensus was that London's name originated in what language?	Celtic
What is the meaning of the later-believed pre-Celtic Old European origin of London's name?	'river too wide to ford
What is the modern Welsh form o the word London?	Llundain
Who came up with an explanation of the origins of London's name that contradicted earlier assumptions	Richard Coates
In what year did Richard Coates offer a differing explanation as to the origins of London's name?	1998
What river flows into the River Thames?	the River Effra
The remains of an ancient bridge found on the shore of the River Thames was dated back to what archaeological period?	Bronze Age
The remains of what type of structure from the mesolithic period was found on the River Thames's foreshore?	not known
How many ancient structures' ruins have been found near the River Thames in recent history?	Two
The remains of an unknown ancient structure found on the River Thames foreshore dated back to approximately what year?	4500 BC
Who was the leader of the Iceni tribe?	Queen Boudica
What was Roman London's population in the 2nd century?	around 60,000
The Romans invaded what is now London and established its first major settlement in what year?	43 AD
What was the capital of Britannia before Londinium?	Colchester
Who invaded and destroyed the first major settlement of Roman London in 61 AD?	the Iceni tribe
What area continued to exist after Londinium was abandoned following the end of Roman rule?	St Martin-in-the-Fields
What was responsible for the decline of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Lundenwic?	repeated Viking invasions
How many known attacks on London did the Vikings commit?	three
By the late 7th century, what was a main function of Lundenwic?	a major port
Of the three recorded Viking assaults on London, how many were successful?	two
According to the Anglo-Saxon chronicle, who reestablished London in 886 AD?	Alfred the Great
Danelaw, established by the Vikings, covered what  geographical area?	London to Chester
What was the name of the Danish warlord who played a major role in establishing Danelaw?	Guthrum
Following the Viking invasion, when did London begin to significantly grow and expand?	about 950
What was Danelaw?	political and geographical control imposed by the Viking incursions
Who rebuilt Westminster Abbey?	King Edward the Confessor
By which century had London started becoming a prominent capital city?	the 11th century
What architectural style was Westminster Abbey rebuilt in?	Romanesque
What historian was quoted as saying that London had all the necessary characteristics to be a major capital city?	Frank Stenton
Prior to the 11th century, what was Anglo-Saxon England's capital?	Winchester
In what area of London was the Tower of London built?	southeastern corner
The Palace of Westminster originated from what building?	Westminster Hall
On what day did Duke William II of Normandy become King of England?	Christmas Day 1066
Who built Westminster Hall?	William II
In which famous battle did Duke William II of Normandy see victory?	the Battle of Hastings
What was the administration which governed the City of London called?	the Corporation of London
In the 12th century, where were the various bodies of English government centrally located for the most part?	Westminster
Where was the royal treasury housed?	the Tower
Before being centrally located, how was the English government handled in terms of location?	accompanied the royal English court as it moved around the country
In what era did the Protestant Reformation occur?	the Tudor period
What event greatly boosted English shipping and commerce?	the re-opening of the Netherlands to English shipping
What phenomenon did the Reformation bring about?	a gradual shift to Protestantism
Typically what were the nationalities of ships that traveled to and from England via the Straight of Gibraltar?	Italian or Ragusan
When was England again able to ship to the Netherlands?	January 1565
What was the defensive wall that encircled London in 1642 called?	the Lines of Communication
How long did it take to build the Lines of Communication?	under two months
Who did the Lines of Communication wall fail to prevent from coming into London?	the New Model Army
Approximately how many workers did it take to build the Lines of Communication?	20,000
What was King George II's royal residence beginning in 1762?	Buckingham House
What was the name of the police force established in London in 1750?	the Bow Street Runners
On average, when did children born in the City of London die?	before reaching their third birthday
How many crimes in 18th century London could result in the death penalty?	more than 200
What was the London hub of the British press?	Fleet Street
What was the primary cause of the cholera outbreak in 19th century London?	London's overcrowded conditions
Who bombed London in both World War I and World War II?	the Germans
When did London host its first Summer Olympics?	1948
How many people died of cholera in London in 1848?	14,000
Where did the 1948 Summer Olympics in London take place?	the original Wembley Stadium
What was the root cause of the Brixton riot in 1981?	Racial inequality
In what year was the Greater London Council formed?	1965
In what period was London a symbol of trend-setting and youth?	the mid-1960s
During "The Troubles", who waged assaults via bombings on London?	the Provisional IRA
Why was the Greater London Council established?	the growth of the urban area
What was London's estimated population in the 1980s?	around 6.8 million
What event preceded a substantial decrease in the average population in London?	the Second World War
The main ports for London were relocated to where?	Felixstowe and Tilbury
When was construction on the Thames Barrier completed?	the 1980s
What was the primary function of the Thames Barrier?	to protect London against tidal surges from the North Sea
What were the Millennium Dome, the London Eye, and the Millennium Bridge created to honor?	the start of the 21st century
What government entity was abolished in 1986?	The Greater London Council
London was honored with what in July, 2005?	awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics
What replaced the long-abolished Greater London Council in 2000?	the Greater London Authority
The population of Greater London in January 2015 was its greatest since what year?	1939
London's government administration is comprised of how many tiers?	two
What governmental entity oversees London's city-wide administrative tier?	the Greater London Authority (GLA)
Who is the current Mayor of London?	Boris Johnson
How many boroughs does London consist of?	32
What group of elected officials provides checks and balances on the Mayor's executive authority?	the London Assembly
What area of the River Thames does the Port of London Authority's jurisdiction cover?	Teddington Lock to the sea
What agency provides fire fighting and rescue service in London?	The London Fire Brigade
Who oversees and manages the London Fire Brigade?	London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority
The world's largest "free-at-the-point-of-use" ambulance service is known as what?	the London Ambulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust
What agency operates in conjunction with the LAS as needed?	The London Air Ambulance charity
What is the Prime Minister of the UK's official residence?	10 Downing Street
Who first dubbed the British Parliament the "Mother of Parliaments?"	John Bright
How many Members of Parliament are from London?	73
As of May 2015, which party holds the majority of seats in Parliament?	the Labour Party
As of May 2015, how many Liberal Democrats sit in Parliament?	one
Which police force in London does not typically engage in police activity with the general public?	the Ministry of Defence Police
What area of London does the Metropolitan Police Service cover?	Greater London, with the exception of the City of London
What agency is responsible for policing rail services in London?	The British Transport Police
What department runs the Metropolitan Police Service?	the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC).
What is the name of the City of London's police force?	the City of London Police
What statutory policy minimizes outward expansion of urban London?	the Metropolitan Green Belt
Greater London is divided into what two groups of boroughs?	Inner London and Outer London
Where is the centre of London said to be located?	Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall
In which directions does the River Thames divide the City of London?	North and South
What metropolitan area lies beyond the Metropolitan Green Belt?	London commuter belt
What title regarding London has never been made official in law or by decree?	London's status as the capital of England
What areas within Greater London have city status?	the City of London and the City of Westminster
For what reason are the City of London and Greater London considered to be counties?	for the purposes of lieutenancies
In the past, how much wider was the River Thames than it is today?	five times
What was the population density of Greater London in 2001?	4,542 inhabitants per square kilometre (11,760/sq mi)
In which direction does the River Thames run through the City of London?	the south-west to the east
What is the population of the London Metropolitan Region?	13,709,000
What is the main geographical landmark in London?	the Thames
How far from the center of London is London Heathrow Airport?	15 miles west
What is London's average high temperature in July?	24 °C (75.2 °F)
What phenomenon causes the center of London to be warmer than its suburbs?	urban heat island effect
Approximately how many days in a given year will London experience temperatures above 25 degrees Celsius (or 77 degrees Farenheit?	31
What occasional weather event causes problems for drivers in London?	Snowfall
What is England's oldest standing palace from the Tudor period?	Hampton Court Palace
Of what material is London's National Gallery made?	Portland stone
When did the Great Fire of London occur?	1666
The area west of London's city is characterized by what type of building?	white stucco or whitewashed
What, in part, is the reason for London's lack of a singularly characteristic architectural style among its buildings?	their varying ages
Where in London are the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall located?	in Kensington
What famous monument is located in Trafalgar Square?	Nelson's Column
The Monument, located in the City of London, was erected to commemorate what event?	the Great Fire of London
What was the most common type of brick used to construct London's older buildings?	yellow London stock brick or a warm orange-red variety
Where are Marble Arch and Wellington Arch located?	at the north and south ends of Park Lane
What are the financial districts of London known as?	the City of London and Canary Wharf
High-rise buildings may be restricted to prevent obstruction of what views?	St Paul's Cathedral and other historic buildings
What is the European Union's tallest building?	Shard London Bridge
How high does the Shard London Bridge rise?	95-storey
Most of London's skyscrapers are located where?	in the two financial districts
How many different species of plant life are known to grow in London?	2000
How many National Nature Reserves exist in the London area?	two
Green space and open water comprises what percent of London?	more than 40 percent
How many species of fish live in the River Thames?	120
The London Natural History Society has document how many species of butterfly?	47
What type of animal belonging to Queen Elizabeth II was killed by an intruding fox on the Buckingham Palace grounds?	pink flamingos
What animal was seen sleeping in London's Parliament Building?	fox
What is London's fox population density?	16 foxes for every square mile (2.6 square kilometres)
In 2001, what organization conducted a survey of residents regarding London's fox population?	the London-based Mammal Society
Approximately how many foxes live in the City of London?	10,000
Epping Forest is home for how many species of bats?	Ten
What animal was found dead at the Highway in Wapping, near the Tower Bridge?	otter
It appears that otters may be returning to the city of London after how long an absence?	a hundred years
How many species of bats exist in England?	eighteen
What rare breed of deer is protected at the Deer Sanctuary at Theydon Bois?	melanistic, black fallow deer
When do culls to ensure sustainability of London's deer population occur?	each November and February
Why are herds of deer starting to enter residential areas in London?	to take advantage of the London's green spaces
Bushy Park in Richmond is home to what herds of animals?	red and fallow deer
London is second only to what city in terms of its foreign population?	New York City
What percentage of London residents are foreign-born?	36.7%
Many German-born Londoners were British citizens by birth due to what?	parents serving in the British Armed Forces in Germany
When did London see its highest population numbers?	1939 immediately before the outbreak of the Second World War
What was London's estimated population at the time of the 2011 census?	8,173,941
With which two other cities is London named one of the most expensive in the world?	Tokyo and Moscow
Where does London rank in terms of the world's largest cities?	19th
About how many billionaires call London home?	72
What is the ratio of black and Asian schoolchildren to white schoolchildren?	about six to four
What was the approximate population of London children aged 0 to 15 years at the time of the 2011 census?	1,624,768
The 2011 census in London found what percentage of children to be white?	46.4
A 2005 survey indicated that how many communities comprised of non-indigenous people existed in London?	more than 50
According to the 2011 London census, what percentage of children were black?	19 per cent
What percentage of the Greater London population was said to be foreign-born according to the 2011 census?	36.7 per cent
What agency is responsible for compiling London's population data?	the Office for National Statistics
When was the most recent UK census published?	2011
What is the name of the largest Hindu temple in Europe?	Neasden Temple
Where is London's Sikh population primarily located?	Southall
Where is the East London Mosque located?	Tower Hamlets
Which eastern boroughs host large Muslim populations?	Tower Hamlets and Newham
How many Hindu temples exist in London?	42
Which Jewish synagogue boasts the largest membership in Europe?	Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue
The Sephardic Jewish community in London is affiliated with which Synagogue?	Bevis Marks Synagogue
For how long has the Bevis Marks Synagogue in London been conducting religious services continuously?	over 300 years
London's Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue passed London's Ilford Synagogue in terms of membership in what year?	1998
When was the London Jewish Forum established?	2006
What is the best-known London accent known as?	Cockney
An increasingly popular London accent among younger people fuses Cockney with what?	'ethnic' accents
What style of accent in London is commonly used by media and other professionals?	RP (Received Pronunciation)
Outside of London, where is the Cockney accent typically heard?	the wider South East England region
What is the name of the world-famous insurance market based in London?	Lloyd's of London
What is the largest industry in London?	finance
What is the UK's central bank known as?	the Bank of England
Prior to mid-2007, approximately how many people in London had jobs in the financial sector?	325,000
How many banks does London operate overseas?	480
What is the second largest port in the UK?	The Port of London
Approximately how much was spent on non-food retail sales in London in 2010?	£64.2 billion
How much cargo does the Port of London handle annually?	45 million tonnes
What is London's second most competitive industry?	media distribution
What corporation is the major player in London's media distribution industry?	The BBC
According to 2015 data, how many how many visitors gave London its ranking as the number one visited city in the world?	65 million
How many US dollars are estimated to have been spent in London by visitors from other countries?	$20.23 billion
As of 2003, roughly how many full time workers were employed in the tourism industry?	350,000
Which travel and tourism website's user activity has indicated that London is the number one travel destination?	TripAdvisor
What percentage of visitor money is estimated to be spent in London?	54%
Which elected official is financially responsible for public transportation in London, except for long-distance railways?	the Mayor of London
London's public transportation is overseen by which agency?	Transport for London (TfL)
Along with the London Underground, buses and trans, what form of public rail transport was added in 2007 to the Mayor's responsibilities?	the London Overground network
How many airports are affiliated with London and incorporate the word London in their names?	Eight
The majority of air traffic utilizes how many of the airports in and around London?	six
In terms of international travel, which airport is the world's busiest?	London Heathrow
A fifth terminal was opened in 2008 for which UK airline?	British Airways
In May 2010, who scrapped British Airways's plans to add a sixth terminal and another runway?	the Coalition Government
What is the smallest airport in the London area?	London City Airport
London City Airport's clients are comprised chiefly of what?	business travellers
Which local UK airport hub is located in Essex?	Stansted Airport
London Southend Airport in Essex offers primarily what type of service?	cheap short-haul flights
Where is London City Airport located?	Newham, East London
What is Europe's busiest rail station in terms of train activity?	Clapham Junction
How many railway stations are utilized by London's railway network?	366
Why does South London have such a high number of railways?	it has fewer Underground lines.
What is Britain's busiest railway station in terms of passengers?	Waterloo
How many travelers pass through Waterloo station yearly?	over 184 million
In the 20th century the Night Ferry was a boat train that provided connections between London and which cities?	Paris and Brussels
London is directly connected to continental Europe through what rail service?	Eurostar
In what year did the Channel Tunnel open?	1994
St. Pancras International is linked to Paris and other popular European tourist destinations via what method of transportation?	high-speed trains
When did local high speed rail service that linked London and Kent begin?	June 2009
How much revenue is generated yearly by London's public bus service?	£850 million
How many buses does the London public bus network operate?	more than 700
What feature added in 2007 facilitated bus travel by London' passengers with hearing and vision impairments?	audio-visual announcements
What distinct appearance identifies many buses as a landmark for London?	red double-decker
Typically, what color are London taxi cabs?	black
What is the name of London' bike-for-hire operation?	Santander Cycles
When did the single cable car operating in London begin service?	June 2012
Who is the current sponsor of London's cable car operation?	the airline Emirates
What was the approximate cost to build the Emirates Airline Cable Car?	£60
Roughly how many passengers travel daily on London's cable car?	3,500
What type of roadway is widely recognizable in the center of London?	The inner ring road
What failed plan to install a major network of roadways within the City of London were eventually scrapped in the 1970s?	the Ringways Plan
London is connected to Leeds, Newcastle, and Edinburgh through what motorways?	The A1 and M1
How long is the M25 motorway?	121.5 mi (195.5 km)
Automobile transportation is primarily used in what areas of London?	the suburbs
What is the daily cost for most drivers to operate their cars within a given zone in the center of London?	£10
When was the daily congestion charge in London implemented?	In 2003
By what percentage did the congestion charge decrease the amount of cars traveling through the center of London?	35-per-cent
Drivers who live in a given zone reduce the cost of their congestion charge by means of what?	season pass
What services were anticipated to be greatly increased as a result of the congestion charge zone?	Underground and bus
What professional services network named London the world's capital of higher education?	PricewaterhouseCoopers
London has the highest concentration of higher education institutions in Europe with how many universities?	43
What is the approximate number of international students studying in London?	110,000
In terms of teaching and research, what is the world's foremost institute of social science?	London School of Economics
Where is University College London, or UCL, ranked among the world's best colleges and universities?	5th
The Financial Times rated what school's MBA program 2nd-best in the world in 2015?	The London Business School
What school in London shares the rank of 2nd best in the world with the famous University of Cambridge in the 2014-2015 World University Rankings?	Imperial College London
What school within the University of London would a student seeking a degree in the veterinary medicine likely attend?	the Royal Veterinary College
What major university is comprised of four multi-faculty universities and several schools specialized schools?	University of London
From what school in London would a student receive an MBA?	the London Business School
What is the average student population at the University of London?	120,000
What is the student population of University of Westminster?	34,000
How many international universities operate in London?	three
In what suburb is the American International University in London located?	Richmond
What is Europe's largest university for degrees in communication and performing arts?	University of the Arts London
How many major medical schools does London boast?	five
What is the largest school of medicine in Europe?	King's College London School of Medicine
Barts and the London School of Dentistry if part of which university in the University of London Network?	Queen Mary
How many of the United Kingdom's five health academic science centers are located in London?	three
UCL Partners is the largest type of what facility in Europe?	academic health science centres
City University London is related to what specialized business school?	Cass Business School
The Royal College of Art and the Royal College of Music are examples of what type of schools?	specialist arts education institutions
Who overseas the public primary and secondary school systems in London?	the London boroughs
What private boys' school shares in London shares its name with a famous cathedral?	St Paul's School,
What is the entertainment center of London known as?	the West End
What is a prominent feature of Picadilly Circus?	giant electronic advertisements
London's Chinatown district is located in what area?	Soho
Where is London's West End located geographically?	the City of Westminster
What prolific composer and producer of musicals has been a major force in the West End theater district?	Andrew Lloyd Webber
What street in Islington boasts more bars and restaurants than any other street in Britain?	Upper Street
What is the longest street for shopping,, housing many shops and department stores, in the United Kingdom?	Oxford Street
How long is Islington's Upper Street?	1 mile (1.6 km)
What famous high-end department store is located on Oxford Street?	Selfridges flagship store
Which world-renowned luxury department store is located in the borough of Knightsbridge?	Harrods
The Lord Mayor's Show occurs annually in what month?	November
What does the Lord Mayor's Show parade commemorate and celebrate?	the annual appointment of a new Lord Mayor
Who participates in the military pageantry in the Trooping the Colour event every June?	regiments of the Commonwealth and British armies
Fireworks are discharged on New Year's Eve from what contemporary London landmark?	the London Eye
Every June, the Trooping of the Colour celebrates what event?	the Queen's Official Birthday
Who witnessed first-hand and wrote about the Great Fire of 1666?	Samuel Pepys
What area has historically been the literary hub of London?	Hampstead
A more current, 20th century center for London's literary set is located where?	Bloomsbury
Which author's novels painted a dismal portrait of Victorian London?	Charles Dickens
What female writer is one of the leading literary minds of the 20th century?	Virginia Woolf
What famous Elizabethan playwright spent much of his life in London?	William Shakespeare
What contemporary of Williams Shakespeare wrote a play entitled The Alchemist?	Ben Jonson
What author of Robinson Crusoe also wrote a fictionalized account of the Great Plague of 1665?	Daniel Defoe
The people in Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales begin their pilgrimage from what London establishment?	the Tabard inn
Arthur Conan Doyle brought to life what famous detective in a series of novels?	Sherlock Holmes
What major film production company calls London home?	Working Title Films
In what theater are the British Academy film awards presented?	the Royal Opera House
What popular soap opera has the BBC televised since 1985?	EastEnders
What silent movie film star who made movies such as The Little Tramp hailed from London?	Charlie Chaplin
In what year was the stage musical My Fair Lady, set in turn-of-the-century London, made into a major motion picture?	1964
When was the British Museum in Bloomsbury founded?	1753
Which London museum is prominently located in Trafalgar Square?	the National Gallery
How many artifacts from all over the world does the British Museum have on display?	7 million
Besides being popular tourist destinations, London's museums play a vital role in what activity?	research
The National Gallery was established in 1824 to accommodate and display what items?	the British national collection of Western paintings
What is the National Portrait Gallery known for housing?	depictions of figures from British history
London's Tate Britain and Tate Modern galleries were formerly one entity known as what?	The Tate Gallery
What cultural and scientific hub was named in honor of Queen Victoria's husband?	Albertopolis
What London museum was named for an historic Queen of England and her Prince husband?	the Victoria and Albert Museum (for the applied arts)
What was the original purpose for the construction of the Tate Gallery?	as an annexe of the National Gallery
What musical instrument is situated at Royal Albert Hall?	The UK's largest pipe organ
London-based EMI is a corporation focused on what industry?	music
In which facility is the London Symphony Orchestra based?	the Barbican Arts Centre
What are the names of London's two primary opera houses?	the Royal Opera House and the London Coliseum
Royal Academy of Music and Royal College of Music are examples of what?	conservatoires
What famous chain of music-themed restaurants opened its first establishment in London?	Hard Rock Cafe
In which recording studio did the Beatles do much of their recording?	Abbey Road Studios
What in part inspired the sounds of many British rock bands and singers in the 60s, 70s, and 80s?	the streets and rhythms vibrating through London.
What London concert venue shares its first name with a famous football stadium?	Wembley Arena
Located in London, what is the busiest concert arena in the world?	the o2 arena
London was a major factor in the rise of what musical genre?	punk
Musical genres that gained popularity in London and elsewhere, such as dubstep, were based on and derived from what?	the foreign genres of hip hop and reggae
Which BBC radio station focuses primarily on black and urban music?	BBC Radio 1Xtra
What rock music group led by Gavin Rossdale got its start in London's music scene?	Bush
How many royal parks are located in the center of London?	three
In which park is the London Zoo housed?	Regent's Park
What royal park shares a border with its neighbor, the park known as Kensington Gardens?	Hyde Park
What area of Regent's Park is an excellent spot to see the London skyline?	Primrose Hill
What popular tourist destination is located near Regent's Park?	Madame Tussauds Wax Museum
What famous London gardens were named as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2003?	Kew Gardens
Victoria Park is located in what London district?	the East End
What entity oversees both Hampstead Heath of North London and Epping Forest?	the City of London Corporation
What former private home hosts lake-side classical music concerts ever summer?	Kenwood House
People frequently engage in physical activities such as walking, biking, and golf, in what forest?	Epping Forest
What river is a tributary of the River Thames?	the River Wandle
What is the London Outer Orbital Path commonly referred as?	"Loop"
What walking path was created as a tribute to a member of the Royal Family who died prematurely?	the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk
What recent improvements has served to enhance the walking experience?	Access to canals and rivers
Which walking path follows the route of the body of water for which it is named?	the Thames Path
What is London's most popular athletic sport?	football
How many of the football clubs in the Premier League are based in London?	five
When did the Chelsea Football Club win the UEFA Champions League title?	May 2012
How many professional football clubs call London their home?	fourteen
Besides the Arsenal, Chelsea, and Tottenham football clubs, how many London-based football club have won a national league titie?	none
What is the name of the national rugby union stadium located in South-West London?	Twickenham Stadium
What is the current spectator seating capacity of Twickenham Stadium?	82,000
Of the three Aviva Premiership rugby union teams in London, which ones actually play in the Greater London Area?	Harlequins and Saracens
Where do the London Scottish and London Welch rugby teams play their home games?	in the RFU Championship club
London's residential property value is equivalent to what nation's GDP?	Brazil
What is the average price of property per square meter in central London as of April 2014?	€24,252
A World Property Journal report has ranked London as the most expensive office market in the world for how many consecutive years?	three
What city has the highest prices for property in Europe?	London
What is the average property price per square meter in Berlin as of April 2014?	€3,306
What is the foundation of the United States federal government?	United States Constitution
In the Unites States what sets out the boundaries of federal law?	The Constitution
What is defined as the official codification of federal statutory law?	The United States Code
What is compromised of many levels of codified and uncodified forms of law?	law of the United States
The constitution set boundaries for case law that originates from where?	federal judiciary
What is the foundation of the U.S. federal government?	the United States Constitution
What sets out the boundries of federal law?	The Constitution
What two forms of law make up the laws of the United States?	codified and uncodified
What is th eofficial compilation of federal statutory law called?	The United States Code
What different kinds of law make up the laws of the United States?	codified and uncodified
What is the most important document in the US, setting the boundries for all other laws?	the United States Constitution
What branch of gevernment is responsible for ratifing treaties?	Senate
With branch of government deals with new regulations?	the executive branch
Who's responsibility is case law?	the federal judiciary
What comes before state and territorial laws in the 50 U.S states?	Federal law and treaties
Federal sovereign only possess authority if it is stated in what?	the Constitution
States may grant their citizens border rights as long as they do not infringe on what?	federal constitutional rights
Most U.S law, the kind of law we live everyday, consists of what kind of law?	state law
Does every state have the same laws?	vary greatly from one state to the next.
Federal law overrides what laws?	conflicting state and territorial laws
The scope of federal power is not what?	universal
What type of system is American Federalism?	dual-sovereign system
American Federalism can also be considered tripartite because of the presence of what?	Indian reservations
States can grant their people broader rights than those granted in what document?	the federal Constitution
Is there anything that trumps state law?	Federal law and treaties
How many state make up the United States?	50
Can states grant rights to citizens that are not defined by the constitution?	as long as they do not infringe on any federal constitutional rights
What is day-to-day, operational law considered?	"living law"
What is living law mostly made up of?	state law
In order for a unconstitutional statue to disappear, it has to be deleted by?	a subsequent statute
What has remained on the books after they were ruled unconstitutional?	federal and state statutes
What principle  states no lower court will enforce an unconstitutional statue?	stare decisis
Who can reverse an unconstitutional court ruling?	the Supreme Court
What must happen to a statute for it to become unconstitutional?	it must be deleted
What can delete a statute and make it unconstitutional?	a subsequent statute
Some federal and state statutes remain on the books for how long after they are ruled unconstitutional?	decades
What decisis states that no lower court will enforce an unconstitutional statute?	the principle of stare decisis
Any court that enforces an unconstitutional statute will be overturned by what court?	the Supreme Court
If a statute is unconstitutional, how is it removed?	deleted by a subsequent statute
What happens when an unconstitutional statute remains on the books?	no sensible lower court will enforce
What would happen if a lower court tried to enforce an unconstitutional statute?	reversed by the Supreme Court
What must happen before the Supreme Court will reverse a decision by a lower court refusing to uphold a constitutional law?	constitutionality has been expressly established in prior cases
What would happen if a lower court refused to uphold a constitutional law?	risk reversal by the Supreme Court
The rule of liability for defective products originated from what law?	law of warranty
In what case did the supreme court of California, throw away warranties and strictly impose liability for defective products?	Greenman v. Yuba Power Products
What was most influential American 20th century tort law?	rule of strict liability for defective products
What year was the case Greenman v. Yuba Power products?	1963
What is one of the most influential changes to tort law?	rule of strict liability for defective products
Who was at the forefront of the fight to change the laws on defective products?	Roger J. Traynor
When was the Greenman rule in Section 402A of the Restatement (Second) of Torts published?	1964
What case was fundamental in the fight to change warranty laws?	Greenman v. Yuba Power Products
When was the Restatement (Second) of Torts beginning to be adopted outside of the United States?	1985
What law covers wrongs which humans can inflict upon each other?	Tort law
Why can American tort law not be easily summarized?	because of its immense size and diversity
While attempting to standardize tort law, multiple versions of tort law have come about, what are there versions called?	Restatement of Torts
What covers crimes of human against human?	Tort law
What does tort law overlap with?	wrongs also punishable by criminal law
What is attempting to standardize the tort law system?	Restatement of Torts
What is the Restatement of Torts not successfull as a whole yet?	many states have chosen to adopt only certain sections
Why is tort law hard to standardize?	immense size and diversity
A lot of American common law diverged from where?	English common law
When would American courts follow post-revolution commonwealth rulings?	there is no American ruling on point
Courts in commonwealth nations are often influenced by what?	by each other's rulings
Most modern American common law came from what kind of law?	English common law
Couts of commonwealth nations are often influenced by who's rulings?	each other's
What rulings do American courts rarely follow?	post-Revolution Commonwealth rulings
What is one reason American courts may follow a post Revolutionary Commonwealth ruling under what circumstances?	there is no American ruling on point
How close is current American law to English law?	diverged significantly
What differs about American and English law?	American courts rarely follow post-Revolution Commonwealth rulings
When would American law be more likely to follow English law?	no American ruling on point
How close do the issues have to be in order for an English law to be used?	nearly identical
Reception statues are generally the same as what law?	the common law of England
Who sites pre-revolution cases when discussion evolution of judge-made law?	contemporary U.S. courts
Which US State did not  enact reception statues?	Louisiana
What do reception statutes state is the law of the state?	common law of England
What is the only state to not enact reception statutes?	Louisiana
Some reception statutes impose what?	a specific cutoff date
Modern courts often cite which period in history cases when discussing changes in law?	pre-Revolution
What are reception statutes?	the common law of England (particularly judge-made law) is the law of the state
When are reception statutes invaild?	repugnant to domestic law or indigenous conditions
Where did the bulk of the US's starting laws come from?	English law
Which is the only stste without reception statutes?	Louisiana
What kind of case would a contemporary lawyer discuss when talking about an ancient judge-made common law principle?	pre-Revolution
early on American courts cited what cases?	contemporary English
What century were apellate decisions regularly reported?	19th century
When did cotations to English decisions gradually disappear?	19th century
How many published reports of American volumes existed in 1810?	eighteen
How many published reports of American volumes existed in 1910?	over 8,000
When did Americans really begin to establish their own laws independent of the English?	mid-19th century
How many published volumes of American reports were released in 1810?	eighteen
By 1910, how many volumes of American reports were there?	8,000
What did the lawmakers think of the increase in reports?	By 1879 one of the delegates to the California constitutional convention was already complaining
What were the lawmakers beginning to drown in?	judicial literature
What does federal law come from?	the Constitution
What gives Congress limited power to enact statutes?	the Constitution
What do you call the official compilation and codification of federal statutes?	The United States Code
Where are regulations published?	in the Federal Register
Where are regulations codified into?	Code of Federal Regulations
Where does federal law begin?	the Constitution
Who has the power and right to enact statutes for interstate dealings?	Congress
What is the compilation and codification of all federal statutes?	The United States Code
Who do the statutes give the power of creating regulations?	executive branch agencies
Where are the regulations from executive branch agencies found?	the Code of Federal Regulations
What areas of the Constitution deal with issuses such as aviation, railroads, and trademarks?	Commerce and Spending Clauses
In areas of law such as insurance, there are laws refusing to regulate them as long as states have laws doing what?	regulating them
What type of property are trademarks and copyrights?	intellectual property
What governs things such as military, money, foreign relations, etc.?	federal law
What enabled federal law to begin expanding into other areas such as avaition, telecommunications, railroads, etc.?	Commerce and Spending Clauses of the Constitution
When did the Commerce and Spending Clauses of the Constitution allow federal power to begin expanding?	start of the 20th century
What is a law enacted by Congress that states that it refuses to regulate some industries as long as the states have regulations in place already?	McCarran-Ferguson Act
What happens when both the federal and state governments have regulations that overlap?	coexist with each other
Who signs a bill into a law?	the President
Where does a bill go after it is signed?	Office of the Federal Register (OFR) of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
What is a new law given at the OFR of the NARA?	a law number
After being given a law number, a new law is prepared for publication as what?	a slip law
What kind of laws are not given statutory citation by the OFR?	private laws
Where does a bill go once the President signs it into effect?	delivered to the Office of the Federal Register (OFR) of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
What happens after a bill is delivered to the OFR?	assigned a law number
After a bill is assigned a number, what is it made ready for?	publication as a slip law
Once the slip laws are placed into the United States Statutes at Large, what are they called?	session laws
What is the United States Statutes at Large?	a chronological arrangement of the laws in the exact order that they have been enacted
What does congress often grant to give rulemaking authority to federal agencies?	statutes
Federal agencies are authorized to make what public?	regulations
Regulations normally carry the force of what?	law
Regualtions carry force of law when based on reasonable interpretation of what?	relevant statutes
What power is granted to federal agencies by Congress?	broad rulemaking authority
Why does Congress give generalized powers to federal agencies?	too gridlocked to draft detailed statutes that explain how the agency should react to every possible situation
What gives regulations imposed by federal agencies the right to enforce their regulations?	the principle of Chevron
What does the Principle of Chevron provide for?	regulations normally carry the force of law as long as they are based on a reasonable interpretation of the relevant statutes
What is used to determine whether federal judicial power extends to formulating binding precedent?	stare decisis
What is stare decisis?	the act of deciding a case becomes a limited form of lawmaking in itself
Why is stare decisis a limited form of lawmaking?	an appellate court's rulings will thereby bind itself and lower courts in future cases
Who else does stare decisis affect?	impliedly binds all persons within the court's jurisdiction
Who has noted that binding precedent did not exist when the Constitution was written?	federal judge Alex Kozinski
Why were decisions not reported or recoded correctly?	reporters often simply rewrote or failed to publish decisions which they disliked
What are the natural theories of law that that the English judges in the eighteenth century used?	law was believed to have an existence independent of what individual judges said
Why could one judge reject another judges opinion?	saw themselves as merely declaring the law which had always theoretically existed, and not as making the law
Why would one judge reject another's opinion?	incorrect statement of the law
How did the federal agencies differ from their English counter-parts?	no plenary reception statute at the federal level that continued the common law
What did the missing plenary reception do?	granted federal courts the power to formulate legal precedent
Where do the federal courts fall?	the federal Judiciary Acts
Where is judicial power found in the original Constitution?	Article Three
What does Article Three give federal agencies?	implied judicial power of common law courts to formulate persuasive precedent
When did binding precedent become possible in the United States?	nineteenth century
What made binding precedent a possibility?	creation of a clear court hierarchy (under the Judiciary Acts), and the beginning of regular verbatim publication of U.S. appellate decisions by West Publishing
What can invalidate the rule of law?	hopeless inefficiency, instability, and unpredictability
Why was the rule of precedent allowed?	in the absence of case law, it would be completely unworkable for every minor issue in every legal case to be briefed, argued, and decided
How is a court hierarchy established?	the Judiciary Acts
What states that there is no general federal common law?	the doctrine of Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins
When was the doctrine of Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins put into effect?	1938
Why can't federal courts just make up law?	lack the plenary power possessed by state courts
When are states allowed to use plenary power?	absence of constitutional or statutory provisions replacing the common law
What is a major implication of the Erie doctrine?	federal courts cannot dictate the content of state law when there is no federal issue
What are states not bound by?	federal interpretations of state law
What states that deference is one way only?	Erie doctrine
What does it mean when Erie states that deference is one way only?	state courts are not bound by federal interpretations of state law
What does each state posess?	state constitutions, state governments, and state courts
What are the 50 states in the Union known as?	separate sovereigns
Which ranch applies, interprets, and occasionally overturns both state statutes and regulations?	judicial branch
What branch of government enacts state statutes?	legislative branch
Which branch of government promulgates state regulations?	executive branch
Where are cases usually argued?	state courts
What types of cases are argued in the state courts?	involve claims and defenses under state laws
How many new cases were filed in 2010?	103.5 million
What types of cases did federal district courts receive in 2010?	282,000 new civil cases, 77,000 new criminal cases, and 1.5 million bankruptcy cases
How many cases did appellate courts receice in 2010?	272,795
What makes up the law of criminal procedure?	federal constitutional case law interwoven with the federal and state statutes
What did the exclusionary rule provide for?	inability of legislatures in the U.S. to enact statutes that would actually force law enforcement officers to respect the constitutional rights
What might a suspect use to challenge their detention?	writ of habeas corpus
What must a police officer recite to a suspect upon arrest/	Miranda warning
What acts cover tort damages from police brutality cases?	Civil Rights Act of 1871 and Bivens actions
What is over all judicial proceedings involving private party lawsuits?	The law of civil procedure
What did New York enact that replaced traditional common law proceeding?	code pleading
What was code pleading ultimately replaced by?	modern notice pleading
When did code pleading get replaced by modern notice pleading?	20th century
What did the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure abolish?	The old English division between common law and equity courts
Which states have not adopted FRCP?	New York, Illinois, and California are the most significant
How do New York, Illinois and California maintain civil procedure laws?	codified statutes enacted by the state legislature
What should New York, Illinois and California be using instead of codified statutes?	court rules promulgated by the state supreme court
What is extensive pretrial discovery a part of?	American civil procedure
What is a pretrial deposition?	summary judgment
What is an opt-out class action?	the burden falls on class members to notify the court that they do not wish to be bound by the judgment
What is an opt-in class action?	class members must join into the class
What is the American Rule?	parties generally bear their own attorneys' fees
What is criminal law?	prosecution by the state of wrongful acts
What type of wrongful act will the state prosecute?	acts which are considered to be so serious that they are a breach of the sovereign's peace
Who focuses on things such as evading payment of federal income tax, mail theft, or physical attacks on federal officials, as well as interstate crimes like drug trafficking and wire fraud?	Federal criminal law
Where are the majority of the U.S.'s crimes prosecuted?	state level
What can result in incarceration?	crimes
What two levels of crime are there?	felonies and misdemeanors
What is a misdemeanor?	minor crimes
What results in lengthy prison sentences as well as subsequent probation, large fines, and orders to pay restitution directly to victims?	felony convictions
What usually happens with misdemeanors?	a year or less in jail and a substantial fine
What is a third level of crime that some states have adopted?	infractions
What is contract law?	obligations established by agreement (express or implied) between private parties
What standardized contract law?	Uniform Commercial Code
What kinds of agreements do contract law cover?	express or implied
How much a  Myanmar's boundaries are encompassed by beachfront lands?	(1,200 miles) forms an uninterrupted coastline
How many people dwell in  Myanmar ?	51 million people recorded
What is the land mass of  Myanmar ?	Myanmar is 676,578 square kilometres (261,227 sq mi) in size
Is the capital city the holder of the largest amount of the population in  Myanmar ?	largest city is Yangon (Rangoon)
What is the name of the capital city of Myanmar?	capital city is Naypyidaw
What were the names of some of the early cultures located in Myanmar?	Tibeto-Burman-speaking Pyu city-states in Upper Burma and the Mon kingdoms in Lower Burma
When did the dominant religion of Myanmar become something outside of the mainstream ?	in the 1050s, the Burmese language, culture and Theravada Buddhism slowly became dominant in the country.
What caused the downfall of the downfall of the the original kingdom in Myanmar?	The Pagan Kingdom fell due to the Mongol invasions and several warring states emerged
Whose rule  was Myanmar under when it was one of the most massive kingdoms in Southeast Asia ?	Taungoo Dynasty
When did was Myanmar ruled by the Taungoo Dynasty ?	In the 16th century
What portion of the government was eventually separated from government participation?	the military junta
Has the country been able to overcome the problems of government with the previous regime?	Aung San Suu Kyi's party won a majority in both houses, ending military rule.
What type of government is now established in Myanmar?	a nominally civilian government
Are previous leaders a hendrence to the current government?	former military leaders still wield enormous power in the country
What major conflict is Myanmar known for?	one of the world's longest-running ongoing civil wars.
Where did the name Burma originate from ?	names are derived from the name of the majority Burmese Bamar ethnic group
What is the considered to be the name in slang terms for the people of Myanmar?	Burma is derived from "Bamar", the colloquial form of the group's name
How is the slang term for the people of Burma articulated correctly ?	Depending on the register used, the pronunciation would be Bama (pronounced: [bəmà])
When did the term for the people of Burma become a common place word in English?	The name Burma has been in use in English since the 18th century.
By which name is the country called by most English speaking countries?	Burma continues to be used in English by the governments of many countries, such as Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom
How is Burma officially identified in the United States	Burma (Myanmar)
What is the country called in sessions of the United Nations?	United Nations uses Myanmar
What does the current president of the United States call the country in official settings?	Burma (Myanmar)" and Barack Obama has referred to the country by both names
What extinct species of hominid that lived throughout most of the Pleistocene geological period is believed to have dwelled in Myanmar?	Homo erectus
When was the extinct species believed to have lived in Myanmar?	400,000 years ago
What is the name of the civilization that is believed to be one of the oldest.	Anyathian
Did any other ancient cultures also leave behind evidence of existence in Myanmar?	neolithic age domestication of plants and animals and the use of polished stone tools dating to sometime between 10,000 and 6,000 BC has been discovered
What form was the evidence of ancient cultures discovered in ?	discovered in the form of cave paintings
By what name is the era in the 3rd millennium around 1500 BC known?	The Bronze Age
What events of significance to human development occurred during the Bronze Age ?	people in the region were turning copper into bronze, growing rice
What event evolving animals are the Myanmar also accredited with being the first to accomplish?	domesticating poultry and pigs
When did the Age of Iron begin?	The Iron Age began around 500 BC
What events punctuate the beginning of the Iron Age?	with the emergence of iron-working settlements in an area south of present-day Mandalay
What period was the first known city states established in Myanmar?	Around the second century BC
From what people have were the first records known to be existent derived from?	from present-day Yunnan
Were any of the early civilizations influenced by each other and if so by what how did it occur?	The Pyu culture was heavily influenced by trade with India
What Myanmar import from other countries that has been of major importance?	Buddhism as well as other cultural, architectural and political concepts
What is the name of the kingdom that became dominant along the coastline of Myanmar?	Kingdom of Mrauk U
How long did it take for Myanmar to recover from the collapse of it's first kingdom ?	250 years
Did the Mongol invasions of Burma leave any lasting signs?	Shan migrants who arrived with the Mongol invasions stayed behind
Who was involved merger of the smaller states into the two largest factions of Myanmar ?	Ava Kingdom and Hanthawaddy Kingdom
Was there more than one racial class in the organized societies of the states of Myanmar?	states were all multi-ethnic polities
During what age did the culture of Myanmar grow?	This period is considered a golden age
Who increased the spread of religious reforms in Myanmar?	Hanthawaddy monarchs
Who is the monarch that has some of the most impressive built in their honor in the Myanmar	Mrauk U
Before attempting to obtain political unification, what title did Taungoo,hold ?	a former vassal state of Ava.
Who was the ruling monarchy when Taungoo, was vassal?	king Tabinshwehti
Who was the ruler of the largest kingdom in Southeast Asia ?	Bayinnaung
In what year did the dynasty of Bayinnaung fully collapse ?	1599
Have any other countries ever established a foot hole in Burma?	Portuguese mercenaries established Portuguese rule at Thanlyin (Syriam)
How were the Portuguese expelled from Myanmar?	The dynasty regrouped and defeated the Portuguese
Did the country have lasting monarchs?	Toungoo kings created a legal and political framework whose basic features would continue well into the 19th century
Did the original chieftains maintain power political power?	The crown completely replaced the hereditary chieftainships with appointed governorships in the entire Irrawaddy valley
In what year was one of the original Myanmar kingdoms restored?	In 1740, the Mon of Lower Myanmar founded the Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom
What was the event called that caused  Ayutthaya  to reclaim lost territories ?	the Chinese threat
In what year did  Ayutthaya capture Lan Na  ?	1776.
What country was Burma at war with with until 1855 ?	Arakan
Who managed to eventually control the territory of Arakan	King Bodawpaya
What language eventually came to power in the Irrawaddy valley ?	Burmese language
What was the literacy rate for the Burmese people during the big period of artistic growth?	half of all males and 5% of females
Did changes move along at a uniform pace for the Burmese people?	pace of reforms were uneven and ultimately proved insufficient
What country was Burma a colony of ?	British
What are the kings of the Konbaung monarchy famed for in their rule?	Konbaung kings extended Restored Toungoo's administrative reforms, and achieved unprecedented levels of internal control and external expansion
have the Burmese people ever shown any reservations about the ruling government bodies?	Burmese resentment was strong and was vented in violent riots that paralysed Yangon (Rangoon) on occasion all the way until the 1930s.
What were some of problems experienced with the colonialism of Burma by the British?	Some of the discontent was caused by a disrespect for Burmese culture and traditions
How long was U Wisara on a strike were he refused subsistence ?	166-day hunger strike
Was U Wisara able to survive  the protest?	died in prison after a 166-day hunger strike
Why was U Wisara involved in a resistance movement of such extremes ?	to protest against a rule that forbade him from wearing his Buddhist robes while imprisoned.
Was Burma effected by the world wars?	Burma was devastated during World War II
Did the British protect Burma as its colony during WWII?	the British administration had collapsed
Where groups from Burma an advantage to the Allies during WWII?	British Chindits were formed into long-range penetration groups trained to operate deep behind Japanese lines. A similar American unit, Merrill's Marauders
How many soldiers were lost by the Japanese in Burma during WWII ?	the Japanese lost some 150,000 men in Burma
When did the temporary Japanese rule end in Burma?	the end of Japanese rule in July 1945
Who negotiated the agreement that Burma would be free from forgien rule ?	Aung San
What is the name of the agreement that guarantee Burma's freedom from foreign rule ?	the Panglong Agreement
What leaders were present during the negotiations made for freedom of the Burmese people?	Aung Zan Wai, Pe Khin, Bo Hmu Aung, Sir Maung Gyi, Dr. Sein Mya Maung, Myoma U Than Kywe
What position did Aung San hold in the Burmese government?	Deputy Chairman of the Executive Council of Myanmar
When did and how did Aung San pass away ?	July 1947, political rivals assassinated Aung San
What are the 1988 demonstrations in Burma called?	8888 Uprising
Who lead the government coup in 1988 ?	General Saw Maung
Why was marshal law declared in Burma in 1989?	declared martial law after widespread protests.
What was the official name of Burma changed to by the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC)	Union of Myanmar
Have elections been held in Burma since the military coup in 1988 ?	The military government finalised plans for People's Assembly elections on 31 May 1989
What was the cause of the insurrection in the summer of 2007 ?	an increase in the price of diesel and petrol
What was the name of the insurgency lead by Buddhist Monks?	Saffron Revolution
Did the insurgency lead to any economic changes in Burma ?	an increase in economic sanctions against the Burmese Government.
How did the world respond to the reported acts of military violence during the Burmese revolution of 2007?	The military crackdown against unarmed protesters was widely condemned as part of the International reactions
What natural disaster caused detrimental effects to the Irrawaddy section of Burma in May of 2008 ?	Cyclone Nargis
What is the main crop of the delta of the Irrawaddy section of Burma?	rice
How many people were reported missing or deceased due to the natural disaster of 2007 ?	estimated 200,000 people dead or missing
How much was the financial cost of the damages of the 2007 natural disaster in Burma ?	10 billion US Dollars
Did the government of Myanmar welcome the international efforts of assistance?	Myanmar's isolationist government was accused of hindering United Nations recovery efforts
In 2012 what was the the disturbance with the government running smoothly ? Burma?	the number of ongoing conflicts in Myanmar
Were any religious groups involved in the scrimmages ?	Pro-Christian Kachin Independence Army a
Were any terrorist groups involved in the Burmese conflicts ?	al-Qaeda
Does al-Qaeda believe that Muslims in Burma are in danger?	Ayman al-Zawahiri said al-Qaeda had not forgotten the Muslims of Myanmar and that the group was doing "what they can to rescue you".
Did Muslims in Burma give a repose to statements made by al-Qaeda?	the Burmese Muslim Association issued a statement saying Muslims would not tolerate any threat to their motherland.
What country was Burma involved with in 2015	Armed conflict between ethnic Chinese rebels and the Myanmar Armed Forces
Were there any refuges that resulted from the Burmese conflict in 2015?	The conflict had forced 40,000 to 50,000 civilians to flee their homes and seek shelter
What was the government of China accused of during the Kokang offensive ?	China was accused of giving military assistance to the ethnic Chinese rebels.
Is China an affect on the government in Burma ?	Burmese officials have been historically 'manipulated' and pressured by the communist Chinese
To what benefit of China has its interest in the Burmese government brought about ?	creating a Chinese satellite state in Southeast Asia
Where the elections of 2010 conducted fairly in Burma?	allegations of polling station irregularities were raised
Were the results of the 2010 elections accepted by the United Nations?	the United Nations (UN) and a number of Western countries condemned the elections as fraudulent.
What is the name that Burma held before 2010?	Union of Myanmar
Why was the referendum in 2008 ?	the creation of a "discipline-flourishing democracy"
Is Burma now a democratic nation?	Opinions differ whether the transition to liberal democracy is underway
Does the military still have a government presence in Burma ?	the military's presence continues
What type of government does Burma operate under ?	'disciplined democracy
Does the military presence interfere with the day to day running of the government ?	reforms only occurred when the military was able to safeguard its own interests
In what direction is the government of Burma ultimately attempting to go?	reforms to direct the country towards liberal democracy
What type of economy is Burma attempting to reach?	a mixed economy
Where was  Aung San Suu Kyi confined during his imprisonment in Burma ?	house arrest
What happened to the political prisoner being held in Burma ?	granting of general amnesties for more than 200 political prisoners
Are groups who represent workers allowed to express their opinions in protest in Burma?	new labour laws that permit labour unions and strikes
Have the changes in Burmese law been of benefit to the country in international views ?	approval of Myanmar's bid for the position of ASEAN chair in 2014; the visit by United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
Who was the United States Secretary of State who visited Myanmar in 2014?	Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
How long was the interval between the visits from the United States Secretary of State officials ?	more than fifty years
What political party does Aung San Suu Kyi belong to ?	National League for Democracy (NLD) party
Who raised concerns of fraud in the elections held in the Burma 2012 elections ?	the Freedom House organisation raised concerns
Did all of the political prisoners obtain freedom due to the election in Burma of 2012 ?	some other political prisoners have not been released
Who was expelled from Myanmar before the elections of 2012 and what position did they hold ?	Somsri Hananuntasuk, executive director of the Asian Network for Free Elections (ANFREL)
Are international monitors used in the elections of Burma ?	The 2012 by-elections were also the first time that international representatives were allowed to monitor the voting process in Myanmar
Does the political party of Aung San Suu Ky hold any positions among the ruling faction ?	43 of the 45 available seats
What countries surround the border that is opposite the southwest border of Burma?	Burma is bordered in the northwest by the Chittagong Division of Bangladesh and the Mizoram
What sea is an integral part of the Burma landscape ?	Andaman Sea to the southwest and the south, which forms one quarter of its total perimeter.
How many miles of uninterrupted coastline does Burma encompass?	1,200 mi
What is the name of the bay along the southwest coast of Burma ?	Bay of Bengal
What region lays along the north border of Burma and is famed for the presence of monks ?	the Tibet Autonomous Region
Where does the majority of the Burmese country fall on the globe ?	Much of the country lies between the Tropic of Cancer and the Equator
How much rain is received in the region where Burma is located ?	5,000 mm (196.9 in) of rain annually
What is the expected rainfall in the zone considered to be dry in Burma ?	1,000 mm (39.4 in
What is the average temperature of the coldest  part of Burma and where is it located ?	The Northern regions of Myanmar are the coolest, with average temperatures of 21 °C (70 °F).
How warm does it get at the height of summer along the in the delta and coastal regions of Burma?	Coastal and delta regions have an average maximum temperature of 32 °C (89.6 °F).
What industry is supported by animal labor in Burma ?	the lumber industry
What is an important protein source  in the Burmese diet?	Hundreds of species of freshwater fish
What animals where domesticated in Burma for industry use ?	elephants, which are also tamed or bred in captivity for use as work animals
What is note worthy about the bird population of Burma ?	The abundance of birds is notable with over 800 species
Are large jungle cats part of the animal population of Burma ?	Typical jungle animals, particularly tigers and leopards, occur sparsely in Myanmar
What was the name of the winning unit in the 2010 elections in Burma ?	The elections of 2010 resulted in a victory for the military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party
Were the elections held in an unbiased manner Burma in 2010 ?	Various foreign observers questioned the fairness of the elections.
What were some of the opinions foreign advisers stated about the Burma 2010 elections ?	One criticism of the election was that only government sanctioned political parties were allowed to contest in it
What was the Burmese official decision concerning the legitimacy of National League for Democracy in 2010 ?	the popular National League for Democracy was declared illegal
How have international relations developed due to the recent political changes in Burma ?	relations have thawed since the reforms following the 2010 elections.
What did the United States do in response to the reform changes of the 2010 Burma elections ?	the United States relaxed curbs on foreign aid to Myanmar in November 2011 and announced the resumption of diplomatic relations
What type of activity has the European Union engaged in in response to the reforms made in Burma ?	sanctions on Myanmar, including an arms embargo, cessation of trade preferences, and suspension of all aid with the exception of humanitarian aid.
How did the United States treat Myanmar prior to the changes made in Burmese government ?	years of diplomatic isolation and economic and military sanctions
How are international businesses discouraged from operating in Burma?	Sanctions imposed by the United States and European countries against the former military government, coupled with boycotts
What was the result for internationals companies attempting to conduct business in Burma ?	the withdrawal from the country of most US and many European companies
Who called for the sanctions in Burma to be given reprieve ?	British Prime Minister David Cameron
What did Aung San Suu Kyi become a part of in Burma ?	the Burmese parliament
How do Asian countries feel about the European attitude towards Burma ?	Asian corporations have generally remained willing to continue investing in the country and to initiate new investments
What is a popular business for international Asian countries in Burma ?	natural resource extraction.
What two countries does Burma have Superior relationships with ?	India and China
What is the benefit to the two countries involved in the  India Look East policy ?	fields of co-operation between India and Myanmar include remote sensing, oil and gas exploration, information technology, hydro power and construction
Why did India stop supporting the military in Myanmar in 2008 ?	over the issue of human rights abuses by the ruling junta
Did the military sanctions imposed by India affect the business workings of it's relations in Burma ?	it has preserved extensive commercial ties
Who helped to improve the relations between India and Burma?	Belarusian Prime Minister Mikhail Myasnikovich and his wife Ludmila
What city in Burma was visited by the envoy from India	the capital, Naypyidaw
Who is the first official Burmese delegate to visit the white house following the 2010 elections in Burma ?	Thein Sein became the first Myanmar president to visit the White House in 47 years
When was the most prior visit from a Burmese representative to the  United States prior to 2010 ?	the last Burmese leader to visit the White House was Ne Win in September 1966
Was the visit from the Burmese delegate welcome in the United States in 2010?	Political activists objected to the visit due to concerns over human rights abuses in Myanmar
Did the visit to the United States result in the release of political prisoners in Burma ?	leaders discussed to release more political prisoners
What agreements were made in the visit to the United States by the Burmese in the 21 century ?	to sign a bilateral trade and investment framework agreement on 21 May 2013.
What country has provided Burma with the most military aid ?	Myanmar has received extensive military aid from China
How long has Burma participated in the group ASEAN ?	Myanmar has been a member of ASEAN since 1997
What year was Myanmar the host for the ASEAN conference?	hosted the summit in 2014
What event caused tension between Burma and Bangladesh in 2008 ?	natural gas in a disputed block of the Bay of Bengal
What is the name of the military in Burma ?	Tatmadaw
How large is the military of Burma ?	numbers 488,000
Which traditional branches of the military does Burma have?	Army, the Navy, and the Air Force
What ranking does Burma hold for the number of troops currently serving on active military duty ?	The country ranked twelfth in the world for its number of active troops in service.
From where does Burma receive most of its military artillery ?	Myanmar imports most of its weapons from Russia, Ukraine, China and India.
What did the United adopt in reference to Burma annually until 2005 ?	Until 2005, the United Nations General Assembly annually adopted a detailed resolution about the situation in Myanmar by consensus.
What occurred in the United Nations general convening in 2006 ?	voted through a resolution that strongly called upon the government of Myanmar to end its systematic violations of human rights.
What did China and Russia both do in 2008 ?	vetoed a draft resolution before the United Nations Security Council calling on the government of Myanmar
What other countries were in disagreement with the United Nations decision on Burma ?	South Africa
What is the general view of Burma ?	military regime in Myanmar is one of the world's most repressive and abusive regimes
Who is Samantha Power?	Barack Obama's Special Assistant to the President on Human Rights
What did Ms Powers write concerning Burma ?	"Serious human rights abuses against civilians in several regions continue, including against women and children
What are the names of some of the  human right organizations that have been involved in Burmese relations.	Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International and the American Association for the Advancement of Science
In 2011 what did the group Freedom House say concerning the Burma military?	The military junta has ... suppressed nearly all basic rights; and committed human rights abuses with impunity
How many prisoners are still held in Burma on political crimes?	In July 2013, the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners indicated that there were approximately 100 political prisoners being held
How are children used in the conflicts in Burma?	Child soldiers have and continue to play a major part in the Burmese Army as well as Burmese rebel movements.
How are children obtained for use as solders in Burma ?	Children are being sold as conscripts into the Burmese military for as little as $40 and a bag of rice or a can of petrol
How many child solders were released from the Burmese military in 2012 ?	the Myanmar Armed Forces released 42 child soldiers
What section of the Burmese population is routinely discriminated against ?	The Rohingya people
When was the citizenship laws placed into effect in Burma ?	1982
How does one become a full citizen in Burma ?	Citizenship is given to those who belong to one of the national races
What races are considered for full citizenship in Burma?	national races such as Kachin, Kayah (Karenni), Karen, Chin, Burman, Mon, Rakhine, Shan, Kaman, or Zerbadee
What happens if one is not able to prove ancestral claim on full citizenship ?	Associate citizenship is given to those who cannot prove their ancestors settled in Myanmar before 1823
When did the Rohingya lose citizenship rights in Burma?	the Rohingya have been denied Burmese citizenship since the enactment of a 1982 citizenship law
How is the decision made on who gets full citizenship rights in Burma?	Citizenship is given to those who belong to one of the national races
What races are considered to be the of the the national races in Burma ?	national races such as Kachin, Kayah (Karenni), Karen, Chin, Burman, Mon, Rakhine, Shan, Kaman, or Zerbadee.
How can one prove their race in Burma ?	prove their ancestors settled in Myanmar before 1823
How many of the  Rohingya people have new changes in citizenship caused to become refugees ?	expulsion of approximately half of the 800,000 Rohingya from Burma,
What is believed to be one of the potential religious instigators for the stiff in Burma against a certain race ?	suggested that the Rohingya conflict may be driven by an Islamist political agenda to impose religious laws
Who occupied Burma during the Second World War ?	the Japanese
What system of militaristic management exists in Burma?	the Tatmadaw
What may have caused negative feeling to still linger among the different races of the Burmese people ?	lingering resentment over the violence that occurred during the Japanese occupation
Who did the British choose to back in Burma during WWII ?	British allied themselves with the Rohingya
Has the violence in Burma decreased over the years as the country has tried made democratic strides ?	Since the democratic transition began in 2011, there has been continuous violence as 280 people have been killed and 140,000 forced to flee
Are the separate religious factions in Burma able to peacefully coexist ?	unrest had re-emerged between Myanmar's Buddhist and Muslim communities, with violence
What news company  discovered visual evidence of the disdain exhibited by civil employees and civilians in Burma ?	BBC News media outlet obtained video footage of a man with severe burns who received no assistance from passers-by or police officers
Who recorded the visual evidence on the disdainful incident?	footage was filmed by members of the Burmese police force in the town of Meiktila
Who was the videotape used as evidence against in Burma ?	used as evidence that Buddhists continued to kill Muslims after the European Union sanctions were lifted on 23 April 2013.
What was believed to be one of the Burma reasons for the unrest in 2012 ?	many commentators citing the killing of ten Burmese Muslims by ethnic Rakhine
How many are believed to have been uprooted by this unrest ?	It displaced more than 52,000 people
Who is the president of the BROUK's UK division?	Tun Khin
How many people where missing after the 2012 Burma civil unrest ?	1,200 are missing
What have the military and law enforcement been denounced for in the matter of  summer of 2012 ?	The Burmese army and police have been accused of targeting Rohingya Muslims through mass arrests and arbitrary violence
How have the friar organizations contributed to the struggle in Burma?	monks' organisations that played a vital role in Myanmar's struggle for democracy have taken measures to block any humanitarian assistance to the Rohingya
What happened in Rakhine in the summer of 2012 that had severe implications on the running of the location?	On 10 June 2012, a state of emergency was declared in Rakhine, allowing the military to participate in administration of the region
How did the Burmese government respond to the unrest in 2012 ?	The government has responded by imposing curfews and by deploying troops in the regions
Have there been any changes to restrictions placed on the communications networks in Burma ?	Restrictions on media censorship were significantly eased in August 2012
If communications restrictions have changed how so?	The most significant change has come in the form that media organisations will no longer have to submit their content to a censorship board before publication.
What is the name of the newspaper that was banished from Burma?	The Irrawaddy
What is required of commentators before publishing or airing content ?	journalists "are required to follow 16 guidelines towards protecting the three national causes
What did demonstrators wear during the media rally?	wore shirts demanding that the government "Stop Killing the Press.
What is the name of the individuals who gave relevant information on the recent events in Burma ?	the Crisis Group
Have there been any advances in the human rights situation in Myanmar?	the country's human rights record has been improving
What is the current rating of for Burma from the  Freedom in the World report and what caused the current standing ?	Myanmar improved yet again, receiving a score of five in civil liberties and a six in political freedom
What caused Myanmar to receive a rating of 6?	improvements in civil liberties and political rights, the release of political prisoners, and a loosening of restrictions.
What was the previous rating for Burma?	lowest rating of 7
What did the government bring together ?	National Human Rights Commission
Once the decision was made to bring the group together who was it comprised of ?	consists of 15 members from various backgrounds
Has the joining brought about any changes in the region ?	invitation to expatriates to return home to work for national development.
Who extended the offer to the activists ?	President Thein Sein
Who addressed the United nations on Myanmar's behalf in the fall 2011 ?	Myanmar's Foreign Minister Wunna Maung Lwin
Has the government of Myanmar made life any easier for it's inhabitants ?	has also relaxed reporting laws, but these remain highly restrictive.
Does the government allow access to any desired  media channels for residents ?	several banned websites, including YouTube, Democratic Voice of Burma and Voice of America, were unblocked.
Are there any groups who are able to effectively operate in Burma ?	international humanitarian non-governmental organisations (NGOs)
Why are groups hesitant to work with government officials ?	ethical quandary of how to work with the government without bolstering or appeasing it.
What official was the first to visit the grounds of Great Britain from Burma?	Thein Sein
Who did the official from Myanmar meet with ?	Prime Minister David Cameron,
What was the outcome of the meeting ?	Myanmar president declared that all of his nation's political prisoners will be released by the end of 2013
Where did the official make his announcement of the meetings outcome ?	at Chatham House
What would the official like to see happen between the two countries ?	a desire to strengthen links between the UK and Myanmar's military forces
In terms of finance, when being ruled by the English, where did Burma stand ?	Under British administration, Myanmar was the second-wealthiest country in South-East Asia.
What was Burma's greatest export during that time of English rule ?	rice
What did Myanmar do that made it know to be one of the originals in a particular finance producing endeavor ?	Burma began exporting crude oil in 1853, making it one of the earliest petroleum producers in the world.
What wood product was produced primarily in Myanmar during British rule ?	75% of the world's teak
What notable quality made Burma stand out from other South East Asian countries ?	a highly literate population
How did world war two affect Burmese business and economy ?	British destroyed the major government buildings, oil wells and mines for tungsten, tin, lead and silver to keep them from the Japanese.
How was the Burma framework affected by WWII ?	the country was in ruins with its major infrastructure completely destroyed.
What lead to the architectural changes in Myanmar ?	bombed extensively
Who was credited with changes that occurred to the interior due to the war's effects ?	bombed extensively by both sides
When was Myanmar given sovereignty to rule it's own nation ?	1948, Prime Minister U Nu embarked upon a policy of nationalisation and the state was declared the owner of all land.
What is the major farming production crop in Burma?	rice
What percentage of  the countries's farm-able land is used for the major farming production crop in Burma?	60%
What category does the major farming production crop in Burma fall into ?	food grain production
How is production in the category tallied ?	by weight
How many novel types of this crop did Burma develop as of 1997 ?	52 modern rice varieties
What is the difficulty with expanding the gem business in Burma ?	US and European jewellery companies, including Bulgari, Tiffany, and Cartier, refuse to import these stones based
Why is Burma experiencing this problem with the gems industry  ?	reports of deplorable working conditions in the mines.
Who gave information on the gem industries in Burma ?	Human Rights Watch
What did the group advised based on the information's results ?	encouraged a complete ban on the purchase of Burmese gems based
Who receives the majority of financial benefits from the gem mining ?	the ruling junta
Name two of the metropolitan areas that are enjoyed most frequently by tourist in Myanmar  ?	Yangon and Mandalay
What are two of the top spiritual destination that Myanmar offers ?	Mon State, Pindaya, Bago and Hpa-An
Does Myanmar offer any destinations  that might be good for outside enthusiasts ?	nature trails in Inle Lake, Kengtung, Putao, Pyin Oo Lwin
Are there any edifice points of interest that may be of note to visitors of Burma?	ancient cities such as Bagan and Mrauk-U; as well as beaches in Nabule, Ngapali, Ngwe-Saung, Mergui.
Can visitors travel unrestricted through the country ?	much of the country is off-limits to tourists
How are most visitors ushered into the city of Myanmar ?	by air
Is Myanmar convenient to other countries in South East Asia ?	No bus or train service connects Myanmar with another country, nor can you travel by car or motorcycle across the border – you must walk across
Are there any cruise travel destinations for Myanmar ?	It is not possible for foreigners to go to/from Myanmar by sea or river.
How long have bus tours been available to tourist of Myanmar ?	one tourist company has successfully run commercial overland routes through these borders since 2013.
How far are the people from Taiwan ,but not actually citizens of Taiwan, allowed to venture into the Myanmar territory ?	Those in Thailand on a visa run can cross to Kawthaung but cannot venture farther into Myanmar
Can one travel by plane from any country in Myanmar ?	Flights are available from most countries
Is there anyway to decrease travel time in getting to Myanmar ?	direct flights are limited to mainly Thai and other ASEAN airlines
Has the travel industry considered making changes to fight plans for Myanmar ?	5 international airlines and increasing numbers of airlines have began launching direct flights from Japan, Qatar, Taiwan, South Korea, Germany and Singapore.
What airlines travel to Myanmar that currently has development plans towards expanding ?	Thailand-based Nok Air and Business Airlines and Singapore-based Tiger Airline".
What occurred in the winter of 2014 of significance for Myanmar ?	December 2014, Myanmar signed an agreement to set up its first stock exchange
What is the name of the business that first rang a bell to begin in the winter of 2014 in Myanmar ?	Yangon Stock Exchange Joint Venture Co. Ltd
W is set to to be the major stock holder of the business that first rang a bell to begin in the winter of 2014 in Myanmar ?	Myanma Economic Bank sharing 51 percent
Did other countries actively participate in business that first rang a bell to begin in the winter of 2014 in Myanmar ?	Japan's Daiwa Institute of Research Ltd 30.25 percent and Japan Exchange Group 18.75 percent.
What day did the business that first rang a bell to begin in the winter of 2014 in Myanmar open its doors to customers?	Yangon Stock Exchange (YSX) officially opened for business on Friday, March 25, 2016.
How many are estimated people live in Burma officially?	provisional results of the 2014 Myanmar Census show that the total population is 51,419,420
Who may have been left out of the 2014 census in Burma ?	an estimated 1,206,353 persons in parts of northern Rakhine State, Kachin State and Kayin State who were not counted.
How many people in Burma are currently using a work visa for Thailand?	600,000 registered migrant workers from Myanmar in Thailand
How many of the Burmese  people are predicted to work in Thailand without authorization	millions more work illegally
What percentage of emigrant workers in Thailand that are from Myanmar ?	80% of Thailand's migrant workers
What is the largest percentage of  the Burmese populace ?	Bamar form an estimated 68% of the population
What is the smallest percentage of the Burmese populace ?	Overseas Chinese form approximately 3% of the population
What is the preferential term for those in Burma that are not a part of the racial majority ?	ethnic nationality
What percentage of the population is of the  Rakhine descendant line ?	Rakhine people constitute 4% of the population
What does the term Burmanisation make people feel ?	the proliferation and domination of the dominant Bamar culture over minority cultures.
What percentage of people in Burma are related by linguistically lines to the Khmer.	2% of the population, are ethno-linguistically related to the Khmer
Which community previously held a persuasive authority on the Burmese population?	Anglo-Burmese
When did a mass migration of the community that  previously held a persuasive authority on the Burmese population start?	1958 onwards
Where did the majority of these people end up after Burma ?	principally to Australia and the UK
What are the four categories for the most prolific dialects used in Burma ?	Sino-Tibetan, Tai–Kadai, Austro-Asiatic, and Indo-European.
What are the primary languages of Europe that are used in Burma ?	Pali, the liturgical language of Theravada Buddhism, and English
How many different types of dictionaries could you potentially need to cover all the languages spoken in Myanmar	there are more than 130 languages spoken by people in Myanmar
Are the languages of Myanmar widely used by other nations  ?	many of them are known only within small tribes around the country
What is the preferred lingo for the Tai–Kadai language?	The primary Tai–Kadai language is Shan
What is the matriarchal brogue of Burma that became the countries' standard vernacular ?	Burmese
Which two vernaculars hold relation to the official language?	Tibetan and Chinese language
How is the recognized official language of Burma displayed ?	It is written in a script consisting of circular and semi-circular letters
On what is the visual display of the language a subset of  ?	the Mon script, which in turn was developed from a southern Indian script in the 5th century
From when are the  first impressions of the visually displayed language ?	The earliest known inscriptions in the Burmese script date from the 11th century.
Does Burma have more than one religion ?	Many religions are practised in Myanmar
Are public displays allowed for the celebration of religion in Myanmar ?	Festivals can be held on a grand scale.
Are all welcomed to practice faith openly in Burma	Christian and Muslim populations do, however, face religious persecution
Can anyone in Burma Join the military forces in Burma ?	it is hard, if not impossible, for non-Buddhists to join the army
What are the best routes for career achievement in Burma ?	join the army or get government jobs, the main route to success in the country.
What part of the populace does not  identify with conformists religious  majority?	7% of the population identifies as Christian; 4% as Muslim; 1% follows traditional animistic beliefs; and 2% follow other religions
Are these percentages an accurate estimate of nonconformists religious  groups ?	international religious freedom report, official statistics are alleged to underestimate the non-Buddhist population.
How many dwelling are dedicated to the worship of the faith Jehovah's Witnesses ?	80 congregations around the country and a branch office in Yangon
How many dialects are the publications distributed by the Jehovah Witness available in ?	16 languages
What problem presented itself to the Jewish locale in Rangoon ?	a synagogue but no resident rabbi to conduct services
Who runs the school system in Myanmar ?	the Ministry of Education
What country is Burma to credit for its academic system ?	United Kingdom's
Why is this country so influential to the Burma academics ?	due to nearly a century of British and Christian presences in Myanmar.
Are there any alternatives to the public school system in Burma ?	privately funded English language schoo
Are children required to go to school or can they choose to stay at home and work ?	Schooling is compulsory until the end of elementary school
What are the pervasive culture that is sanctioned in Burma ?	the majority culture is primarily Buddhist and Bamar.
Have these cultures developed on there own over time ?	Bamar culture has been influenced by the cultures of neighbouring countries
What type of effect did Theravada Buddhism.have on Bamar?	The arts, particularly literature, have historically been influenced by the local form of Theravada Buddhism
What is the connection between an insect that has devotional following and Buddhism ?	Buddhism is practised along with nat worship, which involves elaborate rituals to propitiate one from a pantheon of 37 nats.
Customarily where is the expected place in the lives of the people for the home of monks in Burma ?	In a traditional village, the monastery is the centre of cultural life.
What event is exceedingly relevant for young males that involves monks in Burma ?	A novitiation ceremony called shinbyu
What do girls of the village get in comparison the the young male event ?	Girls have ear-piercing ceremonies (နားသ) at the same time.
What is the biggest celebration held in local events in Burma ?	the most important being the pagoda festival
What do many villages have that protects them in times of imminent or impending danger ?	Many villages have a guardian nat
What evidence of previous rule is evident in the buildings in Burma ?	Colonial architectural influences are most evident in major cities
What part of the Burmese population is considered not a part of the mainstream group?	ethnic groups constitute 32%
Do opinions differ on the numbers for that population is considered not a part of the mainstream	exiled leaders and organisations claims that ethnic population is 40%, which is implicitly contrasted with CIA report (official US report).
What is the name of the group that reported the information regarding the populace in Burma ?	The World Factbook
What is the time-honored dish served for the morning meal in Burma ?	Mohinga is the traditional breakfast dish
What is most commonly enjoyed to eat along the coast of Myanmar ?	Seafood is a common ingredient in coastal cities
Where is the most chicken enjoyed in Burma ?	landlocked cities
What is considered as an alternative to tofu for the valuable ingredient it holds for those not living near water in BUrma?	Freshwater fish and shrimp have been incorporated into inland cooking as a primary source of protein
What are popular ways that fish are used in Burma ?	fresh, salted whole or filleted, salted and dried, made into a salty paste, or fermented sour and pressed.
What was the first motion picture about someone's life filmed in Myanmar ?	Myanmar's first film was a documentary of the funeral of Tun Shein
Why was this film relevant enough to be the first ?	Tun Shein — a leading politician of the 1910s, who campaigned for Burmese independence in London.
Before the advent of talking pictures, what was the name of the first movie in Myanmar and when was it 's debut ?	first Burmese silent film Myitta Ne Thuya (Love and Liquor) in 1920
Following the end of the second World War, what was a still a popular theme among films makers in Burma ?	After World War II, Burmese cinema continued to address political themes
Where any of the Burmese films ever used as an instrument to influence the people ?	Many of the films produced in the early Cold War era had a strong propaganda element to them.
Which group originated as a national and religious group in the Middle East during the second millennium BCE, in the part of the Levant known as the Land of Israel?	Jews
Who consolidated their hold with the emergence of the Kingdom of Israel, and the kingdom of Judah?	Israelites
What were incoming nomadic groups known as?	Hebrews
When did Jews originate as a national and religious group in the Middle East?	during the second millennium BCE, in the part of the Levant known as the Land of Israel
What appears to confirm the existence of a people of Israel?	The Merneptah Stele
What percentage of Jews reside in Israel?	43%
What percentage of Jews reside in the U.S.?	40%
How many Jews live in Europe?	1.4 million
How many Jews live in Canada?	0.4 million
What is one reason the world population of Jews difficult to determine?	issues with census methodology
What is the origin of the word Yiddish?	Jude
What is another word to describe a Jew?	Ebreo
What is a Russian word used to describe a Jew?	Еврей, Yevrey
Ebreo is an Italian word derivation of what word?	Hebrew
Name one person that Jewish ancestry traced back to?	Abraham
Where did Jacob and his family migrate to?	Ancient Egypt
Who led the Exodus?	Moses
Who was Jacob's son?	Joseph
Who was Joseph's father?	Jacob
Which culture was largely Canaanite in nature?	Israelite
What is one of the Ancient Canaanite deities?	Yahweh
The period of time from 1200 to 1000 BCE is known as what?	Iron Age
What group was divided into Twelve Tribes?	Israelites
When was the Kingdom of Israel conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire?	after the 720s BCE
From where do the Jews derive their ethonynm?	Israelite tribes of Judah
How many times did Israelites have political independence in ancient history?	twice
From where did the term Jews originate?	Roman "Judean
When was land divided into Israel and Judah?	After the fall of the United Monarchy
Inhabitants of Judah are known as what?	Jews
When did the Babylonian exile end?	539 BCE
Genetic studies show that Jews bear their strongest resemblance to the peoples of where?	Fertile Crescent
How far back does the Jews' shared common genetic pool date?	4,000 years
Most Jews share a common genetic heritage that originates from what place?	Middle East
What book is considered a religious interpretation of the traditions and early national history of the Jews?	The Hebrew Bible
What religions are now practiced by 54% of the world?	Abrahamic religions
What is the Hebrew Bible?	a religious interpretation of the traditions and early national history of the Jews
In modern secular usage Jews include how many groups?	three
What makes the definition of a Jew vary slightly?	whether a religious or national approach to identity is used
Which religion shares some characteristics of a nation, an ethnicity, a religion and a culture?	Judaism
What have historical definitions of Jewish identity been based on?	halakhic definitions of matrilineal descent, and halakhic conversions
Historical definitions of who a Jew is dates back to what year?	200 CE
What is used as a warning against intermarriage between Jews and Canaanites?	Jewish sages
Who believed the status of the offspring of mixed marriages was determined patrilineally in the Bible?	Shaye J. D. Cohen
What dictated that when a parent could not contract a legal marriage, offspring would follow the mother?	Roman law
What is one explanation for the change in Mishnaic times?	the Mishnah may have been applying the same logic to mixed marriages as it had applied to other mixtures
Where did Jews migrate to after the Babylonian conquest?	Babylonia
Between what years did Jews increase to an estimated 2 million?	200 CE – 500 CE
Name one thing that has accounted for Jewish population growth?	conversion
What is a tax imposed on Jews in 70 CE?	The Fiscus Judaicus
When did the FIscus Judaicus relax to exclude Christians?	96 CE
Name one reason historians believe the conversion during the Roman era was limited in number and did not account for much of the Jewish population growth?	illegality of male conversion to Judaism
What resulted in effective and long-term isolation of Jewish communities?	An array of Jewish communities was established by Jewish settlers in various places around the Old World, often at great distances from one another
Name one way Jewish cultural expressions differ in each community?	religious interpretations
Name another way Jewish cultural expressions differ in each community?	culinary preferences
Name one major group that Jews are often identified as belonging to.	Ashkenazim
Name another major group that Jews are often identified as belonging to?	Sephardim
What does Ashkenaz mean in Hebrew?	Germany
What is the more common term in Israel for many of those broadly called Sephardim?	Mizrahim
What does Mizrach mean in Hebrew?	East
In modern usage, why is Mizrahim sometimes termed Sephardi?	due to similar styles of liturgy
When did the expulsion of Jews from Spain and Portugal occur?	the 1490s
Where are the Teimanim from?	Yemen
What group of Jews represent the bulk of modern Jewry?	Ashkenazi Jews
Which group represents at least 70% of Jews worldwide?	Ashkenazi Jews
Why does Ashkenazim represent the overwhelming majority of Jews in the New World continents?	As a result of their emigration from Europe
In what country does the immigration of Jews from Algeria (Sephardim) has led them to outnumber the Ashkenazim?	France
What is the liturgical language of Judaism?	Hebrew
What is also termed lason ha-kodesh, "the holy tongue?"	Hebrew
What are the two languages of the Babylonian Talmud?	Hebrew and Aramaic
What are the Hebrew scriptures called?	Tanakh
What is a closely related tongue to Hebrew?	Aramaic
What is the Judaeo-German language developed by Ashkenazi Jews who migrated to Central Europe?	Yiddish
What is the Judaeo-Spanish language developed by Sephardic Jews who migrated to the Iberian peninsula?	Ladino
Name one reason the ancient and distinct Jewish languages have largely fallen out of use?	Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries
What language is spoken by more Jews in history than any other language?	Yiddish
North Africans continue to use what language as their mother tongue?	North Africans
What are the three most commonly spoken languages among Jews today?	Hebrew, English, and Russian
South African Jews adopted which language?	English
Which language has by and far superseded most Jewish vernaculars?	English
Ashkenazi Jews share more common paternal lineages with what group?	Jewish and Middle Eastern groups
Jewish traditions place most Jewish paternal origins in which region?	Middle East
Which lineages are generally more heterogeneous?	maternal lineages
What looks at the entire DNA mixture?	autosomal DNA
What has become increasingly important as the technology deveops?	autosomal DNA
Mizrahi Jews show evidence of admixture with whom?	Middle Eastern populations and Sub-Saharan Africans
What are Sephardic Bnei Anusim?	descendants of the "anusim" forced converts to Catholicism
Who are descendants of the "anusim" forced converts to Catholicism?	Sephardic Bnei Anusim
What percentage of Iberians are Sephardic Bnei Anusim?	19.8%
What years did the Jewish population rise from 800,000 to two million?	1948 and 1958
What is the population of Israel?	6 million
Between 1974 and 1979, how many immigrants arrived in Israel?	227,258
More than half of the Jews live where?	Diaspora
How many Jews live in Canada?	315,000
How many Jews live in Argentina?	180,000-300,000
How many Jews live in Brazil?	196,000-600,000
Where is Western Europe's largest Jewish community?	France
How many Jews live in France?	between 483,000 and 500,000
What is the population of Jews in the United Kingdom?	292,000
Prior to 1948, how many Jews were living in lands which now make up the Arab world (excluding Israel)?	800,000
The only substantial aliyah came from where?	Yemen and Syria
When did a small-scale exodus begin in many countries?	early decades of the 20th century
When did the advent of the Jewish Enlightenment occur?	18th century
What was a result of the Jewish Enlightenment?	growing trend of assimilation
Name a Jewish community that disappeared entirely?	Kaifeng Jews of China
What is the rate of interreligious marriage in the United States?	just under 50%
What is the rate of interreligious marriage in the United Kingdom?	53%
What is the rate of interreligious marriage in France?	30%
What is the rate of interreligious marriage in Mexico?	as low as 10%
What is the rate of interreligious marriage in Australia?	as low as 10%
When did the Papal States exist?	until 1870
In the Papal States, what is the name for the specified neighborhoods where Jews were required to live?	ghettos
What promoted hatred of Jews because of their descent?	bad antisemitism
What were Jews and Christians living in Muslim lands known as?	dhimmis
What is the per capita tax imposed on free adult non-Muslim males known as?	jizya
What was the disability described by Bernard Lewis as "most degrading?"	requirement of distinctive clothing
Which group had an inferior status under Islamic rule?	Dhimmis
What were walled quarters known as?	mellahs
Who was forced into confinement in mellahs?	Moroccan Jews
When did the confinement of Moroccan Jews in mellahs begin?	15th century
What was one method used to entirely eliminate Jewish populations?	expulsion
What resulted in the massacre of Jews?	First Crusade
Who led the Spanish Inquisition?	Tomás de Torquemada
According to the American Journal of Human Genetics, what percentage of modern Iberian population has Sephardic Jewish ancestry?	19.8%
How many Jews were slaughtered in the Holocaust?	approximately 6 million
Worldwide, how many Jews were there in 1939?	15 million
What was the state-led systematic persecution and genocide of European Jews and other minority groups?	The Holocaust
In 1939, what fraction of Jews were killed in The Holocaust?	more than a third
What is one method used to prevent intermarriage?	pursuing secular Jews in order to give them a stronger Jewish identity
What is the trend for secular Jews to become more religiously observant known as?	the Baal Teshuva movement
Who leads the movement that pursues secular Jews in order to give them stronger Jewish identity?	Orthodox
What is the most frequent use of cotton?	fabric
To what date has cotton been dated?	5000 BC
Where in India has cotton been found from prehistoric times?	Indus Valley
In what Central American country has cotton use been found from early times?	Mexico
What machinery has lead to the  easily made and widespread use of cotton?	cotton gin
Where in Southeast Asia has early use of cotton been discovered?	Mehrgarh, Pakistan
To what period has cotton been dated in Pakistan?	Neolithic
When did the Indus Valley Civilization cover parts of India and Pakistan?	3300 and 1300 BCE
Until what event did the ancient methods of spinning and fabrication of cotton last?	industrialization
During what time did cotton become widely used in India?	2000 and 1000 BC
Use of cotton in Iran dates back to what period?	Achaemenid era
When was the Achaemenid era?	5th century BC
In what source can references to cotton be found in Iran?	Persian poets' poems
What 13th century explorer saw cotton in Persia?	Marco Polo
What Frenchman in the 17th century noted cotton farming in Persia?	John Chardin
When did cotton begin to be commercially grown in Egypt?	1820's,
What French businessman convinced the ruler of Egypt to grow cotton for the French market?	M. Jumel
Who was ruler of Egypt in the 1820s?	Mohamed Ali Pasha
How high had cotton revenues risen by the time of the American Civil War?	$56 million
How many bales of cotton were produced by Egypt by 1903?	1.2 million bales a year
In the late medieval period in Europe as what was cotton viewed?	imported fiber
What 1350 writer stated that cotton was produced by sheep that grew on trees?	John Mandeville
What ancient writer gave later eras the idea that cotton might be a tree?	Herodotus
By the end of what century was cotton grown in the Americas and Asia?	16th century
Why was it easy for people to believe that cotton grew on sheep that grew in plants?	similarities to wool
How did British rule effect Indian cotton processing?	declined
During what centuries did British rule effect Indian cotton production?	late 18th and early 19th
What British business's policies damaged the Indian cotton industry?	British East India Company
What cotton products did British law mandate that India was allowed to sell?	raw cotton
If instead of producing fabrics, where was India forced to purchase cotton products?	Britain
What event produced an expansion of the British cotton industry?	Industrial Revolution
When was a new spinning machine patented that boosted cotton production?	1738
What device did James Hargreaves invent?	spinning jenny
What was Samuel Crompton's invention of 1775?	spinning mule
Whic British city was nicknamed "Cottonopolis" because of its cotton production?	Manchester
What invention improved the cotton industry in both America and Britain?	cotton gin
What American invented the cotton gin?	Eli Whitney
Before the use of the cotton gin, how was cotton separated?	by hand
What business development did the British use to establish a hold on the global cotton market?	commercial chain
From what source was raw cotton first bought and later resold?	colonial markets
What was the difference that made American cotton preferred over Indian cotton?	longer, stronger fibers
In the 1840s, what country could no longer adequately supply the British cotton mills?	India
Besides buying from the American plantations, where else in the western hemisphere did Britain buy cotton?	Caribbean
By what time had cotton become prominent in the American economy of the south?	mid-19th century
What was cotton called in the 19th century?	King Cotton
What action of the Union damaged the southern cotton exports?	Union blockade
When did the American cotton industry fail?	American Civil War
To what county's cotton did European buyers turn due to the American Civil War?	Egyptian
What characteristic of American cotton attracted buyers after the end of the Civil war?	cheap
What did the abandonment of Egyptian cotton mean to the Egyptian economy?	bankruptcy
What was the procedure called which involved workers to work for a share of the profits?	sharecropping
What difficulty in harvesting cotton required a large labor force?	hand-pick
Besides adults what segment of the southern US population was involved in the harvesting of cotton?	children
What function of southern schools was created for children to pick cotton?	split vacations
What part of the southern population worked as sharecroppers?	landless
What is the optimum amount of rainfall for cotton growth?	600 to 1,200 mm
In what soil type does cotton prefer to grow ?	heavy
Why is cotton grown as an annual crop?	control pests
Where in the US is considered the best place to grow cotton on Earth?	South Plains
What type of tolerances make cotton an ideal crop for semiarid areas?	salt and drought
To stop reliance on what was GM cotton developed?	pesticides
What form of cotton is GM?	Genetically modified
What bacterium is used to produced GM cotton?	Bacillus thuringiensis
What farming pest management technique does the use of GM grown plants promote?	noninsecticide
What part of the life cycle of moths does Bt toxin effect?	larvae
In what year did a research study find that the use of Bt toxin plants failed to be effective after 7 years?	2006
On what did a 2009 study conclude that increased insects were dependent?	temperature and rainfall
What did a 2012 study suggest  was halved by the use of GM plants?	pesticides
What did the 2012 study say was doubled by the use of GM cotton?	ladybirds, lacewings and spiders
How much of the Earth's cotton crops are planted in GM cotton?	69%
How much area was planted in India in GM cotton in 2011?	10.6 million hectares
What was the percentage of GM cotton planted in India in 2011?	88%
Waht country has the largest area of GM cotton on Earth?	India
At what rank does US GM cotton stand in the world?	second largest
What percentage of Australia's cotton crop was GM in 2009?	95%
What are organic plants understood to be?	not genetically modified
Without what are organic plants meant to be grown ?	synthetic agricultural chemicals
What is meant by synthetic chemicals?	fertilizers or pesticides
What group in the US determines the allowed practices in organic agriculture?	National Organic Program
How much organic cotton was produced worldwide in 2007?	265,517 bales
What insect is the most destructive pest in cotton growing in the US?	boll weevil
What program has effectively eliminated the boll weevil in the US?	Boll Weevil Eradication Program
What is the organization that instigated the Boll Weevil Eradication Program?	US Department of Agriculture
What form of cotton contains a genetically modified gene?	Bt cotton
On what does the use of Bt cotton reduce reliance?	synthetic insecticides.
How is most cotton harvested?	mechanically
What is the cotton harvesting machine that removes the boll with damaging the plant?	cotton picker
What machine strips off the entire head of the cotton plant?	cotton stripper
What weather conditions mandate the planting of stripper types of cotton?	windy
What type of plant is cotton?	perennial
What was the first manufactured fiber?	rayon
When was rayon first made in France?	1890s
What type of industry produced a growing chain of synthetic fibers?	chemicals industry
What company produced nylon and acrylic in the 1930s and 1940s?	DuPont
What was manufactured completely from petrochemicals?	Nylon
What prompted a help program produced by cotton producers in the 1960s?	decline in market share
What law was passed in 1966 to aid cotton producers?	Cotton Research and Promotion Act
What type of competitors does the 1966 act help combat?	synthetic competitors
Where has the Cotton Research and Promotion Act made cotton the best selling fiber?	U.S.
What did producers of cotton have to re-establish after the market declined?	markets for cotton
For what is cotton used to make?	textile products
Besides new cotton fibers, what type of fibers can be used to make cotton products?	recycled or recovered cotton
With what is cotton often blended to make a new style of fabric?	synthetic fibers
What kinds of fabrics can be made from blended fibers?	knitted or woven
For what can cotton yarn be used?	crochet and knitting
For what is cottonseed used after it is separate from the fibers?	cottonseed oil
What product is processed cottonseed oil?	vegetable oil.
What is cottonseed meal used for feed?	ruminant livestock
For what purpose are cottonseed hulls used in feed?	roughage
As what did early scientists describe gossypol ?	poisonous pigment
What part of the cotton plant is used for paper manufacture?	Cotton linters
What do cotton linters look like?	fine, silky fibers
What are cotton linters called in the UK?	cotton wool
What is cotton wool called in the US?	absorbent cotton
What individual first used cotton wool medically?	Sampson Gamgee
What is a fine, tightly twisted type of cotton fabric?	Cotton lisle
What is lisle considered to be as a fabric?	strong and durable
What does extra twisting of lisle thread produce?	single thread
Where was the lisle thread originally made?	Lisle, France
How is color perceived to be for lisle in comparison to softer yarns?	more brilliant
In 2009 what were the largest producers of cotton?	China and India
How do the US and Africa rank as exporters of cotton?	largest exporters
What is the combined international trade in cotton?	$12 billion
What company is the top cotton broker in Africa?	Dunavant Enterprises
Where is Dunavant Enterprises based?	Memphis, Tennessee
How many subsidized cotton growers are in the US?	25,000
What is the rate of subsidies of cotton growers in the US?	$2 billion per year
What country provides the highest rate of support for cotton growers?	China
Which former colonies still have tight monopolies on cotton brokering?	French
Where in Africa is it possible to buy out brokerages in cotton?	former British colonies
What was Brazil's argument against the US cotton industry?	heavily subsidized
What are the African countries of Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, and Mali referred to as in the cotton industry?	Cotton-4
What has the Cotton-4 been in regards to the US cotton subsidies?	leading protagonist
What could the US do that would please the foreign cotton industry concerning cotton subsidies?	reduction
What organization has Brazil tried to use to curb US cotton subsidies?	WTO's Dispute Settlement Mechanism
What type of labor have some countries come under fire for employing?	child
What usage that causes worker damage have some countries been reported doing?	exposure to pesticides
What country has been accused of forced child and adult labor?	Uzbekistan
Where does Uzbekistan rank as a cotton exporter?	third largest
What system was started in 2005 to deal with organic and ethically produced products?	fair trade
What is the final sequencing goal of sequencing diploid cotton genomes first ?	tetraploid cotton
What type of cotton has two separate genomes within its nucleus?	Tetraploid
When did a group of researchers decide to sequence the genomic structure of tetraploid cotton?	2007
What type of genome must be sequenced first to prevent confusion before the tetraploid form?	diploid
In order to understand the tetraploid forms, what must be used as a comparison in cotton gene sequencing?	diploid counterparts
What companies finished much of the sequencing of the D genome?	Monsanto and Illumina
When was the sequencing of D genome of G.  raimondii mostly completed?	2010
What did Monsanto and Illumina say they would do with the research?	donate
What is the seeming result of donating genetic cotton sequencing to the public?	public relations
What plants are the goal of sequencing wild forms of cotton?	cultivated varieties
What involves encoding information using fewer bits than the original representation?	data compression
What can be either lossy or lossless?	Compression
What reduces bits by identifying and eliminating statistical redundancy?	Lossless compression
What is the process called of reducing the size of a data file?	data compression
What is the process called of encoding at the source of the data before it's processed?	source coding
What helps reduce resource usage?	Compression
What must be decompressed?	compressed data
What is subject to a space-time complexity trade off?	Data compression
What type of scheme involves trade offs among other things?	data compression
What usually exploits statistical redundancy?	Lossless data compression algorithms
What represents statistical redundancy?	Lossless compression
What may have colors that do not change over several pixels?	an image
What compression methods are among the most popular?	Lempel–Ziv (LZ)
What is used in PKZIP, Gzip and PNG?	DEFLATE
What serves as the basis of the Zip method?	LZR
What is a current LZ based coding scheme that does well?	Brotli
What is used in Microsoft's CAB format?	LZX
What can be paired with an algorithm called arithmetic coding?	statistical estimates
What can achieve superior compression?	Arithmetic coding
What uses an internal memory state?	Huffman algorithm
What type of data compression is the converse of lossless date data compression?	Lossy
What can save storage space?	Dropping nonessential detail from the data source
What helps by eliminating off nonessential bits of information?	JPEG image compression
What is used for CD ripping?	audio compression
What methods are used to remove non-audible components of audio signals?	psychoacoustics
What compression is usually performed with even more specialized techniques?	human speech
What is used in internet telephony?	Voice compression
What is encoded by audio players?	audio compression
What is Machine learning closely related to?	compression
What type of compressor can be used for prediction?	optimal
What has been used as a benchmark for "general intelligence"?	data compression
What can be looked at as a special case of data differencing?	Data compression
What is made up of producing a difference given a source and a target?	Data differencing
What can classified as data differencing with empty source data?	data compression
What has the potential to reduce the transmission bandwidth and storage requirements of audio data?	Audio data compression
What is inserted in software as audio codecs?	Audio compression algorithms
What compression algorithms provide higher compression at the cost of fidelity?	Lossy
What produces a representation of digital data that decompresses?	Lossless audio compression
What compression cannot attain high compression ratios?	Lossless
What are around 50-60% of the original size?	Compression ratios
What compression is used in a lot of applications?	Lossy
What is used in most video DVDs?	digitally compressed audio streams
What compression usually achieves far greater compression then lossless?	Lossy
What may be used to weight the importance of components?	Equal-loudness contours
What are often called psychoacoustic models?	Models of the human ear-brain
What is the process called when a signal is masked by another signal separated by time?	temporal masking
What is the coding called that is used with speech?	linear predictive coding
What is thought of as a basic perceptual coding technique?	linear predictive coding
What uses a model of the sound's generator?	source-based coders
What results from methods used to encode and decode data?	Latency
What analyzes a statement of data to boost performance?	codecs
What creates segments called a "frame"?	codecs
What refers to the number of samples that must be analysed before a block of audio is processed?	latency
What has zero samples in a minimum case?	latency
What often has low latencies?	LPC
What varies with time?	voltage
What has to be compressed in order to perform properly?	data
What does "A/D" stand for?	analog-to-digital
What was published in the IEEE Journal in 1988?	literature compendium
What did the literature compendium document?	finished, working audio coders
Where were most of the authors in the JSAC edition?	MPEG-1 Audio committee
Who developed the first commercial broadcast automation audio compression system?	Oscar Bonello
Who was an engineering professor at the University of Buenos Aires?	Oscar Bonello
What was launched in 1987 under the name Audicom?	broadcast automation system
What all mostly use lossy compression?	video compression algorithms
What requires a high data rate?	Uncompressed video
What may present visible or distracting artifacts?	Highly compressed video
What compression typically operate on square-shaped groups of pixels?	video
What only sends the differences within those pixels and blocks?	macroblocks
What does high-frequency detail lead to?	variable bitrate
What may be represented as a series of still image frames?	Video data
What can average a color across similar areas to reduce space?	Compression algorithms
What is hard to tell with smaller differences involved?	color
What still remains much shorter than intraframe compression?	longer command
What happens when a frame contains areas where nothing has moved?	the system simply issues a short command
What is a sequence that can be edited?	video
What copies data from one frame to another?	interframe compression
What is a type of video format?	DV
What is almost as easy as editing uncompressed video?	Making 'cuts'
What do all commonly used video compression methods use?	discrete cosine transform
What does a DCT do?	spatial redundancy reduction
What is not used in practical products?	fractal compression
What are the latest generation of lossless algorithms?	Genetics
What encoding reduces the heterogeneity of a dataset by sorting SNPs?	MAFE
What two algorithms have compression ratios of up to 1200-fold?	DNAZip and GenomeZip
Which newspaper overtook The Sun as largest Saturday UK newspaper?	Daily Mail
What was the sun's circulation per day in March 2014?	2.2 million copies
What was the largest demographic for readers of The Sun?	C2DE demographic
What is the percentage of The Sun readers who are women?	Approximately 41%
What is one controversial event covered by The Sun?	1989 Hillsborough football stadium disaster
Which newspaper did the The Sun on Sunday take the place of?	News of the World
In what year was The Sun's look changed?	2013
What was the circulation of The Sun on Sunday in March 2014?	1,686,840
When did the Sunday Mail overtake The Sun in sales numbers?	May 2015
When is the weekly Mail forecast to pass The Sun in terms of circulation?	during 2016
Who ordered research on the Herald?	Cecil King from Mark Abrams of Sussex University
What was named as a potential reason for the Herald's decline?	demographic changes
What type of people was the new paper supposed to attract?	'social radicals'
What was the advertising budget of the new paper?	£400,000
What was the number of papers in the first print run of the Times?	3.5 million
What did the prospective owner of the paper promise?	fewer redundancies
How did the prospective publisher describe the newspaper he would produce?	a "straightforward, honest newspaper"
Which party would the newspaper endorse?	Labour
What was the price paid for the newspaper?	£800,000
Whose offer to buy the paper was turned down?	Maxwell's offer
What position did Larry Lamb take with the Sun?	editor
What type of view did Lamb have of the Mirror?	scathing
What did Lamb and Murdoch believe to be the best indicator of newspaper quality?	its sales
What position did Lamb formerly hold at the Mirror?	senior sub-editor
How many reporters did Lamb hire for the Mirror's initial staff?	about 125
What did Lamb employ as an important theme from the beginning of the paper?	Sex
When did the first Page 3 model appear topless?	17 November 1970
Who was the first Page 3 topless model?	Stephanie Rahn
Who was the first to prohibit the paper from being in its library?	A Conservative council in Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire
When was the library ban reversed?	1971
What were the Sun's political leanings early on under Murdoch?	nominally Labour
Who led the Labour Party in the 1970 General Election?	Harold Wilson
Who did the Sun support in 1974?	Edward Heath
Who would the Sun consider supporting from the Labour Party in 1974?	James Callaghan or Roy Jenkins
What type of politician did a Sun editorial state that it would support in October 1974?	any able politician who would describe himself as a Social Democrat
Who temporarily replaced Larry Lamb?	Bernard Shrimsley
What was Shrimsley's political background?	middle-class uncommitted Conservative.
Who lent his voice to a campaign that aided The Sun in passing the Daily Mirror in 1978?	Christopher Timothy
Where did Murdoch begin expanding?	United States
When did Murdoch begin expanding into the U.S?	1973
What newspaper was founded by Express Newspaper?	The Daily Star
By what year had The Daily Star started impacting The Sun's sales?	1981
What helped the Sun overcome the Daily Star's challenge?	Bingo was introduced as a marketing tool and a 2p drop in cover price
Who became editor of the Sun in 1981?	Kelvin MacKenzie
What impact was Mackenzie said to have?	changed the British tabloid concept more profoundly than [Larry] Lamb did"
What did The Sun state that had it taken sponsorship of?	a British missile
What did the wording on the side of The Sun missile state?	"Here It Comes, Senors..."
Who did The Sun state that the missile would be used against?	Argentinian forces
How did troops react to the missile?	it was not well received
What was the name of The Sun journalist who reported on the missile?	Tony Snow
What was the Sun's headline on 4 May 1982?	"GOTCHA"
Which Argentine ship was torpedoed?	the General Belgrano
Why did The Sun change the wording of the headline?	the extent of Argentinian casualties became known
Which reporter saw copies of The Sun being thrown into the ocean?	John Shirley
What ship were copies of The Sun thrown from?	HMS Fearless
Which ship was the target of Argentinian aggression?	HMS Sheffield
Which newspapers were highly critical of The Sun's war reporting?	The Daily Mirror and The Guardian
Who was lead writer of The Sun?	Ronald Spark
Who was the BBC's defense correspondent?	Peter Snow
What was the accusation leveled by Ronald Spark against The Daily Mirror, The Guardian, and BBC?	treason
Who did The Sun say was not fit to be Prime Minister in 1983?	Michael Foot
Which party was The Sun accused of covering maliciously?	Labour Party
Who did The Sun support in the 1984 U.S. presidential election?	Ronald Reagan
How old would Ronald Reagan turn soon after he began his second term as U.S. president?	74
What did the headline read that was run with Michael Foot's photo?	"Do You Really Want This Old Fool To Run Britain?"
Who did The Sun support in the 1984-85 Miners' strike?	the police and the Thatcher government
Who was president of the Miners' union?	Arthur Scargill
What did a picture of Scargill have him appear to be doing?	giving a Nazi salute
How did The Sun feel about the American bombing of Libya in 1986?	strongly supported the April 1986 bombing
Who was Labour M.P. in 1986?	Clare Short
How did Murdoch describe critics of his newspaper?	"snobs" who want to "impose their tastes on everyone else"
What did Murdoch and Mackenzie say in defense of The Sun?	they are "giving the public what they want"
Who is one critic of The Sun?	John Pilger
What was the focus of Pilger's reporting in one issue of The Daily Mirror?	the genocide in Pol Pot's Cambodia
What distinction does one single edition of The Daily Mirror hold?	the only edition of the Daily Mirror to ever sell every single copy issued throughout the country
Who wrote Max Clifford: Read All About It?	Clifford and Angela Levin
Who was writing a book with McCaffrey?	Starr
Who was previously Starr's public relations agent?	Max Clifford
How did attention from the story impact Starr's career?	the attention helped to revive his career
What was the name of Starr's autobiography?	Unwrapped
How many libel writs did The Sun get for their coverage of Elton John?	17
Who did The Sun allege that Elton John had sex with?	rent boys
What journalist did The Daily Mirror wrest from The Sun?	John Blake
What breed of dog did The Sun mistakenly report that Elton John owned?	Rottweiler
Where did The Sun offer to fly gay men in 1987?	Norway
What did Piers Morgan offer opinions about in a late 1980s column?	the sexuality of male pop stars
Which papers did Morgan serve as editor of?	Daily Mirror and of The Sun
Which BBC show's homosexual kiss did The Sun report on?	EastEnders
Who shared the first homosexual kiss on EastEnders?	Colin Russell and Guido Smith
Which column did Piers Morgan edit at The Sun?	Bizarre pop column
What was the headline for a page 2 Sun story on 17 November 1989?	"STRAIGHT SEX CANNOT GIVE YOU AIDS – OFFICIAL."
Whose opinion did The Sun trust in their AIDS reporting?	Lord Kilbracken
Which groups were classified as being at a high risk for AIDS?	homosexuals and recreational drug users
With which group was Lord Kilbracken associated?	All Parliamentary Group on AIDS
How did other news outlets report on Lord Kilbracken's words?	none of them presented Lord Kilbracken's ideas without context or criticism
What did critics believe about The Sun and Lord Kilbracken's ideas on AIDS?	The Sun and Lord Kilbracken cherry-picked the results from one specific study while ignoring other data reports on HIV infection and not just AIDS infection
What did Lord Kilbracken think of The Sun's editorial?	Lord Kilbracken himself criticised The Sun's editorial and the headline of its news story
Who criticized The Sun for its reporting on AIDS and HIV?	The Press Council
What did David Randall say about the Sun's AIDS story?	The Sun's story was one of the worst cases of journalistic malpractice in recent history
In what textbook did David Randall write his opinion?	The Universal Journalist
What did the paper report that some fans did?	picked the pockets of crushed victims
Who was reported to have been assaulted while trying to help a patient?	a police constable
Who wrote the headline "The Truth"?	Kelvin MacKenzie
Who wrote the actual story?	Harry Arnold
What was the story based on?	allegations either by unnamed and unattributable sources, or hearsay accounts of what named individuals had said
Where did The sun lose a large portion of its daily sales as a result of the front page?	Liverpool
What were the estimated daily sales in Liverpool 25 years later?	around 12,000
What documentary aired in 2008?	Alexei Sayle's Liverpool
What do many Liverpool residents do with the paper even if given to them free?	simply burn or tear it up
What name have Liverpool residents given to The Sun?	The Scum'
Which footballer was verbally attacked in Liverpool?	Wayne Rooney
What team did Rooney transfer to?	Manchester United
What was Rooney's age at the time of the Hillsborough disaster?	three years old
Who was managing editor of The Sun in 2005?	Graham Dudman
How did Dudman describe The Sun's Hillsborough coverage?	"the worst mistake in our history"
When did Margaret Thatcher leave office?	November 1990
What is another name for the Community Charge?	Poll tax
Who took over for Thatcher?	John Major
Who opposed the poll tax?	Conservative MPs
How did The Sun feel about the Poll tax?	was vociferously supported by the newspaper
What types of policies did The Sun support?	Thatcherite policies
What is an example of a Thatcherite policy?	Royal Mail privatisation
What was The Sun's stance toward the EU?	The paper showed hostility
What's another thing the paper showed hostility to?	promotion of right-wing ministers to the cabinet
What was The Sun's initial stance toward the closures?	opposition
Who did The Sun declare political endorsement of in 1997?	Labour party
Who became Prime Minister in 1997?	Tony Blair
Which New Labour policies did The Sun oppose?	Minimum Wage and Devolution
How did The Sun describe John Major's Conservatives?	"tired, divided and rudderless"
Who greatly changed the image of the Labour party?	Blair
What did Blair agree to in order to get the support of Rupert Murdoch?	not to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism
Who was Cabinet Minister in 1998?	Peter Mandelson
What happened on BBC's Newsnight in 1998?	Peter Mandelson was "outed" by Matthew Parris
Who was editor of The Sun in 1998?	David Yelland
What did The Sun say its policy about revealing an individual's sexuality would be moving forward?	The Sun would never again reveal a person's sexuality unless it could be defended on the grounds of "overwhelming public interest"
What allegation did the government level against The Sun in 2003?	racism
Who specifically leveled the allegations against The Sun?	Prime Minister's press spokesman Alastair Campbell and the Home Secretary David Blunkett
What did a 4 July 2003 front page story claim?	asylum seekers were slaughtering and eating swans
From which issue did claims that The Sun was racist stem?	immigration
Who did The Sun print pictures of in a Nazi outfit in 2005?	Prince Harry
Who did The Sun endorse in the 2005 general election?	Blair and Labour
What is one of the weaknesses The Sun thought Blair possessed?	failure to control immigration
Who was leading the Conservatives at this time?	Michael Howard
What did Blair state about the 2005 election?	it would be his last as prime minister
What was the result of the 2005 election?	Labour's third successive win
What was the subject of the front page on 22 September 2003?	mental health
Who was featured in the article on mental health?	Frank Bruno
What was the original headline on 22 September 2003?	Bonkers Bruno Locked Up
What was the headline changed to after public backlash?	Sad Bruno In Mental Home
What had happened to Frank Bruno to spur the publishing of a story about him?	had been admitted to hospital
Which two nations has The Sun been very antagonistic towards?	French and Germans
What names were used by The Sun to characterize the French and Germans?	"frogs", "krauts" or "hun"
What is the paper's stance on the EU?	opposed
How was French president Jacques Chirac described by The Sun?	le Worm
Which German chancellor was criticized by The Sun?	Angela Merkel
What type of forum was the subject of a January 2009 front page story in The Sun?	a British Muslim internet forum
Who was said to be targeted in The Sun's front page story?	a "hate hit list" of British Jews
What magazine refuted the claims made by The Sun in its article about the forum?	Private Eye
According to Private Eye who was the only forum member expressing wishes for a hate campaign?	Glen Jenvey
Complaints to which body led to The Sun removing the story from its website?	UK's Press Complaints Commission
What was the claimed target of a terrorist attack according to a late 2010 Sun front page story?	Granada Television in Manchester
What was the television program that would have been affected by the attack?	Coronation Street
What did the Manchester police say about these claimed attacks?	categorically denied having "been made aware of any threat from Al-Qaeda or any other proscribed organisation."
Who negotiated an apology from The Sun for its misreporting of this story?	the Press Complaints Commission
Who was responsible for the 2011 Norway attacks?	Anders Behring Breivik,
When was The Sun printed on the Wapping presses for the last time?	January 2008
Where was London printing of The Sun moved to?	Waltham Cross in the Borough of Broxbourne in Hertfordshire
How many presses were there at the new printing facility?	12
Where had northern printing been moved to?	Knowsley on Merseyside
How much had been invested in the new printing locations?	£600 million
Who followed Tony Blair as Prime Minister?	Gordon Brown
Who was the Conservative leader that The Sun often supported?	David Cameron
What is the name of the company that operates The Sun?	News Corporation
What was the House of Lords Select Committee on Communications investigating in 2007?	media ownership and the news
On which issues did Murdoch claim he exerted editorial control?	which political party to back in a general election or which policy to adopt on Europe
Who showed up on the editorial floor of the Independent?	James Murdoch and Rebekah Wade
Who was the editor of the Independent?	Simon Kelner
What did The Sun neglect to report concerning the upcoming election?	its own YouGov poll result
Who did the Independent state wouldn't decide the election?	Rupert Murdoch
What year was the United Kingdom general election?	2010
Who did The Sun advocate for the 2010 election?	David Cameron
What did The Sun fear would result from election of the Labour Party?	disaster
What was the outcome of the general election?	hung parliament
Which party came to power after the election?	Tories
Who did David Cameron align with in order to become Prime Minister?	Liberal Democrats
Why were former Sun staff members put in police custody in early 2012?	as part of a probe in which journalists paid police officers for information
What was the charge against those arrested?	suspicion of corruption
What greater scandal was this investigation a part of?	the News of the World scandal
Which Sun staffers were arrested?	crime editor Mike Sullivan, head of news Chris Pharo, former deputy editor Fergus Shanahan, and former managing editor Graham Dudman
What role had Graham Dudman taken after serving as The Sun managing editor?	columnist and media writer
Who were the main leaders of the ruling party?	David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband
Who criticized Milliband for posing with a copy of The Sun showing the Hillsborough disaster?	Liverpool Labour MPs and the city's Labour Mayor, Joe Anderson
How did Milliband explain posing with this newspaper?	promoting England's bid to win the World Cup
Who was the Labour Mayour of Liverpool?	Joe Anderson
What emotion did many people feel over The Sun's coverage of Hillsborough?	anger
Who was the subject of an early June 2013 front page story?	Tulisa Contostavlos
Who wrote the story on Tulisa Contostavlos?	Mahzer Mahmood
What was the main allegation in The Sun's story on Contostavlos?	that Tulisa introduced three film producers (actually Mahmood and two other Sun journalists) to a drug dealer and set up a £800 deal
What did The Sun reporters make Contostavlos believe?	that she was being considered for a role in an £8 million Bollywood film
What was the title of the front page story on Contostavlos?	Tulisa's cocaine deal shame
How did the case against Tulisa fare?	collapsed
What did the judge in the case state?	Mahmood had lied at a pre-trial hearing and tried to manipulate evidence against the co-defendant Tulisa
What type of drugs was Tulisa accused of supplying?	Class A drugs
What action did The Sun take against Mahmood?	suspended
When was the case against Tulisa tried?	July 2014
What were Sun staff accused of in a 2014 trial?	conspiring to commit misconduct in a public office
What was at issue in the 2014 trial?	illegal payments allegedly made to public officials
Who were The Sun staffers accused of buying information about?	the Royal Family, public figures and prison inmates
Who was the judge in this particular case?	Richard Marks
What was the outcome of the jury's deliberation in the trial?	failing to reach verdicts on the outstanding charges
Who was appointed presiding judge over the retrial in 2015?	Charles Wide
In which newspaper did Lisa O'Carroll report the choice of judge?	The Guardian
Who was Pharo's lawyer in the case?	Nigel Rumfitt QC
What did Rumfit state that the defendants should have been informed about?	why Marks was being replaced by Wide
What did the lawyers for the defendants threaten to do?	take the decision to judicial review
Who was found guilty in 2015?	Anthony France
Who was responsible for Operation Elveden?	the London Metropolitan Police
Which Sun reporter was found guilty in 2015?	Anthony France
Who was responsible for Operation Elveden?	London Metropolitan Police
How much did Anthony France pay to a police officer?	more than £22,000
Who was the policeman leading Operation Elveden?	Detective Chief Superintendent Gordon Briggs
How did Briggs characterize the relationship between France and Edwards?	"long-term, corrupt relationship"
Who was the first journalist convicted as a result of Operation Elveden since it had been revised?	France
What was the change made to Operation Elveden by the Crown Prosecution Service?	prosecutions would only be brought against journalists who had made payments to police officers over a period of time
Which judge commented on France's unlawful activities?	Timothy Pontius
Who else did Judge Pontius believe should be blamed for France's actions?	News International
Who was News International considering bringing a case against?	the London Metropolitan Police Service
What did The Irish Sun stop doing in 2013?	featuring topless models on Page 3
What was stated to be the last edition of the regular Sun to publish topless models?	the edition of 16 January
Which newspaper claimed that The Sun stopped featuring topless models in 2013?	The Times
What happened on 22 January 2015?	Page 3 returned to its usual format
What did The Sun's Head of PR say about the reported editorial change at The Sun?	the reputed end of Page 3 had been "speculation" only
Which Sun columnist made controversial remarks about migrants to Britain in April 2015?	Katie Hopkins
What terms did Katie Hopkins use to describe migrants to Britain?	"cockroaches" and "feral humans" and said they were "spreading like the norovirus"
Which organization sharply rebuked Hopkins' comments?	the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights
Who was the High Commissioner of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights?	Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein
What did Hussein compare Hopkins' remarks to?	that employed by Rwanda's Kangura newspaper and Radio Mille Collines during the run up to the 1994 genocide
On Twitter what famous person condemned Hopkins' remarks?	Russell Brand
Who wrote critically in The Independent about Hopkins?	Simon Usborne
With whom did Usborne draw parallels to Hopkins as a result of Hopkins' comments?	previous uses by the Nazis and just before the Rwandan Genocide by its perpetrators
Which writer in The Guardian was critical of Hopkins?	Zoe Williams
What did Williams say should be done about Hopkins?	I’m not saying gag her: I’m saying fight her
What is an often used term for British withdrawal from the European Union?	Brexit
Who did The Sun say was in favor of British withdrawal from the European Union?	Queen Elizabeth II
Where was Queen Elizabeth II said to have made critical remarks about the European Union?	Windsor Castle
Who refuted the statement that the Queen was critical of the European Union?	Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg
With whom was a complaint lodged alleging breach of guidelines in accuracy after the incident involving Queen Elizabeth II?	Independent Press Standards Organisation
When does Fastelavn occur?	Shrove Tuesday
The Philippines stopped celebrating Carnival after what year?	1939
Maslenitsa is celebrated in what type of nation?	Eastern Orthodox
What is the Carnival celebration known as in Lutheran countries?	Fastelavn
When does Carnival typically begin in the Netherlands?	on 11/11
The term Carnival is very common in areas with a large presence of which religious sect?	Catholic
What country no longer celebrates Carnival?	the Philippines
The Manila Carnival was dissolved after what year?	1939
What is the Carnival known as in countries which are mostly Lutheran?	Fastelavn
What is the name of the festival celebrated in Eastern Orthodox nations during the last week before Great Lent?	Maslenitsa
What does vastenavond mean?	the days before fasting
What month was the livestock typically slaughtered?	November
A carnival feast is the last time to do what before winter?	eat well
Why were the winter stores of lard and meat eaten before fasting?	it would soon start to rot and decay
Why was the carnival feast typically the last opportunity to eat well?	food shortage at the end of the winter
What was one limited to during the winter?	the minimum necessary
Why would all the remaining stores of lard, butter and meat left at vastenavond be eaten?	it would soon start to rot and decay
What does "vastenavond" mean?	the days before fasting)
When would new food sources be available for those who survived the winter?	spring
Whose effigy was placed on a ship on wheels?	Nerthus or Freyr
What type of tribe celebrated daylight returning?	Germanic
What season did fertility typically return?	spring
What typically accompanied the effigy of Nerthus?	a procession of people in animal disguise
What typically happened aboard the ship on wheels?	the marriage of a man and woman be consummated
What did a bunch of Germanic tribes celebrate?	the returning of the daylight
How was the ship carrying a predominant deity moved around during the jubilee?	on wheels
Why was the winter driven out?	to make sure that fertility could return in spring
What is Nerthus the goddess of?	fertility
How would the marriage of a man and woman on the ship serve as a fertility ritual?	be consummated
What's the name of the Christian festive season that occurs before the season of Lent?	Carnival
When do the main events of the Christian festival occur?	February
Who is the Carnival open to?	public
What do participants of the Carnival experience a heightened sense of?	social unity
What is consumed in excessive amounts during Lent?	alcohol
Who wrote the Germania?	Tacitus
What do the Germans feel it inconsistent to confine gods within?	walls
Germans do not liken the gods to whose countenance?	human
When is the car used in the ritual purified?	Afterwards
Where is the divinity herself purified?	a secret lake
What desires were expected to be suppressed during the fasting period?	sexual
All rich food and drink were consumed before what named event?	Lent
The giant celebration that involved the whole community is thought to be the origin of what festivity?	Carnival
How long is the Lenten period of the Liturgical calendar?	six weeks
What type of rich foods did people refrain from eating during Lent?	meat, dairy, fat and sugar
What was one of the festivals sanctioned by the church?	corpus christi
Carnival was also a result of what area's folk culture?	European
How many days is Jesus traditionally said to have fasted in the desert?	40
What pagan midwinter festival did the church find easier to subvert than eliminate?	Christmas
Why were multiple holidays seized by the Catholic population?	outlet for their daily frustrations
In what year did the synod in Leptines rant against the excesses of the festival?	743
In what month did the excesses occur?	February
What type of books from around 800 contain more information of people's traditions during this period?	Confession
What was it a sin with no small penance to dress up as?	an animal or old woman
What would some people in Spain go out disguised as?	the opposite gender
Many Carnival traditions form an integral part of whose calendar?	Christian
What two ancient Roman festivals is Carnival thought to stem from?	Saturnalia and Bacchanalia
The Saturnalia is potentially based on what Greek festival?	Dionysia
On which month and day did Saturnalia start?	December 17
What happened to the men and women chosen to represent the Lord of Misrule?	horribly murdered
What is insufficient to establish a direct origin from ancient festivals to Carnival?	evidence
What festival did no complete accounts describing survive?	Saturnalia
How do both Jesus and King Carnival make a gift to the people?	with their deaths
What is the gift of King Carnival?	acknowledgement that death is a necessary part of the cycle of life
Who was forced to race naked through the streets of Rom by Pope Paul II?	Jews
Where were some of the best-known traditions first recorded?	Italy
What city's carnival was the most famous for a long time?	Venice
What was the first place in North America with a Carnival tradition?	New France
What were rabbis from the ghettos forced to march through the city streets wearing?	foolish guise
Who dismissed the petition of the Jewish community to stop the abuse of them?	Pope Gregory XVI
What nationality were the settlers from who introduced Carnival?	Portuguese
How many of the inhabited islands is Carnival celebrated on?	nine
Three groups in São Nicolau make use of fire in the construction of what conveyance?	a painted float
What do groups in Mindelo challenge each other for?	a yearly prize
Over how many days is São Nicolau's Carnival celebrated?	three
What is the only state in India in which Carnival is celebrated?	Goa
What does the Indian word "Intruz" mean?	swindler
The largest Carnival celebration takes place in which city?	Panjim
What is eaten on Fat Tuesday to partake in the celebration?	crepes
What legendary king eventually takes over the state?	Momo
Whose Carnival is known local as Cwarmê?	Malmedy
Despite being located in East Belgium, Malmedy's Carnival harks purely to what area?	Latin
How many days does Malmedy's festival take place before Shrove Tuesday?	4
Where can all the traditional costumes be seen parading on the Sunday of the festival?	in the street
What do disguised people pass through during the festival?	the crowd
What do some Belgian cities hold during Lent?	Carnivals
What Carnival takes place on Laetare Sunday?	the Carnival de la Laetare
What group of participants attack bystanders with confetti and dried pig bladders?	Blancs-Moussis
What day does the town of Halle engage in its celebration?	Laetare Sunday
What's the name of Belgium's oldest parade?	Carnival Parade of Maaseik
Many towns in what region of Croatia observe the Carnival period?	Kvarner
What does every Kvarner town burn just before the end of the Carnival?	a man-like doll
Who is blamed for all the strife of the previous year?	Jure Piškanac
What does the head regalia of the bell-ringers represent?	their areas of origin
What is the traditional Carnival food?	fritule
How long has Carnival been celebrated?	centuries
Under whose rule was Carnival established in the 16th century?	Venetian
Dionysus was a deity in whose tradition?	Greek
In what century did the Carnival become an organized event?	twentieth
What city almost exclusively celebrates the Carnival?	Limassol
How many parades take place during Carnival?	Three
Who rides through the city on a carriage?	the "Carnival King
Which of the festivals is comprised of participants who are mainly children?	The second
What do people walk along the town's longest avenue in?	costume
Who are the last two parades open for participation by?	anyone who wishes to participate
Where did students in Norway originally see the celebrations?	Paris
Where did the artist federation hold their annual balls?	in the old Freemasons lodge
Who composed the song "Karneval in Paris"?	Johan Svendsens
What organization has produced annual masquerade balls in Oslo since 1988?	Tårnseilerne
When do the processions occur after?	an opera performance
Which Carnival is held in Germany's west?	The "Rheinische"
Cologne Carnival is one of the largest Carnivals and also is the most what?	famous
What is colloquially known as Old Women Day?	Nürnberg. On Carnival Thursday
Who revolted in 1824?	washer-women
What are the women who stormy city halls allowed to do to any passing man?	kiss
What is the Greece Carnival also called?	the Apokriés
What does the Opening of the Triodion derive from?	the liturgical book used by the church
What is one of the festival season's high points?	Tsiknopempti
What types of dinners do people enjoy during the season's high point?	roast beef
What do people engage in after they've disguised themselves?	pranks and revelry
Who holds an annual Phallus festival?	Tyrnavos
What are the giant, gaudily painted effigies of phalluses made of?	papier maché
What are women rewarded with for kissing the giant phalluses?	a shot of the famous local tsipouro alcohol spirit
What is the ancient celebration for?	nature's rebirth
In what square do the bands all play at once?	Ntoltso
In what provinces is the Carnival mainly celebrated in the Netherlands?	southern
Dutch Carnaval is celebrated until which Wednesday?	Ash
What vary from town to town in regards to the Carnival?	traditions
What is consumed on Ash Wednesday?	herring
What is dutch for "Peasant Wedding"?	boerenbruiloft
How long has the Strumica Carnival been going on?	since at least 1670
What nationality was Evlija Chelebija?	Turkish
Who ran from house to house, laughing, screaming, and singing?	masked people
What day is the main Carnival Night observed on?	Tuesday
What year was the Festival of Caricatures and Aphorisms added to Strumica's Carnival celebrations?	2000
What countryside has multiple groups and individuals in disguise?	Slovenian
Kurent is monstrous and demon-like, but also what?	fluffy
Where is the most significant Slovenian festival held?	Ptuj
Who are magical creatures from another world?	the Kurents
What do the Kurents try to banish?	winter
The chirigotas, choirs and comparsas are the most famous of what?	groups
What do the chirigotas sing about?	politics, new times and household topics
How long does it take for a chirigota to prepare their costume?	the whole year
Which group rides around in open carts through the streets?	The Choirs
Who has the most elaborated polyphony?	The comparsas
Where do people dress in masks and costume?	Catalonia
What are raced as part of the festivities?	bed
What is Cantalonian for Eternal Prince of Cuckoldry?	Princep etern de Cornudella
Who has a lovely breast?	Marquès
Who is upon the bed?	the Artist of Honor
Who oversees the period of reckless behavior?	The King
What is the ritual procession through the town to call everyone to attendance called?	cercavila
Fat Thursday is also known as what day?	omelette day
Who is typically burned on a pyre?	King Carnival
When may conventional social rules be broken?	a period of misrule
What city's carnival has documented history from 1790?	Vilanova i la Geltrú
What do the Vilanovins mock the media friendly Carnivals as being about?	"thighs and feathers"
In what dance do the participants lob more than 75 tons of hard candy at each other?	Les Comparses
What do dancers lampoon in the ritual heralding the coming of King Carnival?	current events or public figures
What's the name of the day-long agenda of eating and fighting with meringue?	Merengada
What sort of battle do the adults have at midnight?	meringue
Who throws insults at the crowd?	the Xerraire
What behavior scandalizes the town?	sexual
Who creates sparks and explosions?	ritual crew of devils
Who is the children's King?	Caramel
What do people dress in for the King's funeral?	elaborate mourning costume
Who carries floral arrangements of penis-like veggies?	cross-dressing men
Who weeps around the body of the King?	concubines
What type of eulogy is provided for the King?	satiric
What ritual suggests symbolic cannibalism?	communion
What is one of the longest free events in the streets?	Carnaval de Solsona
How long can the nightly concerts run for?	more than a week
What was a donkey hung from according to local legend?	the tower bell
How does the donkey piss on the crowd below?	water pump
What does "matarrucs" mean?	donkey killers
What do the events of Tarragona start with?	building of a huge barrel
On what day does the main parade take place?	Saturday
What are the clothing of the Carnival groups full of?	elegance
Who has one of the most complete ritual agendas?	Tarragona
About how many people are members of the various parade groups?	5,000
What contagiously throbs during the week of events?	music
How long does Aruba's biggest celebration last?	a month
What type of costumes play a central role in the Queen elections?	flamboyant
What continues in various districts throughout the month of the Carnival?	Street parades
When is King Mom symbolically burnt?	On the evening before Lent
What is the Carnival known as in Barbados?	Crop Over
Where did the festival in Barbados originate from?	sugar cane plantations
What year did Crop Over begin?	1688
What activity is done using a greased pole?	climbing
What is the finale of Crop Over called?	The Grand Kadooment
What type of competition is a major feature of the festival?	calypso
Where did Calypso music originate?	Trinidad
Who perform biting social commentaries?	musicians
What do the musical groups compete for?	the Calypso Monarch Award
What is the climax of the festival called?	Kadooment Day
What's the name of the vehicle where the musicians play?	a Carrosa
What do devotees follow during a particular religious celebration?	a given saint or deity
Who are usually included the group comparsa?	notable men from the community
What is used in some of the festive fights?	flour
What is the goal of the Carnival painters?	to paint as many people as you can
What year did the Carnival start in Haiti?	1804
What event precipitated the Carnival starting in Haiti?	declaration of independence
What is the Carnival known as in the Creole language?	Kanaval
What type of bands play for dancers in the streets?	kompa
What type of annual competition takes place during Kanavel?	song
When does  Dirty Mas take place on the Monday before Ash Wednesday?	before dawn
What do the costumes worn by the revelers pun about?	current affairs,
What is "Clean Mud"?	clay
What are "jab-jabs"?	devils
How are the King and Queen of J'ouvert chosen?	based on their witty political/social messages
On what day is full costume worn?	Carnival Tuesday
What is usually worn on the feet to compliment the costumes?	"Mas Boots"
What does each band base their costume presentation on?	theme
What do the mas bands eventually converge on?	the Queen's Park Savannah
Who gets to be crowned Road March King or Queen?	The singer of the most played song
About how many cities and towns in Mexico is Carnival celebrated in?	225
What contributes to the variations of the celebrations in the rural areas?	level of European influence
Where do people take part in mock combat with blank shooting rifles?	Huejotzingo, Puebla
What is the mock combat roughly based on?	the Battle of Puebla
Morelos, Oaxaca, Tlaxcala and Chiapas are important states which also have their own what?	local traditions
What does Mardi Gras translate to in French?	Fat Tuesday
Where was Mardi Gras first celebrated?	Gulf Coast area
What originated in the onetime French colonial capitals?	Customs
What has been part of the celebrations for many years?	street parades and masked balls
Washington, D.C. and Galveston, Texas are some major American cities which have what?	celebrations
Which borough of New York City is Carnival celebrated in?	Brooklyn
What American holiday is Carnival celebrated on?	Labor Day
What country has one of the largest Caribbean Carnivals?	Trinidad
Over how many people typically attend New York's version of the Carnival?	one million
What neighborhood as the privilege of bearing the brunt of the festivities?	Crown Heights
Which Carnival in Argentina is the most representative of the nature of the Carnival?	Murga
What city in the east of Entre Rios province is considered the most important one for the Carnival?	Gualeguaychú
What kind of tradition does the city of Corrientes have?	Carnival
What is Chamame?	popular musical style.
Where is Carnival celebrated?	In all major cities and many towns throughout the country
Which Carnival takes place in Oruro in Bolivia?	La Diablada
Who is the miners' patron saint?	Vírgen de Socavon
Over how many parade groups participate in the festivities?	50
How many hours a day does the parade run?	18
What does the tropical weather on the east side of Bolivia allow?	a Brazilian-type Carnival
How many members do Samba Schools have?	thousands
How much does a Samba costume typically run an average tourist to buy?	$500–950
What's the name for small, somewhat random groups of people with a definite theme in their samba?	Blocos
About how many Samba schools are in Rio?	30
How much money in US dollars did the Carnival industry make in 2012?	1 billion
Where did the Carnival gestate out of the purview of rules?	in small/unimportant towns
How many days does the non-stop festival go?	six
The uninterrupted celebration of Carnival festivals in Barranquilla is now recognized as what?	one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity
Who rejected attempts to introduce the Carnival in Bogotá?	the government
Where are the most famed Carnival festivities?	Guaranda (Bolivar province) and Ambato (Tungurahua province
What are the festivities known as in Ambato?	Fiesta de las Flores y las Frutas
Where has a celebration recently gained acclaim?	Imbabura
What is there a large population of in the Chota Valley?	afro-Ecuadorian
What music is the Carnival celebrated with in the Chota Valley?	bomba del chota
What is a tradition unique to the Creole people?	touloulous
Why are Touloulous given free condoms?	in the interest of the sexual health
What do men have to do to be allowed into the balls?	pay admittance
What are the touloulous' dance partners not allowed to do?	refuse
Why do the women drink through a straw?	protect their anonymity
What does the Peruvian Carnival incorporate elements of?	violence
Why are the festivals in Peru held when they are?	because it is the rainy season
When did the festivities acquire their violent tendencies?	second half of the 20th century
What is an element of Peruvian's Carnival not found in any other country's celebrations?	sexual assaults on women
How many years in prison can someone expect for being violent during the fun and games?	eight
How many days does the Carnival in Uruguay last for?	more than 40
What parade style does Uruguay's festival ape?	European
What were the stylistic elements of the parade imported with in colonial times?	slaves
What are the main attractions of the Uruguayan Carnival?	two colorful parades
What is summoned by the Desfile de Llamadas parade?	candombe
What are built in many places through the cities?	tablados
What do the different Carnival groups perform together?	opera
What do the topics of the shows put on at the tablados typically relate to?	the social and political situation
What type of rhythmic figures are performed by the drummers playing the tamboril?	candombe
What sort of touch do the vedettes provide to the parades?	sensual
What is the difference between a pesticide and a plant protection product?	pesticides are also used for non-agricultural purposes
What is the purpose of a pesticide?	Pesticides are substances meant for attracting, seducing, and then destroying any pest
What are pesticides most commonly used for?	The most common use of pesticides is as plant protection products
What can pesticides protect plants from?	protect plants from damaging influences such as weeds, fungi, or insects
What item commonly used in hospitals, schools and offices is a pesticide?	sanitizer
What are three pests pesticides target?	plant pathogens, weeds, mollusks
Are pesticides chemical or biological agents?	a pesticide is a chemical or biological agent
What are possible cons of pesticides?	potential toxicity to humans and other species
What are pesticides meant to prevent?	destroy property, cause nuisance, or spread disease, or are disease vectors
What is one way to group pesticides?	chemical structure
Give three examples of target organisms of pesticides.	herbicides, insecticides, fungicides
What are the two types of biopesticides?	microbial pesticides and biochemical pesticides
Which type of pesticides have seen rapid growth in development?	Plant-derived pesticides, or "botanicals
Organochlorine hydrocarbons effect what balance of the nerve fiber?	sodium/potassium
Why was the use of organochlorine hydrocarbons ended?	because of their persistence and potential to bioaccumulate
What type of herbicide selectively kills broad leef weeds?	Phenoxy compounds
What essential plan funtion is interrupted by triazines?	photosynthesis
Organophospates and carbamates cause which symptoms?	weakness or paralysis
What is one way you could group pesticides?	application method
What is the main way that peticides perform their function?	by poisoning pests
In which direction do systemic pesticide generally travel through a plant?	movement is usually upward
Which parts of a plant do systemic pesticides generally attack?	pollen and nectar in the flowers
Pesticides can be used to stop the spread of what dieseases?	West Nile virus, yellow fever, and malaria
What sort of pesticides would you find in ponds and lakes?	Herbicides
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in the US?	Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in Canada?	Pest Management Regulatory Agency
What kind of pesticide is DDT?	an organochlorine
Why have DDTs been banned in some areas?	persistence in the environment and human toxicity
Is DDT 100% guaranteed to work?	DDT use is not always effective
How may species have been found to be resistant to DDT?	nineteen
On estimate how many megatonnes of pesticides were used between 2006 and 2007?	approximately 2.4
What amount of conventional pesticide use does the agricultural sector account for?	80%
 Pesticides contain at least how many ingredients?	more than 1,055
How maney pesticides are offered for sale in the US?	over 20,000
What do monetary savings in crops from the use of pesticide amount to?	$40 billion
What amount is spent annualoy on pesticides?	$10 billion
How are consumers able to benefit from saved crops?	vast quantities of produce available year-round
In which area do pesticides creat jobs?	agrichemical sector
How is the health of the general publis affected by pesticides?	control of insect-borne diseases and illnesses
Can pesticides have a serious effect on people?	cause acute and delayed health effects
What is one of the most serious effects of exposure to pesticides?	cancer
What is thought to possibly cause neurobehavioral alterations?	organophosphate insecticide exposures
How many workers in agriculture die a year from severly poisining pesticides in developing countries?	18,000
What careers put people in danger of being exposed to pesticide poisining?	groomers, groundskeepers, and fumigators
In developing countries, how many workers are exposed to mild pesticide poisining?	as 25 million
Why are 99% of pesticide related deaths in underdeveloped countries?	inadequate regulation
What pecentage of sprayed pesticides affect the wrong species?	Over 98%
What is affected when pesticides don't reach their target?	non-target species, air, water and soil
What is it called when pesticides are caught in the wind and carried to unintended areas?	Pesticide drift
Pesticides contribute to what sort of pollution?	water pollution
What is the effect of pesticide drift?	potentially contaminating
Why are hydrocarbon pesticides not excreted?	dissolve in fats
How are levels of pesticides higher going up the food chain?	Biological magnification
The movement of pesticides from wawrme to cooler climates is called what?	Global distillation
How could pesticides travel over hundreds of miles?	the wind
What feature is wanted to assist with reducing negative impacts of pesticides?	that pesticides be degradable
How else can negative impacts of pesticides be reduced?	quickly deactivated in the environment
What is one way by which pesticides lose their efficacy?	presence of halogens
What may slow pesticide movement?	Adsorption to soil
What is one thing that can be used in place of pesticides?	methods of cultivation
What natural product can be used to control pests?	composted yard waste
Why are alternative methods of pest control gaining popularity?	safer than traditional chemical pesticides
What agency has offered acceptance of safer pesticides?	EPA
What is one non chemical way of dealing with pests?	interfering with insect breeding
What does IPM stand for?	integrated pest management
How can the location and amount of insects be changed?	behavior-modifying stimuli
What is one thing that can be used to pull pests?	food additives
What is the name of the process by which pests are attracted and repelled using IPM.	Push-Pull
How much was Sweden able to lower thier pesticide usage?	halved its use
What other country has reduced its pesticide usage?	Indonesia
What natural substance has been found to effectively increase crop yields	carbon to nitrogen
What amount of gain in crops can be contributed to application of composted yard waste?	10% to 212%
What is one type of pesticide?	biodegradable
How long may it take for persistent pesticides to be broken down?	months or years
What quality caused DDT to build up in various organisms?	persistence
What is one way to classify pesticides?	type of pest they control
What are sulfonyureas commonly used for?	weed control
Nicosulfuron, triflusulfuron methyl and chlorsulfuron can be classified as what type of pesticides?	broad-spectrum herbicides
The restriction of what enzyme allows broad-spectrum herbicides to kill plants?	acetolactate synthase
The amount of material used as a crop protection measure decreased from 1kg/ha in what year to its current 1%?	1960s
Is the trade of pesticides and pesticide treated goods limited to the United States?	traded across international borders
What commitee deals with differences in rules governing the use of pesticides among different countries?	United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
When was the international code which governs the distribution and use of pesticides established?	1985
How recently were voluntary standards of pesticide regulation updated?	2002
What country has attempted to better the controls of pesticide exchanges?	London
What is one agency who is trying to help make the trade of pesticides safer?	United Nations Codex Alimentarius Commission
What is one important thing that should be present when countries are trading with pesticides?	prior informed consent
Are these agencies a requirement in the countries where they exist?	initiatives operate on a voluntary basis
What is one measure taken to keep society safe from improper pesticide use?	pesticide applicator regulation
What is a choice that users of pesticides can make that will lower risks?	choosing less toxic pesticides
What is one country that has sucessfully used IPM?	Australia
Biological and botanical derivatives have what positive effects?	reduce health and environmental risks
Who has the ability to make the choice of using less harmful pesticides?	applicators
What is a measure of pesticides determined in EPA studies?	material is safe to use and the effectiveness
Who is protected by EPA regulations?	humans or the environment
Pesticides are inspected often to make sure they meet up to date safety regulations from what period of time.	before November 1984
How often are pesticides produced more recently evaluated for safety?	every 15 years
How could someone learn more about how to safely use and handle an unknow pesticide?	label
What are pesticides that are thought to be extremely dangerous called?	restricted use pesticides
What would qualify someone to use restricted use pesticides?	an exam
 The EPA or other groups who govern pesticide use may inspect what?	Records of sales and use
Agencies who regulate the environment exists in what regional capacities?	state or territorial
What is the earliest records of humans using pesticides?	before 2000 BC
What was used as a insecticide in the 17th century?	nicotine sulfate
What decade did herbicides become common?	1960s
Who can be credited with finding out DDT is useful as an insecticide?	Paul Müller
What is the source used to exact nicotine sulfate?	tobacco leaves
When were laws first created to regulate pesticides?	1910
What might someone knowledgable about the history of pesticides call ther period of the 1940s and 1950s?	pesticide era
When did America establish the Environmental Protection Agency?	1970
Countries which are established use what amount of pesticides?	Seventy-five percent
Trends about use of pesticides have been published from which country?	USA
What type of region is somerset	Somerset is a rural county of rolling hills
What are some areas of Somerset county	Blackdown Hills, Mendip Hills, Quantock Hills and Exmoor National Park, and large flat expanses of land including the Somerset Levels
How far back was the county populated	There is evidence of human occupation from Paleolithic times, and of subsequent settlement in the Roman and Anglo-Saxon periods
What Kings rise did the county play part in	a significant part in the consolidation of power and rise of King Alfred the Great, and later in the English Civil War and the Monmouth Rebellion
What is the city of Bath famous for	substantial Georgian architecture and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site
What are the people of somerset mentioned in	Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's entry for AD 845
What archaic name was mentioned in 878	The archaic name Somersetshire was mentioned in the Chronicle's entry for 878
When did the county stop using Somersetshire	it went out of fashion in the late 19th century
What was superfluous	As with other counties not ending in "shire," the suffix was superfluous, as there was no need to differentiate between the county and a town
Who invaded Britain when the Romans Left	Britain was invaded by Anglo-Saxon peoples
It took how long for the Anglo Saxons to control  the Somerset area	by the early eighth century King Ine of Wessex had pushed the boundaries of the West Saxon kingdom far enough west to include Somerset
What was the Saxon Royal Palace used for	was used several times in the 10th century to host the Witenagemot
What prison does somerset county contain	HM Prison Shepton Mallet, which was England's oldest prison still in use prior to its closure in 2013, having opened in 1610
What rebellion took place in Somerset in 1685	Monmouth Rebellion was played out in Somerset and neighbouring Dorset
What ended Somersets cottage industry	The Industrial Revolution in the Midlands and Northern England spelled the end for most of Somerset's cottage industries
What flourished in Somerset after the Industrial revelotuion	Farming continued to flourish
What Industry was important in the late 18th and 19th century of North Somerset	Coal mining was an important industry in north Somerset
What did the west somerset mineral way transport	iron ore in the late 19th century; this was taken by the West Somerset Mineral Railway to Watchet Harbour for shipment to the furnaces at Ebbw Vale
How many Somerset soldiers were killed in WW1	Many Somerset soldiers died during the First World War, with the Somerset Light Infantry suffering nearly 5,000 casualties
How many counties had no casualties in WW1	only nine, described as the Thankful Villages, had none of their residents killed
The county was base for what in WW2	for troops preparing for the D-Day landings
What is the Tauton stop line	The Taunton Stop Line was set up to repel a potential German invasion
Why were decoy towns used in WW2	decoy towns were constructed in Somerset in World War II to protect Bristol and other towns, at night
What did the decoy towns mimic	mimic the geometry of "blacked out" streets, railway lines, and Bristol Temple Meads railway station, to encourage bombers away from these targets
Who layed out  Beacon Batch	Shepperton Studios, based on aerial photographs of the city's railway marshalling yards. The decoys were fitted with dim red lights
What decoy city was hit	The Chew Magna decoy town was hit by half-a-dozen bombs on 2 December 1940, and over a thousand incendiaries on 3 January 1941
How long have the boundaries of somerset remained constant	are largely unaltered from medieval times
What river forms the border of Somerset	The River Avon formed much of the border with Gloucestershire, except that the hundred of Bath Forum
What did king Edward the 3 do	Edward III proclaimed "that the town of Bristol with its suburbs and precincts shall henceforth be separate from the counties of Gloucester and Somerset
When did Somerton take over from Ilchester as the county town	in the late thirteenth century, but it declined in importance and the status of county town transferred to Taunton about 1366
How many cities and towns in Somerset	The county has two cities, Bath and Wells, and 30 towns
The largest populations of the county	in terms of population are Bath, Weston-super-Mare, Taunton, Yeovil and Bridgwater
What was the strategic purpose to settle this area	strategic importance in relation to geographical features, such as river crossings or valleys in ranges of hills
Most Southernly town of somerset	Chard is the most southerly town in Somerset, and at an altitude of 121 m (397 ft) it is also the highest
What area lies in the northeastern part of Somerset levels	the Mendip Hills are moderately high limestone hills
What area was Designated to have outstanding beauty	Quantock Hills which was England's first Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty designated in 1956
What is the name of the coal field	The Somerset Coalfield is part of a larger coalfield which stretches into Gloucestershire
What area support dairy farming	on the clay substrate, are broad valleys which support dairy farming and drain into the Somerset Levels.
What's the name of the cave system	an extensive network of caves, including Wookey Hole
Name 2 of the county gorges	and gorges, including the Cheddar Gorge and Ebbor Gorge
Name some of the county rivers	the Axe, Brue, Cary, Parrett, Sheppey, Tone and Yeo
What did King charles levy on river boats	King Charles I, river tolls were levied on boats to pay for the maintenance of the bridge.
What are the Somerset levels	are a sparsely populated wetland area of central Somerset, between the Quantock and Mendip hills
what do the Somerset levels consist of	marine clay levels along the coast, and the inland (often peat based) moors
what are the 2 sections of the somerset levels	the Polden Hills; land to the south is drained by the River Parrett while land to the north is drained by the River Axe and the River Brue
What is the total area of the levels	The total area of the Levels amounts to about 647.5 square kilometres (160,000 acres)
who started drainage of the Somerset levels	the Romans, and was restarted at various times: by the Anglo-Saxons
What are the main coastal towns	Minehead, Watchet, Burnham-on-Sea, Weston-super-Mare, Clevedon and Portishead
what is the name of the natural reserve area	Bridgwater Bay, and is a National Nature Reserve
what does the western coastline look like	the coastline is high and dramatic where the plateau of Exmoor meets the sea, with high cliffs and waterfalls.
What is the somerset climate like	a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country
The annual sunshine rate of somerset	Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1,600 hours
How many days of snow on average	About 8–15 days of snowfall is typical
The average rainfall level of somerset	Average rainfall is around 700 mm (28 in)
What is the leading port of somerset	Bridgwater was developed during the Industrial Revolution as the area's leading port
what was manufacture in Bridgeport in the 19th and 20th century	was a centre for the manufacture of bricks and clay roof tiles, and later cellophane, but those industries have now stopped
The good motor system presently allows for	Bridgwater has developed as a distribution hub for companies such as Argos, Toolstation, Morrisons and Gerber Juice
where are aircraft manufactured	AgustaWestland manufactures helicopters in Yeovil, and Normalair Garratt, builder of aircraft oxygen systems
What do many towns encourage	Many towns have encouraged small-scale light industries, such as Crewkerne's Ariel Motor Company, one of the UK's smallest car manufacturers
What type of factory was built in Somerset	A Royal Ordnance Factory, ROF Bridgwater was built at the start of the Second World War, between the villages of Puriton and Woolavington
What other high tech industry is in Somerset	Other high-technology companies include the optics company Gooch and Housego, at Ilminster
What is yeovilton home to	The Royal Naval Air Station in Yeovilton, is one of Britain's two active Fleet Air Arm bases and is home to the Royal Navy's Lynx helicopters
What area is home to royal marines	Norton Fitzwarren is the home of 40 Commando Royal Marines
What is Somerset an important supplier of	defence equipment and technology.
What area employs 15000 people in the couinty	Agriculture and food and drink production continue to be major industries in the county, employing over 15,000 people
What type of orchids used to be pleantiful	Apple orchards were once plentiful, and Somerset is still a major producer of cider
What area is important to the fruit juice industry	Gerber Products Company in Bridgwater is the largest producer of fruit juices in Europe, producing brands such as "Sunny Delight" and "Ocean Spray
What area is PDO	Cheddar cheese—some of which has the West Country Farmhouse Cheddar Protected Designation of Origin (PDO).
Where is willow growing still practiced	Traditional willow growing and weaving (such as basket weaving) is not as extensive as it used to be but is still carried out on the Somerset Levels
What is pollarding	The willow was harvested using a traditional method of pollarding, where a tree would be cut back to the main stem
What did plastic bags result in	Largely due to the displacement of baskets with plastic bags and cardboard boxes, the industry has severely declined since the 1950s
The somerset level is the only area left  to commercially grow what	The Somerset Levels is now the only area in the UK where basket willow is grown commercially.
What towns grew around the weaving Industry	Castle Cary and Frome grew around the medieval weaving industry
Why did Cj clark shoes leave the area	the work was transferred to lower-wage areas, such as China and Asia
What famous shoe brand was made in Somerset	Dr. Martens shoes were also made in Somerset, by the Northampton-based R. Griggs Group
What type of stone was supplied in the county	supplying freestone and building stone
Who promoted the use of stone from the  Bath area	Ralph Allen promoted its use in the early 18th century, as did Hans Price in the 19th century
What are some uses for Blue Lias	Blue Lias has been used locally as a building stone and as a raw material for lime mortar and Portland cement
What has been supplied by the county since the 1920's	the county has supplied aggregates. Foster Yeoman is Europe's large supplier of limestone aggregates
Tourism supports how many people in the County	estimated in 2001 to support around 23,000 people
Some of the county attractions are	the coastal towns, part of the Exmoor National Park, the West Somerset Railway (a heritage railway), and the museum of the Fleet Air Arm at RNAS Yeovilton
What does Glastonbury have associations with	mythical associations, including legends of a visit by the young Jesus of Nazareth and Joseph of Arimathea, with links to the Holy Grail, King Arthur
What type of festival is Glastonbury famous for	Glastonbury also gives its name to an annual open-air rock festival held in nearby Pilton
What type of cheese is the county famous for	locally produced cheese, although there is now only one remaining cheese maker in the village of Cheddar
What is Hinkley point C	Hinkley Point C nuclear power station is a project to construct a 3,200 MW two reactor nuclear power station
What was Stop Hinkley	Stop Hinkley, was formed to campaign for the closure of Hinkley Point B and oppose any expansion at the Hinkley Point site
What did the European Commission review	opened an investigation to assess whether the project breaks state-aid rules
How did the Commission vote turn out	the European Commission has approved the project, with an overwhelming majority and only four commissioners voting against the decision.
What is the population growth rate of Somerset county	Population growth is higher than the national average, with a 6.4% increase, in the Somerset County Council area, since 1991, and a 17% increase since 1981
The unemployment rate of the county	the unemployment rate is lower than the regional and national average.
What percentage of the population is economically active	is higher than the regional and national average
What percentage of the population is native	Somerset has a high indigenous British population, with 98.8% registering as white British and 92.4% of these as born in the United Kingdom
The largest ethnic group in somerset county is	Chinese is the largest ethnic group
Tauton Bridgewater and Yeovil has what concentration of the population	Over 25% of Somerset's population is concentrated in Taunton, Bridgwater and Yeovil
How many tourist nights are spent in Somerset	Over 9 million tourist nights are spent in Somerset each year
How many tiers  does somerset county consist of	The ceremonial county of Somerset consists of a two-tier non-metropolitan county
What are the 5 districts of Somerset	The five districts of Somerset are West Somerset, South Somerset, Taunton Deane, Mendip, and Sedgemoor
What 2 Unitary authorities were established in april 1996	North Somerset, and Bath & North East Somerset
What police force covers the ceremonial county	Somerset is covered by the Avon and Somerset Constabulary, a police force which also covers Bristol and South Gloucestershire
What fire / rescue squad was formed in 2007	The Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service was formed in 2007 upon the merger of the Somerset Fire and Rescue Service with its neighbouring Devon service
What area does South western Ambulance  Service cover	covers the entire South West of England, including all of Somerset
What is the name of the charitable air ambulance service	The Dorset and Somerset Air Ambulance
Where does the Glastonbury Music festival take place	takes place most years in Pilton, near Shepton Mallet
who holds a literature festival each summer	The annual Bath Literature Festival is one of several local festivals in the county
The annual Carnival is held when and where	The annual circuit of West Country Carnivals is held in a variety of Somerset towns during the autumn
What does Artharian legend claim about Glastonbury	Avalon became associated with Glastonbury Tor when monks at Glastonbury Abbey claimed to have discovered the bones of King Arthur and his queen
What is built in Avalon	the oldest above-ground Christian church in the World" situated "in the mystical land of Avalon
The Episcopal seat of the Bishop is now where	The Episcopal seat of the Bishop of Bath and Wells is now in the Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew in the city of Wells, having previously been at Bath Abbey
Where is St Greggorys abbey	is at Stratton-on-the-Fosse, and the ruins of the former Cistercian Cleeve Abbey are near the village of Washford
What some of the Museums in Bath	American Museum in Britain, the Museum of Bath Architecture, the Herschel Museum of Astronomy, the Jane Austen Centre, and the Roman Baths
What are some other attractions	Claverton Pumping Station, Dunster Working Watermill, the Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton, Nunney Castle, The Helicopter Museum in Weston-super-Mare
Where is the Museum of Somerset	in Taunton
What is the name of the museum in Glastonbury	the Somerset Rural Life Museum in Glastonbury
How many listed buildings in Somerset	Somerset has 11,500 listed buildings
How many monuments on Somerset	523 scheduled monuments
What is a key type of Architecture in Somerset	its medieval church towers
Name some historic private houses in the county	Halswell House and Marston Bigot.
Where does the rugby team play	Bath Rugby play at the Recreation Ground in Bath
The county's first football team is	Yeovil Town won promotion to Division Three as Football Conference champions
When did yeovil achieve promotion to the champion league	Yeovil achieved promotion to the Championship in 2013 after beating Brentford in the playoff final
Where are the horse races held	Horse racing courses are at Taunton and Wincanton
Why was the Somerset county Canal built	to reduce the cost of transportation of coal and other heavy produce
What was in use along the canal	several tramways
What was never built	A planned 11.7 km (7.3 mi) branch to Midford was never built
What was laid on the path to Midford	in 1815 a tramway was laid along its towing path
Who purchased the tramway in 1871	In 1871 the tramway was purchased by the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway (S&DJR), and operated until the 1950s
How long were canals used	usefulness of the canals was short-lived, though some have now been restored for recreation
What was built int the 19th century	19th century also saw the construction of railways to and through Somerset
How many railways served the county	The county was served by five pre-1923 Grouping railway companies
Were any of the railways  electrified	None of these lines, in Somerset, are electrified.
What railways lines are still in use today	The former main lines of the GWR are still in use today, although many of its branch lines were scrapped under the notorious Beeching Axe
What  did paddle streamers serve until the 1960's	the piers at Weston-super-Mare, Clevedon, Portishead and Minehead were served by the paddle steamers of P and A Campbell
What was the pier on Burnham -on-sea used for	The pier at Burnham-on-Sea was used for commercial goods
What is the shortest pier in the UK	The pier at Burnham-on-Sea is the shortest pier in the UK
What was constructed in the 1970's	In the 1970s the Royal Portbury Dock was constructed to provide extra capacity for the Port of Bristol
What are the  state schools in somerset	Bath and North East Somerset, North Somerset, and the larger Somerset County Council
What are the 3 tiers of school	a three-tier system of first, middle and upper schools in the Cheddar Valley, and in West Somerset
How many state and independent secondary  schools in Somerset	Somerset has 30 state and 17 independent secondary schools
What schools can trace their origins back	Several schools can trace their origins back many years, such as The Blue School in Wells and Richard Huish College in Taunton
What was the original name of the Beechen Cliff School	started in 1905 as the City of Bath Boys' School
In 2006 Somerset students performed how well compared to England as a whole	In 2006, 5,900 pupils in Somerset sat GCSE examinations, with 44.5% achieving 5 grades A-C including English and Maths (compared to 45.8% for England).
What school in Bruton was given royal  foundation status	King's School, Bruton, was founded in 1519 and received royal foundation status around 30 years later
What are some prepatory schools for younger students	such as All Hallows, and Hazlegrove Preparatory School
What is one of the Musical schools	Wells Cathedral School which is one of the five established musical schools for school-age children in Britain
What is a roman catholic school	Downside School which is a Roman Catholic public school in Stratton-on-the-Fosse
Bath school of pharmacy founded in	Bath School of Pharmacy (founded 1907
When did Bath Spa Gain University status	achieved university status in 2005
When did the university of Bath gain royal charter	The University of Bath gained its Royal Charter in 1966, although its origins go back to the Bristol Trade School
What University are in Bath	The University of Bath and Bath Spa University are higher education establishments in the north-east of the county
When was the Collegiate School of Saybrook Colony founded?	1701
When was the Collegiate School renamed to Yale College?	1718
Why was the school named Yale College?	recognition of a gift from Elihu Yale
When did Yale first incorporate humanities and sciences?	by 1777
When did Yale issue the first Ph.D in the United States?	1861
How many schools is Yale composed of?	fourteen
How much is Yale's endowment worth?	$25.6 billion
How many books are in the Yale University Library?	15 million
Who runs Yale College?	Yale Corporation
Where is the main Yale campus?	downtown New Haven
When was "An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School" approved?	October 9, 1701
Who voted on "An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School"?	General Court of the Colony of Connecticut
What was the name of the group that started Yale's library?	The Founders
Why was "An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School" proposed?	to create an institution to train ministers and lay leadership for Connecticut
Where did "The Founders" go to school?	Harvard
Where did Elihu Yale grow up?	Wales
Where was Elihu Yale born?	Boston
What was Elihu Yale's father's name?	David
Who suggested the new name of Yale?	Cotton Mather
How many books were in the 1714 shipment to Yale?	500
When was Ezra Stiles president of Yale?	1778 to 1795
What course did Ezra Stiles require freshmen to take?	Hebrew
When did the British threaten to take over the college?	July 1779
Who saved Yale from the British raid?	Edmund Fanning
What degree was Edmund Fanning given for his services?	an honorary degree LL.D
When did William Graham Sumner teach?	1872 to 1909
What did William Graham Sumner teach?	economics and sociology
Why was The Yale Report established?	the classics would not be abandoned
What were the group of Yale professors and ministers attempting to achieve?	developing a whole man possessed of religious values sufficiently strong to resist temptations
What changes were the professors and ministers responding to?	Victorian culture
What was Nathan Hale famous for?	Revolutionary War soldier
What profession did Frederic Remington hold?	artist
What was the name of the protagonist of "Stover at Yale"?	Frank Stover
What turned into the goal of the student body?	winning the big game
What were the subjects of Frederic Remington's paintings?	heroes gloried in combat and tests of strength in the Wild West
In what year was the first debate between Harvard, Yale, and Princeton?	1909
When was the first debate between Harvard and Yale?	1892
How were debates shown to the college students?	front pages of college newspapers
What did members of the debate team get for their service?	the equivalent of athletic letters for their jackets
Why do debates not have a distinct winner?	scoring is subjective
Who attempted to enact measures of football reform?	the presidents of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton
What did the rebellion to the new football measures start?	Intercollegiate Athletic Association
Who was president of Yale during the rebellion?	Arthur Hadley
Who represented Harvard during the rule changing debates?	A. Lawrence Lowell
Who represented Princeton during the rule changing discussions?	Woodrow Wilson
When was the Yale School of Medicine established?	1810
When was Yale Divinity School established?	1822
When was Yale Law School created?	1843
When was Yale Graduate Schools and Arts and Sciences established?	(1847
When was the Sheffield Scientific School created?	1847
When was Noah Porter president of Yale?	1871 to 1886
What idea did Noah Porter strike down?	new research university
What did many historians think of Noah Porter?	simple-minded reactionary, uncritically committed to tradition
What was Porter's reason for striking down the research university?	an eager embrace of its ideals would corrupt undergraduate education
What caused disagreement about Yale's new position?	Expansion
How much did  philanthropic foundations donate between 1925 and 1940?	about $7 million
What was the $7 million used for?	behavioral science research
What animals sexual behavior did Yerkes study?	chimpanzee
Who were the behavioral scientists in charge of the research?	President James R. Angell and psychobiologist Robert M. Yerkes
What was the goal of the behavioral research?	improve mankind
Which group of researchers provided a standard research school environment?	Harrison's group
Which groups of researchers provided unorthodox structure for a research group?	Pickford's and Hutchinson's
What was Pickford's group lacking to make it more like other research schools?	departmental or institutional position or power
What information did Hutchinson's model provide?	new models for research groups are needed
What did Hutchinson's group research?	diverse areas of ecology
Who was dean of Yale Medical School from 1920 to 1935?	Milton Winternitz
What was the driving force behind Milton Winternitz's research?	social medicine
What teaching style did Milton Winternitz develop?	Yale System
What is the Yale System?	few lectures and fewer exams, and strengthened the full-time faculty system
What programs did Milton Winternitz create?	graduate-level Yale School of Nursing and the Psychiatry Department
Who was the first professor for the American studies program?	Norman Holmes Pearson
Where did Norman Holmes Pearson work before Yale?	Office of Strategic Studies in London
What did the American studies program hope to instruct?	fundamentals of American civilization
Who contributed to the American studies programs at Yale and University of Wyoming?	William Robertson Coe
Why did Coe donate to American studies programs?	to celebrate the 'values' of the Western United States
What sister school of Yale's considered merger in 1966?	Vassar College
Who was the first undergraduate woman at Yale?	Amy Solomon
What society did Amy Solomon enroll in at Yale?	St. Anthony Hall
What year did the first undergraduate class including women graduate from Yale?	1973
Where did undergraduate women live during the first few years of women being allowed to attend Yale?	Vanderbilt Hall
What led to Yale's Grievance Board and the Yale Women's Center?	Alexander v. Yale
When was a Title IX complaint filed against Yale?	March 2011
What was the name of the magazine of which multiple editors were involved in the Title IX complaint?	Broad Recognition
What was the complaint of the editors of Broad Recognition?	the university had a hostile sexual climate
What did Yale do about the Title IX complaint?	formed a Title IX steering committee to address complaints of sexual misconduct
Why do New Haven city officials dislike Yale?	exemption from local property taxes
Which Yale president assisted with New Haven's revitalization efforts?	President Levin
What has been the effect of Yale and New Haven's relationship on Yale?	economic power of the university increased dramatically with its financial success
What has been the effect of Yale and New Haven's relation on New Haven?	decline in the local economy
What did the Boston Globe have to say about Yale?	"if there's one school that can lay claim to educating the nation's top national leaders over the past three decades, it's Yale."
Which US presidents since the Vietnam War have studied at Yale?	Gerald Ford, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush
What well known presidential candidates also studied at Yale?	Hillary Clinton (2008), Howard Dean (2004), Gary Hart (1984 and 1988), Paul Tsongas (1992), Pat Robertson (1988) and Jerry Brown (1976, 1980, 1992).
What non winning major party nominees studied at Yale?	John Kerry (2004), Joseph Lieberman (Vice President, 2000), and Sargent Shriver (Vice President, 1972)
How many times were Yale alumni on a presidential ticket between 1972 and 2004	every
Why did President Levin believe there were so many Yale alumni presidential candidates?	Yale’s focus on creating "a laboratory for future leaders,"
Why did Richard Brodhead believe there were so many Yale alumni presidential candidates?	very strong tradition of volunteerism
Why did Gaddis Smith believe John Kerry led Yale's Political Union Liberal Party?	an ethos of organized activity
Why does CNN believe George W. Bush was accepted into Yale?	"son and grandson of alumni", and for a "member of a politically influential family."
What does Elisabeth Bumiller believe the reasoning behind the amount of political Yale alumni is?	the culture of community and cooperation
In the 1988 election, where did George H. W. Bush say Michael Dukakis's foreign policy was born?	Harvard Yard's boutique
How did George H. W. Bush describe Yale's reputation?	so diffuse, there isn't a symbol
How did George H. W. Bush describe Harvard's reputation?	liberalism and elitism
Why was Howard Dean proud of his graduating class?	first class to have women in it
Besides Yale, what other two locations were chosen by Tony Blair for the Tony Blair Faith Foundation's United States Faith and Globalization Initiative?	Britain's Durham University and Universiti Teknologi Mara
As of 2009, who is the director of the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization?	former Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo
What former presidential candidate teaches a seminar at Yale?	Howard Dean
What is the name of Howard Dean's class at Yale?	Understanding Politics and Politicians
What college did Yale's medical facility team up with?	University College London
Who was appointed acting President of Yale in 1977?	Hanna Holborn Gray
Where did Hanna Holborn Gray go after Yale?	University of Chicago
In what year did Judith Rodin become the first female president of an Ivy League school?	1994
In what year did Susan Hockfield become President of MIT?	2004
Who became Vice Chancellor of the University of Cambridge in 2002?	Alison Richard
What union are the members of the Yale University Police Department a part of?	Yale Police Benevolent Association
What union do Yale security guards belong to?	International Union of Security, Police and Fire Professionals of America
What is the name of the unrecognized union of graduate employees?	Graduate Employees and Students Organization (GESO)
What union are Yale's clerical and technical employees a part of?	Local 34 of UNITE HERE
What union are Yale's service and maintenance workers a part of?	Local 35 of the same international
How many strikes has Yale had since 1968?	at least eight
What are The New York Times' views on Yale's labor tension?	the worst record of labor tension of any university in the U.S.
What professor was retired in a 2003 labor strike?	Professor David Graeber
Why was Professor David Graeber retired during the strike?	he came to the defense of a student who was involved in campus labor issues.
What adds to the tensions during wage considerations?	Yale's unusually large endowment
Where does Yale own 500 acres of athletic facilities?	western New Haven
What campus did Yale buy in 2008?	former Bayer Pharmaceutical campus
What is the former Bayer Pharmaceutical campus used for?	laboratory and research space
How many forests does Yale own?	seven
How big is the largest forest in Yale's possession?	7,840-acre
Who called Hillhouse Avenue the most beautiful street in America in the 1840's?	Charles Dickens
Who listed Yale as one of the most beautiful campuses in the United States?	Travel+Leisure
What is Yale largely known for?	Collegiate Gothic campus
When did Travel + Leisure list Yale as one of the most beautiful campuses?	2011
Who financed a large chunk of the architecture from 1917 to 1931	Edward S. Harkness
What do the stone statues on Yale's campus depict?	a writer, an athlete, a tea-drinking socialite, and a student who has fallen asleep while reading
What do the decorative friezes on the buildings show?	contemporary scenes
How did James Gamble Rogers faux age the buildings?	splashing the walls with acid
How did James Gamble Rogers faux age the windows?	breaking their leaded glass windows and repairing them in the style of the Middle Ages
What architects have buildings in the Yale Old Campus?	Henry Austin, Charles C. Haight and Russell Sturgis
What is the largest residential college?	Silliman College
Which school was used as the engineering and sciences school until 1956?	Sheffield Scientific School
What are some other terms for the gothic style buildings in the Old Campus at Yale?	neo-Gothic and collegiate Gothic
Who created the Gateway Arch in St. Louis?	Alumnus Eero Saarinen
What airport was designed by Alumnus Eero Saarinen?	Washington Dulles International Airport main terminal
What did Alumnus Eero Saarinen use for inspiration for Ingalls Rink at Yale?	the medieval Italian hilltown of San Gimignano
What counterpoints Yale's gothic towers?	fortress-like stone towers
Of what nationality is Alumnus Eero Saarinen?	Finnish-American
Who creates sustainability practices at Yale?	Yale's Office of Sustainability
By what percent is Yale committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions below 1990 levels by the year 2020?	10%
How many campus buildings are candidates for LEED design and certification?	Eleven
What project is bringing organic food to all of Yale's residential college dining areas?	Yale Sustainable Food Project
What grade did Yale get on their Sustainable Endowments Institute's College Sustainability Report Card 2008?	B+
What is another term for some of Yale's secret society buildings?	tombs
Who is the interior moulding of the Mace and Chain building rumored to have belonged to?	Benedict Arnold
Who was responsible for landscaping the Manuscript Society building?	Dan Kniley
Who was the architect for St. Elmo?	Kenneth M. Murchison
Who was the architect behind the Manuscript Society building?	King Lui-Wu
When were the first campus police formed at Yale?	1894
Who were the the first campus police composed of?	city police officers
Why was the campus police established?	quell unrest between students and city residents
What other safety measures are available at Yale besides campus police?	blue phones, a safety escort, and 24-hour shuttle service.
What kind of system is Yale's financial aid?	need-based
How is most financial aid obtained at Yale?	grants and scholarships
What was the average need of financial aid at Yale for the Class of 2017?	$46,395
What percent of students at Yale are thought to have no parental help?	15%
What was the average debt of student loan borrowers from the class of 2013?	$13,000
Where would one find a collection of historical medical equipment?	The Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library
What library contains the biggest assortment of 18th century British literary works?	The Lewis Walpole Library
Where can qualified researchers obtain Elizabethan folios?	The Elizabethan Club
What library has a vast assortment of rare books and manuscripts?	The Beinecke Rare Book Library
What is the name of the country's first university partnered art museum?	The Yale University Art Gallery
How many items are in The Yale University Art Gallery?	more than 180,000
Where is the largest center for British art, UK not included?	The Yale Center for British Art
Whose contributions started The Yale Center for British Art?	Paul Mellon
Who designed the building for The Yale Center for British Art?	Louis Kahn
Which of the New Critics were staffed at Yale?	Robert Penn Warren, W.K. Wimsatt, and Cleanth Brooks
Who is known as the father of deconstruction?	Jacques Derrida
Where did Jacques Derrida teach from the late 1970's to mid 1980's?	Department of Comparative Literature
Which Yale staffed labor historian advised other younger labor historians?	David Montgomery
When was The Journal of Music Theory founded?	1957
When was Yale's residential college system established?	1933
Who established Yale's residential college system?	Edward S. Harkness
Who runs Yale's residential colleges?	The colleges are led by a master and an academic dean
Are there academic programs in Yale's residential colleges?	do not contain programs of study or academic departments
Who teaches Yale's residential college's undergraduate classes?	Faculty of Arts and Sciences
In what architectural styles were Harkness' original colleges?	Georgian Revival or Collegiate Gothic
Which two residential colleges are of modernist style?	Morse and Ezra Stiles Colleges
What are Yale's colleges encircling?	a courtyard
Who are the Yale colleges named after?	important alumni or significant places in university history
In what year does the university expect to open two more colleges?	2017
Who was Calhoun college named for?	John C. Calhoun
Why did people dislike the college being named after John C. Calhoun?	a slave-owner and strong slavery supporter in the nineteenth century
What title change will be happening to reduce racial tensions?	the title of “master” for faculty members who serve as residential college leaders will be renamed to “head of college”
What did President Salovey believe would happen if Calhoun's name was removed from the college?	it would "obscure" his "legacy of slavery rather than addressing it."
Whose comments increased racial tension in the Fall of 2015?	Nicholas A. Christakis and his wife Erika
What is the name of the world's oldest humor magazine?	The Yale Record
What year was The Yale Record first published?	1872
In what year was the Yale Daily News established?	1878
When was the Yale Herald established?	1986
What is the name of the campus radio station?	WYBC Yale Radio
What do seniors crush to celebrate graduation?	clay pipes
What do they destroy now instead of clay pipes?	bubble pipes
What statue is it rumored to be good luck to rub?	Theodore Dwight Woolsey on Old Campus
What part of the statue of Theodore Dwight Woolsey is it said to be good luck to rub?	the toe
What game was created, to later be banned by administration?	Bladderball
What is the name of the United States' first bowl stadium?	Yale Bowl
What landmarks did the Yale Bowl influence?	Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and the Rose Bowl
What is the name of the world's second largest indoor athletic building?	Payne Whitney Gymnasium
On what day was the Richard Gilder Boathouse established?	October 21, 2000
How much did the Richard Gilder Boathouse cost to construct?	$7.5 million
How much did Charles B. Johnson pledge to Yale in 2013?	$250 million
How much did the 1954 class donate for their 50th reunion?	$70 million
Who led the 1954 class in their large donation?	Richard Gilder
What royalty has attended Yale?	Crown Princess Victoria Bernadotte, Prince Rostislav Romanov and Prince Akiiki Hosea Nyabongo
What Italian Prime Minister attended Yale?	Mario Monti
What Mexican president attended Yale?	Ernesto Zedillo
Who was the father of American football?	Walter Camp
What Time magazine founder attended Yale?	Henry Luce
Who were the main characters in Stover at Yale?	Dink Stover and Frank Merriwell
What F. Scott Fitzgerald novel is Yale a part of?	The Great Gatsby
What character in The Great Gatsby wrote editorials for the Yale News?	Nick Carraway
What football playing character in The Great Gatsby played for Yale?	Tom Buchanan
Who wrote the novel Stover at Yale?	Owen Johnson
What shattered the unity of the Catholic Church?	the Western Schism
What are the series of events that ended centuries of prosperity in Europe, starting around 1300, known as?	the Crisis of the Late Middle Ages
In what years was the Great Famine?	1315–1317
Which two countries experienced peasant uprisings?	France and England
What major conflict occurred in Europe during the Crisis of the Late Middle Ages?	Hundred Years' War
An interest in texts from which two ancient civilizations sparked the Italian Renaissance?	Greek and Roman
Which conflicts brought Europeans into contact with Arabs prior to the 12th century?	the Crusades
Which city was captured by the Ottoman Turks, resulting in the fleeing of scholars to Western Europe?	Constantinople
Who captured Constantinople?	Ottoman Turks
What kind of texts did Byzantine scholars take with them when they fled Constantinople?	Greek
Which invention resulted in more widespread use of the printed word?	printing
In what year did Constantinople fall?	1453
In what year did Vasco da Gama sail around India and Africa?	1498
In what year was Columbus' expedition to the Americas?	1492
The Protestant Reformation is attributed to what two developments that resulted from the invention of printing?	dissemination of the printed word and democratized learning
Along with the Late Middle Ages, what are the other two period of the Middle Ages?	Early Middle Ages and the High Middle Ages
When was Leonardo Bruni's "History of the Florentine People" published?	1442
What is the name for the division of the periods of history introduced by Bruni?	tripartite periodization
Who was the author of "Decades of History from the Deterioration of the Roman Empire	Flavio Biondo
What 1683 work resulted in the standard use of tripartite periodization?	Universal History Divided into an Ancient, Medieval, and New Period
What methods, applied to the study of history, led to the perception of the Middle Ages as a time of recession and crisis?	economic and demographic
Which author popularized a pessimistic view of the Late Middle Ages in his 1919 book?	Johan Huizinga
What was the title of Huizinga's 1919 book on the Middle Ages?	The Autumn of the Middle Ages
Which countries were the focus of Huizinga's research?	France and the Low Countries
What was the nationality of historian Henri Pirenne?	Belgian
What geopolitical entity emerged from the Late Middle Ages?	the nation state
Which mountain range is seen as a dividing line when considering conditions during the Middle Ages?	the Alps
The Renaissance is generally used to describe developments in what areas of life in the Middle Ages?	intellectual, cultural, or artistic
Which centuries are considered to be part of the Late Middle Ages?	early 14th century up until – and sometimes including – the 16th century
What was the general effect of the Late Middle Ages on religion?	the end of western religious unity
When was the Kalmar Union formed?	1397
Which Danish King was responsible for the Stockholm Bloodbath?	King Christian II
In what year did Sweden break away from the Kalmar Union?	1523
Denmark and Norway remained in the Kalmar Union until what year?	1814
In what year did the Stockholm Bloodbath take place?	1520
In what year was the Holy Roman Empire dissolved?	1806
In what year did a Golden Bull make the king of Bohemia first among the imperial electors?	1356
The Hanseatic League was what type of institution?	financial
In 1438, control of the Holy Roman Empire passed to what dynasty?	the Habsburgs
In what year did Louis die?	1382
Who did Louis name as his heir?	Sigismund of Luxemburg
How old was Sigismund of Luxemburg when he was named heir?	11
Upon taking the throne of Hungary where did Sigismund establish his court?	Buda and Visegrád
What was the result of the Hungarian nobility's refusal to accept Sigismund claim as Louis' heir?	internal war
In what year did Belgrade fall to the Ottomans?	1521
Who led led the Serbian Army at the Battle of Kosovo?	Lazar Hrebljevanovic
In what year was the Battle of Kosovo?	1389
What event resulted in the triumph of Serbia over Bulgaria in 1330?	Battle of Velbazhd
Which country was conquered by the Ottomans in 1479?	Albania
What city was the seat of the papacy for most of the 14th century?	Avignon
In what year did the papacy return to Rome?	1378
What 14th century conflict resulted in the division of southern Italy into two kingdoms?	The War of the Sicilian Vespers
What were the names of the two kingdoms into which southern Italy was divided?	Aragon Kingdom of Sicily and an Anjou Kingdom of Naples
In what year were the two southern Italian kingdoms re-united?	1442
In what year were Isabel I and Ferdinand II married?	1469
When was modern-day Spain created?	1492
The capture of which city finalized the Reconquista?	Granada
Which explorer discovered a sea-route to India?	Vasco da Gama
In what year did Christopher Columbus discover the Americas?	1492
Which climactic epoch followed the Medieval Warm Period?	the Little Ice Age
What was the high end of the estimated death rate of the Black Plague?	sixty percent
What major conflict rocked France during the 13th and 14th centuries?	Hundred Years' War
When did the Medieval Warm Period end?	Around 1300–1350
What was the effect of the Little Ice Age?	agricultural crises
When did the French Jacquerie take place?	1358
What English law was enacted in order to forcibly reduce wages?	Statute of Laborers
In what year was the Statute of Laborers enacted?	1351
Which economic system was ultimately ended by the upheavals of the 14th century?	serfdom
In what year did the English Peasants' Revolt occur?	1381
Which European cities likely had populations greater than 100,000 in 1500?	Venice, Milan, Naples, Paris and Constantinople
What event decimated urban populations in the 14th century?	the Black Death
How many other cities had populations larger than 40,000 by 1500?	Twenty-two
Which English city had a population greater than 40,000 in 1500?	London
Which conflict in France resulted in the establishment of permanent armies?	Hundred Years' War
The use of paid mercenaries and domestic retinues replaced which method of raising troops?	national or feudal levy
Which soldiers were in high demand under the mercenary system?	Swiss
Which English king is associated with the use of mercenaries in the 14th century?	Edward III
What was the chivalric order established by Edward III in 1348?	Order of the Garter
Who founded the Order of St. George?	Charles I of Hungary
In what year was the Order of St. George founded?	1325
What was the code of conduct of the military orders called?	chivalry
In what year was the Order of the Garter established?	1348
What was the result of the election of two popes at the same time?	Papal Schism
Where was the Holy See transferred to in 1309?	Avignon
In what year did the Pope return to Rome from Avignon?	1377
What was the time frame of the Papal Schism?	1378–1417
Who were the supporters of the Avignon Papacy?	France, her ally Scotland and the Spanish kingdoms
Which Oxford professor believed that the Bible should be the sole authority in religious questions?	John Wycliffe
What were Jon Wycliffe's supporters called?	the Lollards
What was the event that ended religious unity in the Western Church?	the Protestant Reformation
Which Catholic practices did Wycliffe speak out against?	transubstantiation, celibacy and indulgences
Who was one of the English aristocrats who supported the Lollard movement?	John of Gaunt
In what year was Jan Hus burned at the stake?	1415
Who did Richard II of England marry?	Anne of Bohemia
Whose teachings did Jan Hus base his own on?	John Wycliffe
What were the followers of Jan Hus called?	Hussites
What conflict resulted from death of Jan Hus?	Hussite Wars
Into what language did Martin Luther translate the Bible?	German
What did Martin Luther post on the castle church of Wittenberg?	95 theses
In what year did Martin Luther post his 95 theses?	1517
What was Martin Luther's response when challenged to recant his heresy?	he refused
Who acted as protector to Martin Luther when he was under the ban of the Empire?	Frederick the Wise
What new form of accounting was created during the late 13th and early 14th centuries?	double-entry bookkeeping
In which country did the so-called 'commercial revolution' primarily take place?	Italy
What was the main benefit of the creation of new forms of partnerships during the commercial revolution?	reducing the risk of commercial ventures
Laws against what lending practice were addressed by the creation of bills of exchange?	usury
What were the benefits of the new system of double-entry bookkeeping?	better oversight and accuracy
What privilege was granted to companies on a national level?	monopolies
Which families financed the wars of kings?	the Fuggers in Germany, the Medicis in Italy, the de la Poles in England
Which economic associations gained power in the towns?	guilds
Where was Jacques Couer from?	France
What caused the decrease in commerce and production in the 14th century?	demographic crisis
What is the alternative to the theory that the Renaissance was a time of great opulence?	depression of the Renaissance
What type of evidence is too incomplete for a decision to be made between the two theories of the Renaissance?	statistical
What is posited as the cause of increased artistic output during the Renaissance?	greater opulence
Which philosophy attempted to reconcile Aristotelian teachings and Christian theology in the 13th century?	Thomistic
Where was the Condemnation of 1277 enacted?	University of Paris
Which philosopher believed that reason and faith were to be kept separate?	William of Ockham
What is the common name for William of Ockham's principle of parsimony?	Occam's razor
On what types of ideas did the Condemnation of 1277 place restrictions?	heretical
What did Jean Buridan create to explain the motion of projectiles?	the theory of impetus
What school of scientific thought was challenged by Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme?	Aristotelian
What scientist is most associated with the heliocentric worldview?	Nicolaus Copernicus
Which scholars made great advances in the theories of motion?	Jean Buridan, Nicole Oresme and the Oxford Calculators
Buridan's theory of impetus led to what modern concept?	inertia
Who invented the movable printing press?	Gutenberg
What religious movement was spurred by the invention of the printing press?	the Reformation
Which inventions of the period had a great impact on everyday life?	eyeglasses and the weight-driven clock
Which invention with military applications helped bring about the nation state?	gunpowder
Advances in what construction trade helped to increase global navigation?	shipbuilding
Who championed the scientific study of anatomy for the benefit of art?	Donatello
Which artistic principle was innovated by Brunelleschi?	linear perspective
Along with da Vinci, who were two other artists regarded as masters of the High Renaissance?	Michelangelo and Raphael
What was achieved though the use of the scientific study of anatomy in the field of art?	Greater realism
What did Donatello study that inspired sculptures?	classical models
What was the focus of paintings in Italy?	idealized compositions
Where was the focus of paintings on textures and surfaces?	the Netherlands
What painter was an early champion of oil as a medium in painting?	Jan van Eyck
Jan van Eyck's paintings are known for what characteristics?	great realism and minute detail
Who wrote the Divine Comedy?	Dante Alighieri
In what languages did Dante and Boccaccio create their works?	Latin as well as Italian
Which dialect became the norm for the modern Italian language?	Tuscan
What is one of Boccaccio's works that helped promote the Italian language?	Decameron
Whose work, Canzoniere, is considered to be the first example of modern lyric poetry?	Petrarch
What style of sacred musical form emerged in the 1330s?	polyphonic
Polyphony was common in the secular music of which French region?	Provençal
What is the term for the four subjects that comprised the liberal arts in medieval universities?	the quadrivium
What was the dominant sacred musical form in the early 13th century?	the motet
Who introduced a system of musical notation used in the Balkans in the 14th century?	John Kukuzelis
What was the name of the new musical style introduced in the Late Middle Ages?	ars nova
Which musical style did ars nova replace in the 14th century?	ars antiqua
Who were the leading composers of the trecento period?	Giovanni da Cascia, Jacopo da Bologna and Francesco Landini
Kukuzelis reformed the music of which religion?	Orthodox Church
What is the most famous morality play from the medieval period?	Everyman
Which dramatic form was created around 1400?	Morality plays
What goes to the grave with Everyman in the morality play?	Good Deeds
Which morality play depicted mankind's progress from birth to death?	The Castle of Perseverance
In the morality play, who summoned Everyman?	Death
Which Late Middle Age English kings kept their own troupes of professional actors?	Richard III and Henry VII
Who performed the seasonal Christmas plays?	Mummers
In what year did Henry VIII establish an Office of Revels?	1545
What did Henry VIII build in 1545 for the benefit of the theatrical arts?	House of Revels
In what part of a nobleman's house were plays performed?	the Great Hall
What was banned that led to the demise of medieval drama?	religious plays
In what year did Elizabeth I ban religious plays?	1558
In what year were religious plays banned in the Netherlands?	1539
What types of subjects did dramatists turn to when religious plays were banned?	secular
Where were religious plays banned in 1548?	Paris
Along with the invention of printing, and the associated dissemination of the printed word, what other factor is believed to have led to the Protestant Reformation?	democratized learning
Which continents did Vasco da Gama circumnavigate in 1498?	Africa and India
What effect did the discoveries of Columbus and da Gama have on European nations?	strengthened the economy and power
What historical era is viewed as a bridge between the Middle Ages and the Modern Era?	the Renaissance
What was discovered as the result of both Columbus' and da Gama's voyages?	new trading routes
Which empire completed its conquest of the Byzantines at the end of the 15th century?	Ottoman
In what year did the Battle of Varna take place?	1444
Which Hungarian ruler was killed at the Battle of Varna?	Vladislaus I
Who was appointed regent-governor of the Kingdom of Hungary in 1446?	count John Hunyadi
Who gave the title of Champion of Christ to John Hyundai?	Pope Pius II
Which Franciscan monk motivated the peasants to fight against Muslims at the Siege of Belgrade?	Saint John of Capistrano
In what year was the Siege of Belgrade fought?	1456
Who did the Hungarian nobility elect as King of Hungary?	Matthias
Which country did Saint Francis of Capistrano come from?	Italy
When John Hunyadi died, which province was left in chaos?	Pannonia
How did Louis II of Hungary die?	drowned in the Csele Creek while trying to escape
Who was the leader of the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohács?	Pál Tomori
In what years did Matthias Corvinus reign as King of Hungary?	1458–1490
Who did Matthias defeat to conquer Bohemia?	Hussite Protestants
Who opposed the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohács?	the forces of the Ottoman Empire
Historians from what country in particular do not refer to the Late Middle Ages?	Italy
What provided developmental continuity between the ancient and modern ages?	classical antiquity
What period do Italian historians believe came immediately after the High Period of the Middle Ages?	the Renaissance
What do many scholars regard the Late Middle Ages as the beginning of?	modern history and early modern Europe
When was Ann Arbor founded?	1824
Which University moved from Detroit to Ann Arbor in 1837?	University of Michigan
During  the 1960's & 70's, Ann Arbor gained a reputation for what?	center for left-wing politics
Which type of tree is associated with the city Ann Arbor's name?	Bur Oak
Who founded Ann Arbor?	John Allen and Elisha Walker Rumsey
What was the profession of the founders of Ann arbor?	land speculators
Which tribe named the settlement as kaw-goosh-kaw-nick?	Ojibwa
For how much money did the founders purchase the land from the federal government?	$800
What were the names of the founders wives?	Ann
Ann Arbor has been linked with which university?	University of Michigan
Which town became the regional transport hub in 1878?	Ann Arbor
Who were the early settlers of Ann Arbor?	British
In which year was Ann Arbor chartered as a city?	1851
In 1916, what was the name of the Synagogue that was establish?	Beth Israel Congregation
When was the Thomas More Law center established?	1999
What was the Thomas More law group?	a religious-conservative advocacy group
During the early & mid 70's, which party won the city council seats?	Human Rights Party
Which magazine listed Ann Arbor as one of the most liveable cities in the USA?	Forbes
For the past few years, what effects has the city Ann Arbor grappled with?	sharply rising land values
What plan did the city voters approve in 2003?	greenbelt plan
On which river is the city of Ann Arbor situated?	Huron
What is the landscape of Ann Arbor like?	hills and valleys
What is the name of the city's airport?	Ann Arbor Municipal Airport
What is the city of Ann arbor nicknamed as?	Tree Town
How many parks are there in the city of Ann Arbor?	157
What is the name of the Arboretum owned by the University of Michigan?	Nichols Arboretum
How big is the Matthaei botanical garden?	300 acres
Which district has the farmers market in the city?	Kerrytown district
Which districts compose mostly of 2-4 story structures?	commercial districts
Which area in the city contains 19th&20th century as well as modern structures?	Downtown
Which century does the Kit houses belong to?	20th century
Who primarily occupies the complexes surrounding the University?	student renters
Which is the tallest building in Ann Arbor?	Tower Plaza
When was the city listed on the National Register of historic Places?	1972
How many seasons are experienced in the city of Ann Arbor?	four
When is the precipitation highest in Ann Arbor?	summer
What is the average snowfall for the city?	58 inches
What is the population density of the city?	4,270.33 people per square mile
What percentage makes up for the whites living in the city?	73.0%
Which parts of the city of Detroit are densely populated?	Oak Park and Ferndale
What is the average household size in the city of Ann Arbor?	2.22
What is the average family size in the city of Ann Arbor?	2.90
What is the median age for the city of Ann Arbor?	28
Name some automobile manufacturers in the city of Ann Arbor	General Motors and Visteon
What is the employee count of the University of Michigan?	30,000
Nam the major components for the City's growth.	High tech, health services and biotechnology
Which company manufactured cameras in Ann Arbor from 1936 to 1960's?	Argus camera company
Which network company opened up in 2008 providing security, storage & networking?	Barracuda Networks
International Radio introduced which mass produced product from the city of Ann Arbor?	AC/DC radio
Which company's adwords program is headquartered at Ann Arbor?	Google
Name some website or media companies located in Ann Arbor.	All Media Guide, the Weather Underground, and Zattoo
What company is Merit network?	education computer network
Who is the city's 2nd largest employer?	Pfizer
Which non-profit non-governmental organization is located in Ann Arbor?	National Sanitation Foundation International
How many researchers does the University of Michigan expect to hire?	2,000
When did the Borders Books open up in Ann Arbor?	1971
Who opened the Borders Books store in Ann Arbor?	Tom and Louis Borders
Which pizza chain is headquartered at Ann Arbor?	Domino's Pizza's
Which company was the world's largest privately held ink manufacturer till 2005?	Flint Ink Corp
Avfuel, a global supplier of what services is headquartered in Ann Arbor?	aviation fuels
When was the University Musical Society founded?	1879
How many events does the University Musical Society present in a year?	over 60
When was the Ann Arbor civic Ballet established?	1954
Name Michigan's first Civic chartered company.	Ann Arbor Civic Ballet
Which museum is located at Ann Arbors historic downtown fire station?	The Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum
Ann Arbor ranks 1st among what goods sold?	books
Which presidential library is located in Ann Arbor?	Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library
What type of Art fairs are held at Ann Arbor?	juried fairs
What is the name of the film festival held at Ann Arbor?	Ann Arbor Film Festival
How many submissions does the Ann arbor film festival receive?	2,500
What medical dispensarys are there in Ann Arbor?	medical marijuana dispensaries
What are the Medical marijuana dispensaries called in the city?	People's Co-op
What annual event is held on the 1st saturday of april?	annual Hash Bash
Who is the member of the Big Ten Conference in college sports in the city?	University of Michigan
Which is the largest American football stadium in the world?	Michigan Stadium
What is the Michigan Stadium called colloquially?	The Big House
What is a person from Ann Arbor called?	Ann Arborite
In recent years what has Ann Arbor become?	gentrified
Which city is referred to as the "People's Republic of Ann Arbor"?	Ann Arbor
What form of government does Ann Arbor have?	council-manager
How many voting members are there in the city- council?	11
How many terms does the mayor of the city serve?	two-year
Who is elected every even numbered year?	mayor
How many council members are elected for the city's ward?	Two
Who represents the congress in Ann Arbor?	Debbie Dingell
On a state level the city is part of which district number?	18th district
Who represents the city in Michigan senate?	Rebekah Warren
Voters in the city approve which kind of amendment?	charter
What kind of politics have been strong in the municipal government?	Left-wing politics
Ann Arbor became the 1st city in the US to what type of voting in the Mayoral race?	instant-runoff
Name a private business school located in Ann arbor.	Cleary University
Who founded Domino's pizza?	Tom Monaghan
Which school acquired the former Ave Maria building after a Roman catholic school moved from there?	Thomas M. Cooley Law School
Ann Arbor has one of the leading programs in what subject?	music
What program is open to the residents of Ann arbor?	Ann Arbor Open School
In 2008, how many were enrolled in public schools?	16,539
Who owns Ann Arbor news?	Booth Newspapers
When did the Ann Arbor news end its print?	2009
Which was the only city in the US to loose its only daily paper?	Ann Arbor
What magazine covers Ann Arbor's local businesses?	Ann Arbor Business Review
Which automobile magazines are based from Ann Arbor?	Car and Driver magazine and Automobile Magazine
Which university magazine reports local, state & regional issues in addition to campus news?	Michigan Daily student newspaper
What is the name of the conservative AM radio channel in Ann arbor?	WAAM 1600
What is the name of the city's FM radio channel?	WUOM 91.7
What is the name of the local free community college radio?	WCBN-FM 88.3
WPXD channel 31 is an affliate of which TV network?	ION
What is the abbreviation of CTN?	Community Television Network
What is one time period in which Gothic architecture flourished?	late medieval period
What style of architecture did Gothic architecture evolve from?	Romanesque architecture
What style of architecture came after the Gothic style?	Renaissance architecture
Where did the Gothic architecture style originate?	France
Gothic architecture is known for being commonly used in cathedrals and churches, what is one example of a lesser known type of structure in which Gothic architecture has been used?	private dwellings, such as dorms and rooms
What is an example of where the Gothic style is expressed most strongly?	churches and cathedrals
Where do the emotions which traits of the Gothic style represent, originate from?	faith or from civic pride
A great number of what type of buildings still remain from this period today?	ecclesiastical
With what organization are many Gothic cathedral listed with as World Heritage Sites?	UNESCO
Why are larger cathedrals and churches associated with the Gothic style?	larger churches are considered priceless works of art
What type of description did the term "Gothic architecture" originate as?	a pejorative description
Who used the term "barbarous German style" to portray what is known today as the Gothic style?	Giorgio Vasari
Who does Vasari believe destroyed ancient buildings after they conquered Rome?	"the Goths"
How long had Italy undergone building in a Classical architecture style at the time of Vasari?	a century
In what period was the Classical architecture vocabulary revived?	the Renaissance
What is one region with which the Gothic style is distinctly connected with?	Northern France
What is another region with which the Gothic style is distinctly connected with?	the Low Countries
What type of structures remaining today have the largest amount of examples of the Gothic style?	churches
What is one country with which the Gothic style is distinctly connected with?	England
What is another country with which the Gothic style is distinctly connected with?	Spain
At the end of what century was Europe separated into several city states and kingdoms?	the end of the 12th century
What was the region covering modern Germany, southern Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, Slovakia, Czech Republic and much of northern Italy known as?	the Holy Roman Empire
What modern country contains regions in which Plantagenet kings controlled large domains?	modern France
Poland was affected by trade connections with what League?	the Hanseatic League
What type of kings brought the Gothic style from France to Southern Italy?	Angevin kings
Europe experienced a rapid growth in what at this time?	trade
What is one country that contained considerable and prosperous towns during this time?	Germany
What type of building was considered to be very important and a sign of affluence and achievement?	Civic building
What is one country that stayed mostly feudal and created spectacular architecture for its royalty rather than its burghers?	England
What is another country that stayed mostly feudal and created spectacular architecture for its royalty rather than its burghers?	France
What church was widespread across Europe at this time?	The Catholic Church
Who were bishops appointed by?	by the feudal lords (kings, dukes and other landowners)
Which periods saw a quick growth in Monasticism?	The early Medieval periods
What types of church were the Benedictines known for?	great abbey churches
What is one type of Benedictine order that was common in France?	Cistercian Orders
During what time period did Romanesque architecture become a pan-European style of construction?	10th to the 13th century
What is one country in the geographic area that was affected by the development of the Gothic style of architecture?	Croatia
Why did country borders not affect differences in style within Gothic architecture?	proximity of some regions
During which period did regional differences in Romanesque architecture become even more pronounced?	the Gothic
England and what other country showed differences in architectural style rarely observed anywhere else?	Spain
Northern Germany, Netherlands, northern Poland, Denmark, and the Baltic countries used what building material in place of local stone?	brick
What was the name of the building style that resulted from the use of brick?	Brick Gothic, is called "Backsteingotik"
What building style was the Hanseatic League connected with in Germany and Scandinavia?	"Backsteingotik"
Why were many buildings covered with marble?	Because of the extensive and varied deposits of marble
With what type of facade were buildings left with if they were to completed at a later time?	undecorated façade
What is Romanesque architecture known as in England?	Norman architecture
By the beginning of what century was the Romanesque style established all over Europe?	the 12th century
The Romanesque style continued to affect and inspire  the basic architectural forms throughout which period?	the Medieval period
What is one important category of building that was recognized during the Romanesque period?	the cathedral church
What is another category of building that was established during the Romanesque period?	the palace
What was the most important single design aspect that separated the Gothic style from the Romanesque?	the pointed arch
What is one example of a Gothic style element that was able to be incorporated because of technological innovation?	the flying buttresses
What is another example of a Gothic style element that was able to be incorporated because of technological innovation?	traceried windows
What is the name of the cathedral in Northern England that first displayed the use of the pointed arch?	Durham Cathedral
What is the name of the cathedral in Sicily that first displayed the use of the pointed arch?	Cathedral of Cefalù
What is one defining characteristic of the Gothic architectural style?	The pointed arch
Which type of architecture first used the pointed arch during the seventh century?	Islamic architecture
What other type of architecture also made use of the pointed arch?	Sassanian architecture
The Roman Karamagara Bridge is an example of what type of structure?	secular structures
Parabolic and pointed arches were used in what type of constrcution?	palace and sacred construction
What could have affected Medieval Europe's embracing of the pointed arch?	cultural contacts with the Muslim world
What event in the year 1090 could have had an effect on Medieval Europe's embracing of the pointed arch?	the Norman conquest of Islamic Sicily
In which parts of the Western Mediterranean did the blending of Romanesque and Islamic styles occur?	those parts of the Western Mediterranean subject to Islamic control
What is one cathedral in which the mixing of Romanesque, Gothic and Islamic styles can be seen?	Cefalù Cathedrals
What is another example of a cathedral in which the blending of Romanesque, Gothic and Islamic styles can be seen?	Teruel Cathedral
The distinctive forms that describe Gothic architecture developed out of which style?	Romanesque
Barrel and groin vaults are examples of what kind of architecture?	Romanesque architecture
What type of vaults were used in the Abbey of Saint-Étienne and Abbaye aux Dames?	ribbed vaults
When was Durham Cathedral constructed?	from 1128 to 1133
What cathedral first made use of pointed arches in high vaults?	Durham Cathedral in England
What is considered the first truly Gothic building?	The Basilica of Saint Denis
Which cathedral was first to be rebuilt in the new style from 1150 to 1231?	Noyon Cathedral
What is one of the features that have come to be considered as an important part of the Gothic style?	pointed arches
What is one of the features that have come to be considered as an important part of the Gothic style?	flying buttresses
What is one of the features that have come to be considered as an important part of the Gothic style?	ribbed vaulting
What is one cathedral in which simple cylindrical columns stand out more than the Gothic features?	Abbey Saint-Denis
When was the construction of Wells Cathedral in England begun?	in 1175
Who completed the transepts and nave on Wells Cathedral in about 1230?	Adam Locke
Which Cathedral is considered the first thoroughly Gothic cathedral?	Wells Cathedral
What is another cathedral in which simple cylindrical columns stand out more than the Gothic features?	Notre Dame de Paris
Who chose to rebuild the great Church of Saint-Denis in about 1137?	Suger
Which portion the cathedral was the reconstruction of the great Church of Saint-Denis begun?	the West Front
The facade of Saint Denis resembled what other well known structure?	the Roman Arch of Constantine
Why were three large portal used in the construction of the Roman Arch of Constantine?	to ease the problem of congestion
The facade of Saint Denis combines round arches with what other style arch?	pointed arches of the Gothic style
When was the west front of Saint Denis completed?	in 1140
What portion of the reconstruction of Saint Denis was begun after the completion of the west front?	the eastern end
What style of nave was left unaltered during this portion of the reconstruction of Saint Denis?	the Carolingian nave
What style of columns did Abbott Suger use when reconstructing Saint Denis?	clustered columns
What design element allowed the use of large clerestory windows?	the flying buttresses
What type of buildings most prominently display the design aspects of the Gothic architectural style?	cathedrals and great churches
Prior to the 20th century, a Gothic cathedral was considered to be what type of building in the town in which it was constructed?	the landmark building
What is another name for the pointed arch?	the ogival
What is an example of architectural technology that is seen in Gothic construction?	the ribbed vault
What is another example of architectural technology that is seen in Gothic construction?	the buttress
In England, which arm would generally show two distinct sections, choir and presbytery?	The eastern arm
Who is a projecting Lady Chapel dedicated to?	the Virgin Mary
What shape does the eastern end often exhibit in France?	polygonal
What is the ring of chapels found in the eastern end of French chapels known as?	chevet
In Italy, the eastern projection beyond the transept often contains what?	the sanctuary
The use of the pointed arch for bringing transverse vaults to the same height diagonal ones, is in disagreement with what theory?	the diffusionist theory
At which cathedral is the pointed arch used to match the heights of transverse and diagonal vaults?	Durham Cathedral
In what type of decorative blind arcading are pointed arches common?	Romanesque
When semicircular arches overlap each other, what type of design is accidentally created?	points
Which type of vault can be used for rectangular and trapezoidal shaped roofs?	The Gothic vault
What structural benefit is offered by the Gothic vault?	channels the weight onto the bearing piers or columns at a steep angle
What can architects raise much higher using the Gothic versus the Romanesque variety?	vaults
What type of visual character is achieved by using the pointed arch?	more vertical visual character
What is one feature of both large and small Gothic churches?	towers
What is another feature of both large and small Gothic churches?	spires
How many towers are typical on the front of Gothic churches in France and Spain?	two towers
In what country is the tower often found detached from the main building?	Italy
How many towers are found at the Salisbury Chapel?	just one tower
What enhances the vertical look of the exterior of Gothic construction?	the towers and spires
What is one design element of Gothic construction that is often terminated by small pinnacles?	The roofline
What is another design element of Gothic construction that is often terminated by small pinnacles?	gable ends
Which cathedral demonstrates a drastic example of termination with small pinnacles?	Milan Cathedral
What other part of Gothic buildings are often found terminated with small pinnacles?	buttresses
What is often found sweeping unbroken from floor to ceiling on the interior of Gothic buildings?	attached shafts
Where are the verticals found repeated in the interior of Gothic buildings?	the treatment of the windows and wall surfaces
What sort of feature is created by the use of vertical elements in gallery and window tracery?	a strongly unifying feature
What does the use of vertical elements help to counteract?	horizontal divisions of the interior structure
Who encouraged cathedral architects to allow as much light as possible into the building?	the Abbot Suger
Who held the belief that all light, including light reflected from walls and surfaces was divine?	Pseudo-Dionysius
What sort of light has always been characteristic of Gothic cathedrals?	Expansive interior light
What book became popular with monks in France and had an effect on how light was used in cathedrals?	The Celestial Hierarchy
Whose writings led to the clerical belief in the divinity of light?	Pseudo-Dionysius
What size of window is found above the main portal at York Minster?	a large window
What type of window is often found above the main portal at cathedrals in France such as the Reims Cathedral?	a rose window
Where are rose windows never found in the facades of cathedrals?	any English Cathedrals
What portion of Gothic buildings are usually richly decorated with arcading or sculpture?	The gable
Which Italian cathedral displays polychrome marble and mosaic on the gable?	Orvieto Cathedral
What is the distinguiushing visual design feature of French cathedrals?	their impression of verticality
How many portals are typically found on the west front of French cathedrals?	three portals
How many towers are typically found on the west front of French cathedrals?	two large towers
What shape does the east end of French chapels typically have?	The east end is polygonal
What do many major churches in Southern France often lack?	transepts
What is the unique design feature of English cathedrals?	their extreme length
What type of transepts do English cathedrals often feature?	double transepts
What size of window is typically featured on the west end of English cathedrals?	very large
Where are rose windows used on English cathedrals?	the transept gables
On English cathedrals, where is a tower almost always found?	at the crossing
In Germany, Poland and Austria Romanesque architecture is defined by its massive size and what other design element?	modular nature
What design style does Romanesque architecture in Germany, Poland, and Austria normally follow?	the French formula
What does the eastern end of German Romanesque cathedrals typically emulate?	follows the French form
What is the distinguishing design element in German Gothic cathedrals?	their breadth and openness
What are hall churches in German cathedrals known as?	Hallenkirchen
What is the distinctive design element of Gothic cathedrals of the Iberian Peninsula?	their spatial complexity
What size are the arcades of Gothic cathedrals of the Iberian Peninsula?	very tall arcades
What type of architecture is a prominent influence on the design and form of Gothic cathedrals from the Iberian Peninsula?	Islamic architecture
What type of West front does the Leon Cathedral resemble?	a French west front
What style are the spires at Burgos Cathedral?	German style
What is the unique characteristic of Italian Gothic design?	the use of polychrome decoration
What color are the columns of Italian Gothic cathedrals often painted?	the columns may be painted red
What type of arches do they love to use in Venice?	they loved flamboyant arches
Instead of rose windows, what type of windows do Italian cathedral facades usually feature?	occular or wheel windows
What is the preferred narrative medium for the interior of Italian cathedrals?	the fresco
Who was the Royal palace of Olite built for?	the kings of Navarre
Who was the Malbork Castle built for?	the master of the Teutonic order
What type of Gothic architecture is the Malbork Castle an example of?	Brick Gothic architecture
What is the name of the royal residence built for the kings of France in Paris?	the famous Conciergerie
When was the Palau de la Generalitat in Barcelona constructed?	built in the 15th century
What is an example of secular Northern Brick Gothic architecture from the 14th century?	Stralsund town halls
When was Brussels Town Hall built?	built during the 15th century
What is the name of the secular building in Spain which was constructed for the purpose of silk exchange?	the Llotja de la Seda of Valencia
What is the name of the 13th-century town hall constructed to host the offices of the republic of Siena?	the Palazzo Pubblico
Impressive public secular architecture can also be found in what other Italian city?	Florence
In what era had university towns grown in wealth and importance?	the late Middle Ages
What is the name of the university building in Bologna, built in the 14th and 15th centuries?	the Collegio di Spagna
What is the name of the building at University of Prague in Bohemia?	the Collegium Carolinum
What is the name of the secular building at the University of Salamanca in Spain?	the Escuelas mayores
What is the name of the secular building at the Jagiellonian University in Kraków, Poland?	the Collegium Maius
What is one city with an accumulation of secular Gothic structures?	Bruges
What is another city with an accumulation of secular Gothic structures?	Siena
What style are most windows on secular Gothic structures?	flat-topped with mullions
Where are pointed arches and vaulted ceilings found on most secular Gothic structures?	a few focal points
What is the name of the surviving monastic building in England?	Mont Saint-Michel
What is the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury's residence?	Lambeth Palace
In what year was a Gothic hammerbeam roof installed on the Archbishop of Canterbury's residence?	In 1663
In what century were distinct Gothic details used on new construction at Oxford and Cambridge?	the late 17th century
Who used Gothic details in construction of Tom Tower, Oxford?	Christopher Wren
When was neo-Gothic popularized by influential figures?	during the second quarter of the 19th century
In Britain after 1837, what was the Gothic revival known as?	Victorian Gothic
During what years was the High Victorian Gothic period in Britain?	1855–1885
What movement was responsible for the philosophy which led to the revival of Anglo Catholic ideas?	the Oxford Movement
Besides ecclesiastical and civic architecture, what other style of architecture did influential figures of the 19th century prefer to use Victorian Gothic for?	institutional architecture
Who was the exterior architect of the Houses of Parliament?	Sir Charles Barry
Who was the interior architect of the Houses of Parliament?	Augustus Welby Pugin
What style of architecture does the Houses of Parliament exemplify?	the Gothic revival style
Who designed the Albert Memorial in London?	George Gilbert Scott
Who designed the chapel at Keble College, Oxford?	William Butterfield
Who was the main figure of the Gothic Revival in France?	Eugène Viollet-le-Duc
What famous French cathedral was restored and reconstructed by Viollet-le-Duc?	the Abbey of Saint-Denis
What modern building material did Viollet-le-Duc teach reform Gothic designers to work with?	cast iron
In what fortified city in Southern France did Viollet-le-Duc recreate historical Gothic constructions?	Carcassonne
What other famous French cathedral did Viollet-le-Duc work on?	Notre Dame de Paris
Name the 8 peopl who began the movement	Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso, joined by Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Fernand Léger and Juan Gris.
Which person  was the most influential in beginning the movement with is three dimensional forms?	Paul Cézanne
What year's were Cezannes painting's displayed at Salon d'Automne? Not including the retrospectives.	1905 and 1906
What were the three offshoots of Cubism formed in France?	Orphism, Abstract art and later Purism
What were the other offshoots formed in countries other than France?	Futurism, Suprematism, Dada, Constructivism and De Stijl
Which offshoot had little in common with Cubism?	Futurist
Which offshoot of cubism was influenced by Picasso?	Constructivism
Between what years did cubism begin?	1907 and 1911
In the spring of what year did the first organized exhibition by cubist appear?	1911
What was the name of the room that the first exhibition of Cubists took place?	Salle 41
Who mentioned the landscapes made by Picasso in the first Cubist paintings?	Gertrude Stein
In what city did the first exhibition of Cubists take place?	Paris
What was the first phase of Cubism known as?	Analytic Cubism
Who coined the phrase Analytic Cubsim?	Juan Gris
What was the second phase of Cubism called?	Synthetic Cubism
From what years did High Cubism take place?	1909 to 1914
From what years did Late Cubism take place?	1914 to 1921
Who asserted that the flat canvas supported Cubism?	Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler
In what year was the assertion made that the flat canvas supported Cubism?	early as 1920
When was the assertion that the flat canvas supported Cubism put into debate?	1950s and 1960s,
Who was the main opponent that began to argue that the flat canvas did not support Cubism?	Clement Greenberg.
Who's work undermined Douglass  Coopers terms describing Cubism?	Picasso, Braque, Gris and Léger
Which artists in the early 19th and 20th century inspired by the newly discovered African, Native American, Micro and Polynesian art?	Paul Gauguin, Henri Matisse, and Pablo Picasso
What about the Native cultures art inspired Matisse, Picasso, and Gauguin?	stark power and simplicity
Who did Picasso meet around 1906 that had also recenelty learned about Primitivism?	Gertrude Stein,
What were Picasso's 1907 paintings usually characterized by?	Protocubism
Which two artists did Douglass Cooper say were very important to the forming of Cubism?	Paul Gauguin and Paul Cézanne
What does Cooper say is the first  Cubist picture?	The Demoiselles
Is it true that the first Cubist picture is The Demoiselles?	although it was a major first step towards Cubism it is not yet Cubist.
What did Daniel Robbins say about Demoiselles being the beginning of Cubism?	such deductions are unhistorical
During which years did the conscious begin to look for a new style in Germany, Italy, Russia, and Holland?	1905 and 1908,
Which impressionist movements were also influenced by Cubism?	Les Nabis and the Symbolists
Which technique did the Impressionists use to make their subjects simple forms?	double point of view
Besides Seurat where else are the beginnigs of Cubism found?	in the two distinct tendencies of Cézanne's later work
Cubists exploration of the concept of the simplification of forms into cones cylinders and spheres was further explored by whom?	Cézanne
Cubism revolutionized the way things could be seen in art how?	all the surfaces of depicted objects in a single picture plane, as if the objects had all their faces visible at the same time.
When did the historical study of Cubism begin?	in the late 1920s
On who's opinions were the beginnings of the this historical study of Cubism based?	Guillaume Apollinaire
On which book and who was the author was one of the main sources of the historical study of Cubism based?	Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler's book Der Weg zum Kubismus
Understanding who's work was the tradition meaning of Cubism formed on?	Braque and Picasso
Who suggested that the artists other than Braque and Picasso's relgation to a distant role in Cubism was a mistake?	Daniel Robbins
What other painters were not thought of as being as Cubist as Braque and Picasso?	Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Robert Delaunay and Henri Le Fauconnier
What year did the term Cubism become used more?	1911
Which poet critic in 1911 with a group of poets accepted the term Cubism?	Guillaume Apollinaire
The artists of Passy included which two people?	Picabia and the Duchamp brothers
Where did Picassos work until 1912?	Montmartre
Where did Braque and Gris stay until the end of the World War I?	Montmartre
Where was Leger based around 1912?	Montparnasse
Which four people usually met at Fauconnier's studio in 1910?	Metzinger, Gleizes, Delaunay and Léger
Where was Fauconnier's studio located?	Boulevard de Montparnasse
What did the group meeting at Fauconnier's studio want to focus on?	research into form, in opposition to the Neo-Impressionist emphasis on color.
In what year did the New York Times review the Salon d'Automne?	October 8, 1911
What was the subtitle of the article published in 1911 in New York TImes about Cubism?	Eccentric School of Painting Increases Its Vogue in the Current Art Exhibition - What Its Followers Attempt to Do
List the artists who were featured in the Salon d'Automne?	André Lhote, Marcel Duchamp, Jacques Villon, Roger de La Fresnaye, André Dunoyer de Segonzac and František Kupka
Which Duchamp presentation was displayed in the 1912 Salon des Independants?	Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2
 Was Duchamp's work considered controversial when displayed in 1912?	caused a scandal
What were one of  Metzingers two showings in 1912's Salon des Independants?	La Femme au Cheval (Woman with a horse) 1911-1912
Which politician made the front page of Le Journa in 1912 for his indignation?	Jean Pierre Philippe Lampué
Who defended the Cubists in the controversy of 1912?	Socialist deputy, Marcel Sembat.
Towards which social topic did the Cubists  at the Salon d'Automne creat contrevesy towards?	the use of government owned buildings,
What against did Metzinger and Gleizes write Du "Cubsime"?	public anger
Who published Du "Cubisme"?	Eugène Figuière
In what year was  Du "Cubisme" published?	1912
What were Kupka's two entries at the Salon d'Automne?	Amorpha-Fugue à deux couleurs and Amorpha chromatique chaude
What were the titles of Delaunay's paintings in 1912?	Simultaneous Windows,
During what years did  Leger produce Contrasts of Forms?	1913–14
By whom was Marcel Duchamp labeled an Orphanist?	Apollinaire
What two items did Duchamp attach together in 1913?	a bicycle wheel to a kitchen stool
What object did Duchamp select in 1914 as a scuplture by itself?	bottle-drying rack
How many works displayed at The Salon de la Section d'Or at the Galerie La Boétie in Paris, October 1912?	Over 200
What did the 1912 exhiibtion of Cubism show?	indicates the artists' intention of making their work comprehensible to a wide audience
What did Christopher Green say of the difference between traditional cubist and Salon Cubists?	It is by no means clear, in any case
Whom did Braque and Picasso aim their works at?	large public
In Du Cubisme who so Metzinger and Gleizes  relate the sense of time to?	Henri Bergson
The Cubist used what kind of treatment of space and time?	The Salon Cubists
What did the technique in Gliezes' piece Le Depiquage represent?	relative motion)
Who painted the Wedding, show at Salon des Independants in 1912?	Léger
Which of Gliezes pieces was featured at Salon de la Section d'Or?	Le Dépiquage des Moissons (Harvest Threshing)
What was the name of the show that introduced Cubism to the USA?	Armory Show
In what city did the show that introduced Cubism to the USA take place?	New York City
Which 1907 piece did Picasso present in the show that introduced Cubism to the USA?	Les Arbres
What 1910 piece did Albert Gleizes present in that show that introduced Cubism to the USA?	La Femme aux phlox
What was the name of the 1909 Cubist sculpture Picassos created?	Head of a Woman
What Douglas Cooper call Picasso's 1909 Cubist sculpture?	The first true Cubist sculpture
Which  Alexander Archipenko piece was similar to other Cubist scupltures of that time?	Woman Walking
What did the critic Maurice Raynal begin to refer to Cubism in around 1917-1920?	'crystal' Cubism
Who's concept of duration was left  behind for a for more concrete frame's of references?	Henri Bergson's
What was the first time period that a significant change began to happen in Cubism?	1914 and 1916
What was the second time period that a significant change began to happen in Cubism?	between 1917 and 1920
Before what year was Cubism considered the most innovative?	1914
With the assistance of what dealer did Cubism return as  a central consideration for artists after World War I?	Léonce Rosenberg
In what year did Rosenberg exhibit Cubist works at  Galerie de l’Effort Moderne?	1918
In which city did Galerie de l’Effort Moderne take place?	Paris
Name the three artists who were in part resonsible for the reemergence of Cubism between 1917 and 1924.	Gris, Léger and Gleizes
Name the three writers who were in part resonsible for the reemergence of Cubism between 1917 and 1924.	Pierre Reverdy, Maurice Raynal and Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler
In 1918 which way did the French idealogies shift that effected Cubism?	conservatism
What two things did Cubism in the early 20th century form an important link between?	art and architecture.
What are the four formal characteristics that are usually connected with Cubism?	faceting of form, spatial ambiguity, transparency, and multiplicity.
In which four countries were the impacts of avant garde art particularly strong?	France, Germany, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia
In Cubism what was architechtural interested base on?	the dissolution and reconstitution of three-dimensional form
Who said that Cubism was becoming an influetial aspect in modern architecture ?	Raymond Duchamp-Villon and André Mare
Increased use of what material marked Cubism influence in architecture?	glass
The ideas of which Cubo Futurist influenced the avant-garde in architecture?	Filippo Tommaso Marinetti
The De Stijl movement took part in the aesthetic principles of what?	Neo-plasticism
Who developed Neo Plasticism?	Piet Mondrian
Who linked De Stijl to Cubist theory?	Gino Severini
Who did Le Corbusier open his Paris studio with in 1922?	his cousin Jeanneret
How big was the model of La Maison Cubiste?	10-by-3-meter
Which Metzinger piece was hung in La Maison Cubiste?	Woman with a Fan
What was La Maison Cubiste ?	a fully furnished house
Is original Cubist architecture rare?	Cubist architecture is very rare
Which country applied Cubism to architecture the most?	Bohemia (today Czech Republic
What was for the form of architectural Cubism in Prague called?	Rondo-Cubism
What was the essential piece Cubist architects explained in their theoretical rules?	dynamism
What's  window shapes di Czech Cubist architects use?	hexagonal
What feelings should Cubist architecture evoke in viewer?	dynamism and expressive plasticity
Who were the leading Cubist architects?	Pavel Janák, Josef Gočár, Vlastislav Hofman, Emil Králíček and Josef Chochol
Where did the leading Cubist architects work?	Prague
What is the best known Cubist architecture building?	House of the Black Madonna
Where is the House of the Black Madonna located?	Old Town of Prague
Who built the House of the Black Madonna?	Vlastislav Hofman
Did cubism influence other fields outside of painting and scuplture?	The influence of cubism extended to other artistic fields,
Who's written works used repitition that was similar to Cubist art?	Gertrude Stein
What was Gertrude Stein's brother's name?	Leo
What was the title of Gertrude Stein's 1906-1908 book?	The Making of Americans
Which poets are closely alligned with Cubism?	Guillaume Apollinaire, Blaise Cendrars, Jean Cocteau, Max Jacob, André Salmon and Pierre Reverdy
What is the name of the american Poet who is associated with talking about the rigiorous architecture of Cubism?	Kenneth Rexroth
Which two American poets have recently created new traslations of Reverdy's work?	John Ashbery and Ron Padgett
What is the name of Wallace Steven's work that explains how cubism can be translated into poetry?	Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird
What specifically dates back with Confucius in the 6th century BC?	Chinese political philosophy
Chinese political philosophy dates back to what century?	6th century BC
Chinese political philosophy was developed as a response to what?	the social and political breakdown of the country
What advocated a communal, decentralized government centered on frugality and ascetism?	Mohism
Western political philosophy originates in what philosophy?	ancient Greece
What philosophy has dates back to at least Plato?	philosophy of ancient Greece
Ancient Greece was dominated by what?	city-states
What demarcates a clear distinction between nation and state, as well as religion and state?	Indian political philosophy
What was divided into governance, administration, defense, law and  order?	The institutions of state
What was the governing body of the Hindu states?	Mantranga
Who was the 4th Century BC Indian political philosopher?	Chanakya
What provides an account of the science of politics for a wise ruler?	The Arthashastra
What is an example of a code of law in ancient India?	the Manusmṛti or Laws of Manu
Who heavily influenced the early Christian philosophy of Augustine of Hippo?	Plato
What was a key change brought about by Christian thought?	the moderatation of the Stoicism
Who also preached that one was not a member of his or her city?	Augustine
What does Civitas terrena mean?	City of Man
What does Civitas Dei mean?	City of God
What strongly altered the power balances and perceptions of origin of power in the Mediterranean region?	The rise of Islam
What emphasized an inexorable link between science and religion?	Early Islamic philosophy
Who challenged the early Islamic philosophy's views?	the "rationalist" Mutazilite philosophers
What type of views did the "rationalist" Mutaziite philosophers hold?	Hellenic view
The clashes between Ehl-i Sunna and Shia had what kind of character?	political
Islamic political philosophy was rooted in what sources?	Islam
What is taken as the basis of an analysis?	The political conceptions of Islam
What was heavily influenced by Christian thinking?	Medieval political philosophy in Europe
Medieval political philosophy had much in common with what type of thinking?	Mutazalite Islamic thinking
Who was the most influential political philosopher of medieval Europe?	St. Thomas Aquinas
What was one of the most influential works during the period?	Niccolò Machiavelli's The Prince
When was Niccolo Machiavelli's The Prince published?	1532
Who wrote The  Prince?	Niccolò Machiavelli
Who was well known for his theory of the social contract?	Thomas Hobbes
What would refer to a set of enduring institutions through which power would be distributed and its use justified?	state
What refers to a specific group of people who occupied the institutions of the state?	government
Society has been considered subject to natural laws akin to what?	the physical world
The concept of the guild was subordinated to the theory of what?	free trade
The enlightenment was an outright attack on what?	religion
What increasingly challenged the Roman Catholic dominance of theology?	Protestant churches
Who was the most outspoken critic of the church in France?	François Marie Arouet de Voltaire
In what area did these ideological reforms not take place until much later?	Ottoman Empire
Whose philosophy gave much to Christian thought of the time?	The Iroquois philosophy
Who was a great admirer of some of the methods of the Iroquois Confederacy?	Benjamin Franklin
Who was responsible for the work Two Treatises of Government?	John Locke
Locke refuted whose political theory?	Sir Robert Filmer
According to Locke, an absolute ruler is proposed by Hobbes is what?	unnecessary
Who developed the Marxist critique of capitalism?	Friedrich Engels
What was one of the defining ideological movements of the Twentieth Century?	The Marxist critique of capitalism
What produced a parallel revolution in political thought?	The industrial revolution
What was a watershed event in human history?	World War I
When was The Russian Revolution?	1917
What brought communism?	The Russian Revolution of 1917
What did Ludwig Von Mises and Friedrich Hayek run?	a group of central European economists
Who published A Theory of Justice?	John Rawls
What did John Rawls publish?	A Theory of Justice
What continent saw a huge blossoming of political philosophy?	Europe
The events of May 1968 led to an increased interest in what?	revolutionary ideology
What remained an important focus during the 1950s and 1960s?	Communism
There was a marked trend towards what type of approach to political issues?	pragmatic approach
Who wrote The Racial Contract?	Charles W. Mills
Who wrote The Sexual Contract?	Carole Patemen
What did John Rawsl publish?	A Theory of Justice
Who Published A Theory of Justice?	John Rawls
When was A Theory of Justice published?	1971
Who wrote Anarchy, State, and Utopia?	Robert Nozick
Herbert Marcuse was from what school?	Frankfurt School,
Thinkers out of the Frankfurt School combined Marxian and what other perspective?	Freudian
Who in particular moved a Marxist analysis of commodity fetishism to the realm of consumption?	Guy Debord
What is often considered valuable for generating a new set of philosophical problems?	The liberal-communitarian debate
What type of control do communitarians tend to support?	greater local control
What type of economic and social policies do Communitarians tend to support?	policies which encourage the growth of social capital
When did republicanism and the capability approach arise?	the end of the 20th century
What aims to provide an alternate definition of liberty from Isaiah Berlin's positive and negative forms of liberty?	The resurgent republican movement
Mahbub ul Haq and Amartya Sen pioneered what approach?	The capability approach
What is an alloy?	a mixture of metals or a mixture of a metal and another element
What are alloys defined by?	metallic bonding character
When are Zintl considered alloys?	depending on bond types
What is solid solution metal elements classified as?	a single phase
What kind of substance is an alloy?	impure
What happens when an alloy is mixed with a molten base?	they will be soluble, dissolving into the mixture
What is an alloy composed of?	two or more elements
What other metal is impure like alloy?	wrought iron
How is steel produced?	Adding a small amount of non-metallic carbon to iron
What kind of metal is soft like copper?	aluminium
What can be added to steel to enhance is corrosion resistance?	chromium
What is superior to pure iron?	steel
What is another word for when alloys solidify?	crystallizes
What causes an alloy to form a solid solution?	If the metals remain soluble when solid
What is the purpose of intermetallic phases?	to reinforce the crystals internally
What are alloys called when the insoluble elements don't separate until after crystallization occurs?	intermetallic alloys
What is electrum made of?	silver and gold
What alloy is formed naturally?	electrum
Which was on of the first alloys made by humans?	bronze
What metal is made by combining tin and copper?	bronze
Around what time where alloys starting to get made by humans?	1900s
The matrix and the solvent are other names for what?	The primary metal
What is another name for solutes?	The secondary constituents
What is the name of an alloy that has  four constituents?	quaternary alloy
A five-part alloy is known as?	ternary alloy
What is a characteristic of iron sulfide?	very brittle
What makes pure metals impure metals?	unwanted impurities
Using fluxes and chemical additives during the alloying process does what?	remove excess impurities
What are the three common impurities in aluminum alloys?	Lithium, sodium and calcium
What is the name of a common alloy?	Steel
What is something on a car that sometimes is made of alloy?	automobile wheels
Steel and other very practical metals are also named what?	alloys
What can be done to a metal to enhance its properties?	combining it with one or more other metals or non-metals
Pure metals have a higher electrical and thermal conductivity than what?	alloys
When copper and tin is mixed, what is made?	Bronze
When was the bronze age?	prehistoric period
Copper and zinc combine to make what?	Brass
What kind of treatment can be made to alter it's properties?	heat treatment
Softening metals can be achieved by?	annealing
Aluminium, copper, magnesium, titanium, and nickel can be strengthened by?	heat treatment
Annealling softens metals by achieving what?	recrystallizes the alloy and repairs the defects
What is the name of steel when it is being formed of two phases?	heterogeneous
What are the two phases when steel becomes heterogenous?	carbon (carbide) phase cementite, and ferrite
What are the characteristics of steel if it is cooled to quickly?	very hard and brittle
Soft and bendable steel is caused by what?	If the steel is cooled slowly
Allotrophy happens between what temperatures?	1,500 °F (820 °C) and 1,600 °F (870 °C)
Precipitation hardening alloys produce the opposite effects of?	steel
Precipitation hardening alloys are sometimes also?	heat-treatable alloys
What makes alloys more softer than normal?	When heated to form a solution and then cooled quickly
Bronze and brass are examples of what?	substitutional alloys
Tin or zinc atoms in place of copper atoms create?	substitutional alloys
What is the name of one interstitial alloy?	Steel
Stainless steel is an example of what two alloys?	interstitial and substitutional
What was one of the first alloys used by humans?	meteoric iron
What is meteoric iron composed of?	nickel and iron
What can forged meteoric iron make?	tools, weapons, and nails
Where does meteoric iron come from?	iron meteorites
How does meteoric iron come to earth?	occasionally fall down on Earth from outer space
Where is the only iron deposit on earth?	Greenland
Around what time did bronze start being formed?	2500 BC
What does copper and zinc form to make?	brass
Where is tin mostly found?	Great Britain
Which metal important to the ancients is the hardest one?	Copper
What does mercury make most metals do?	dissolves
Since when have Amalgams been used?	200 BC
What did ancient Romans use to gild their armor?	mercury-tin amalgams
Gold and silver were extracted from their ores by using?	Mercury
Ancient civilizations often alloyed metals for what reason?	purely aesthetic purposes
Red gold is made by combining gold with?	copper
 Around what time was the Archimedes' principle discovered?	250 BC
Who shouted "Eureka!" while checking the purity of a crown?	Archimedes
Buyers were often deceived when precious metals were mixed with?	less valuable substances
Pewter is mostly made up of?	tin
Why was tin was rarely used for everyday use?	too soft
During the bronze age, which metal was valued higher than gold in Europe and the Mediterranean?	tin
What was done to tin to make it stronger?	alloyed with other metals
What metals were alloyed with tin to make it stronger?	lead, antimony, bismuth or copper
Where did smelting of iron begin?	Anatolia
When did the smelting of iron first begin?	around 1800 BC
When did iron making technology begin in Japan?	around 700 AD
Pig iron is composed of iron and what else?	carbon
What makes Pig iron different from regular iron?	lower melting point
Heat treatment of steel has been know since what time?	1100 BC
When did iron start to become melted by people?	Middle Ages
Who created the first process for the mass production of tool steel?	Benjamin Huntsman
When did Benjamin Huntsman begin to melt blister steel in a crucible	1740
What did the blast furnace help do to pig iron in the middle ages?	produced in much higher volumes than wrought iron
By reducing carbon in liquid pig iron, what was created?	steel
When did puddling start occurring?	1700s
When was the Bessemer process developed?	1858
Steel and manganese combines form to make what?	Mangalloy
Who discovered precipitation hardening alloys?	Alfred Wilm
When were precipitation hardening alloys discovered?	1906
What happens to precipitation hardening alloys after they quenched?	harden over time
One of the first "age hardening" alloys used were called?	duralumin
What was used in the construction of modern aircraft?	duralumin
In what ocean is Norfolk Island found?	Pacific Ocean
How far away is the nearest land mass to Norfolk Island?	about 900 kilometres (560 mi)
What is the capital city of Norfolk Island?	Kingston
How many people live on Norfolk Island?	1,796
How far away is Evans Head from Norfolk Island?	1,412 kilometres (877 mi)
Who was Norfolk Island colonised by?	East Polynesians
What purpose did Norfolk Island serve for the majority of the time from 1788 until 1855?	a convict penal settlement
What date did civilians begin to permanently reside in Norfolk Island?	8 June 1856
Where did the first permanent civilians of Norfolk Island settle from in 1856?	Pitcairn Island
In what year did the UK hand Norfolk Island over to Australia to administrate?	1913
In what year did the British government include Norfolk Island as a auxiliary settlement?	1786
Who proposed the idea to include Norfolk Island as a British auxiliary settlement in 1786?	John Call
In including Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, what Australian state did the British government plan to colonise?	New South Wales
What woman influenced the decision by the British to settle Norfolk Island?	Empress Catherine II of Russia
Where was the majority of the hemp and flax used by the Royal Navy imported from?	Russia
When did Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales Francis Grose start suggesting Norfolk Island be closed as a penal settlement?	1794
Why did Francis Grose think that Norfolk Island should be closed as a penal settlement?	it was too remote and difficult for shipping and too costly to maintain
When did the first group of people leave Norfolk Island?	February 1805
By 1808, how many people remained on Norfolk Island?	200
Why did a small group of people remain on Norfolk Island, after others had already left?	to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings
Who instructed the Governor of New South Wales Thomas Brisbane to send the worst convicts to Norfolk Island?	the British government
What previous disadvantage of Norfolk Island was seen as an advantage for holding male convicts?	Its remoteness
What were the prisoners on Norfolk Island spared from on the the mainland?	the gallows
How many convicts are listed in the database at Norfolk Island?	6,458
What was the average length of a prisoner's detention at Norfolk Island?	three years
Who were the next settlement of people on Norfolk Island descended from?	Tahitians and the HMS Bounty mutineers
Where did the next settlement of people on Norfolk Island settle from?	the Pitcairn Islands
On May 3, 1856, how many Pitcairners left for Norfolk Island?	193
What was the name of the ship the Pitcairners traveled on to Norfolk Island?	Morayshire
What trades did the Pitcairners establish while on Norfolk Island?	farming and whaling industries
When was the Commonwealth of Australia created?	1901
During what major event did Norfolk Island become an important airbase and refuelling station?	World War II
Who contructed the airbase used on Norfolk Island during World War II?	Australian, New Zealand and United States servicemen
Norfolk Island fell under whose responsibility during World War II?	New Zealand
When did N Force leave Norfolk Island during the time of World War II?	February 1944
 What lead to Norfolk Island asking for assistance from Australia in 2010?	Financial problems and a reduction in tourism
What benefit were residents of Norfolk Island told they would receive as a result of Australia's assistance?	greater welfare benefits
What actually ended up happening after Norfolk Island asked Australia for help?	islanders were having to leave to find work and welfare
An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on March 12, 2015, to do what for Norfolk Island?	replace self-government with a local council
What percentage of Norfolk Island voters were against the changes brought by Australia?	68%
What part of the Pacific Ocean is Norfolk Island located?	South
What direction is Norfolk Island in relation to Australia?	east
What are the coordinates for Norfolk Island?	29°02′S 167°57′E﻿ / ﻿29.033°S 167.950°E﻿ / -29.033; 167.950
What is the name of the mountain at Norfolk Island's highest point?	Mount Bates
What is the name of the second largest island of the territory of Norfolk Island?	Phillip Island
What is the coastline of Norfolk made of?	cliff faces
Where is the site of the original colonial settlement of Kingston, Norfolk Islands, currently located?	Slaughter Bay and Emily Bay
How are goods imported to Norfolk Island?	by ship
Where are imported goods usually sent on Norfolk Island?	Cascade Bay
Where can you go to surf on Norfolk Island?	Anson and Ball Bays
How many plants can only be found on Norfolk Island?	51
How many of the plants that can only be found on Norfolk Island are rare or threatened?	18
Where can the tallest tree-fern in the world be found?	Norfolk Island National Park
What was the majority of Norfolk Island covered with, before European colonization?	subtropical rain forest
How much of the rainforest remains in Norfolk Island today?	5 km2
What type of bird does Norfolk Island have few of?	land
What is one reason that has caused many of the birds of Norfolk Island to become extinct?	massive clearance of the island's native vegetation
What is the second thing that caused many of the birds of Norfolk Island to become extinct?	hunting and persecution as agricultural pests
What non-bird animals caused the bird populations of Norfolk Island to suffer?	mammals
What non-native birds caused the bird populations of Norfolk Island to suffer?	common blackbirds and crimson rosellas
What island in the Norfolk Island Group is home to breeding seabirds?	Nepean Island
What near extinct bird of Norfolk Island has shown signs of population increase?	The providence petrel
Where has the providence petrel been seen breeding on Norfolk Island?	Phillip Island
What other types of petrels breed on Phillip Island?	the white-necked petrel, Kermadec petrel
What is the sooty tern known as on Norfolk Island?	the whale bird
What used to be abundant in the waters around Norfolk Island?	Cetaceans
When did commercial sea hunts on Norfolk Island stop operating?	1956
What are some species of whales that can be seen around Norfolk Island today?	humpback whale, minke whale, sei whale
What other species can be seen close to the shores of Norfolk Island?	dolphins
What type of whales were once common in Norfolk Island, but hardly any remain today?	Southern right whales
Christians make up what percentage of the population of Norfolk Island?	Sixty-two percent
Who was the first chaplain of Norfolk Island?	Rev G. H. Nobbs
What type of church was formed after Rev G.H. Nobbs' death in 1884?	a Methodist church
Who led Norfolk Island's first Seventh-day Adventist church?	one of Nobbs' sons
Typical church congregations on Norfolk Island as of 2010 don't exceed what number?	30
What languages do residents of Norfolk Island speak?	English and a creole language known as Norfuk
What is the Norfuk language a mixture of?	18th-century English and Tahitian
The Norfuk language of Norfolk Island was first spoken by whom?	descendants of the first free settlers of Norfolk Island who were descendants of the settlers of Pitcairn Island
What is the official co-language of Norfolk Island?	The Norfuk language
What part of the residents of Norfolk Island could speak Norfuk as of 2011?	under three-quarters
What is the only non-mainland Australian territory that is governed by itself?	Norfolk Island
What is the name of the Act that formerly governed Norfolk Island?	The Norfolk Island Act 1979
What is the name of the new Act that governs Norfolk Island, passed in 2015?	the Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act 2015
Who is the current administrator of Norfolk Island?	Gary Hardgrave
During 1979-2015, Legislative Assembly terms lasted no longer than how many years?	three years
The Assembly of Norfolk Island is made of how many seats?	nine
What method of voting does Norfolk Island use for it's Assembly?	a "weighted first past the post system"
Four members of the Assembly made up what Council, responsible for devising policy for Norfolk Island?	Executive
Who was the last Chief Minister of Norfolk Island?	Lisle Snell
What is the official name for the Minister in charge of tourism on Norfolk Island?	Minister for Tourism, Industry and Development
How many models did Australia propose to Norfolk Island's legislative assembly?	two
What would the more severe of the proposed plans threaten to reduce Norfolk Island's assembly to?	a local council
When did the Australian government end their review on Norfolk Island?	December 2006
The Australian government said that changes to Norfolk Island's government would cause what?	significant disruption
When did the Commonwealth of Australia announce that Norfolk Island would no longer be governed by itself?	19 March 2015
What did the Commonwealth want to replace the Norfolk Island government with?	a local council
From what state did the proposed council come from?	New South Wales
What benefits would Norfolk Island residents receive as a result of the new council?	they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Centrelink and Medicare
What would Norfolk Island residents have to start paying as a result of the new council?	Australian income tax
When did the Legislative Assembly of Norfolk Island vote regarding the proposed Australian reforms?	8 May 2015
How many Norfolk Island residents voted on May 8, 2015?	912
What percentage of Norfolk Island residents voted in favor of self-governance?	68%
Who is Norfolk Island's Chief Minister?	Lisle Snell
According to Lisle Snell, Australian Parliament thought that abolishing Norfolk Island's self-governance would be what?	overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island
Norfolk Island was originally a what?	colony acquired by settlement
Norfolk Island became a territory of what country?	Australia
Under what Act was Norfolk Island accepted as a territory of Australia?	the Norfolk Island Act 1913 (Cth)
Who decided in 1976 that Norfolk Island is a part of the Commonwealth?	High Court of Australia
What was a necessary qualification for voting in Norfolk Island?	Australian citizenship
What has been heavily restricted in Norfolk Island, until recently?	immigration
When were the immigration protocols relaxed in Norfolk Island?	2012
What aided in the relaxation of immigration protocols to Norfolk Island?	an Unrestricted Entry Permit for all Australian and New Zealand citizens
What must Australian and New Zealand citizens do in order to apply for residency in Norfolk Island?	pass a police check and be able to pay into the local health scheme
When will the Australian migration system replace Norfolk Island's immigration policies?	1 July 2016
What automatic right do Australian citizens and residents have on Norfolk Island after meeting the criteria in Immigration (Amendment No. 2) Act 2012?	automatic right of residence
What do citizens from other nations need in order to travel to Norfolk Island?	a passport
What do Australian citizens need in order to travel to Norfolk Island?	either a passport or a Document of Identity
When someone has an Australian visa and they want to travel to Norfolk Island, where must they depart?	Australian Migration Zone
What will happen to travelers with an Australian visa who don't depart from the Australian Migration Zone?	the visa will have ceased
What Act declares Non-Australian residents "outside of Australia" while they are on Norfolk Island?	the Migration Act
What does a Non-Australian citizen who is a resident need to return from Norfolk Island to the mainland?	a still-valid migrant visa or Resident return visa
As far as Australian nationality law goes, Norfolk Island is considered a part of what?	Australia
According to Australian nationality law, time spent by a permanent Australian resident on Norfolk Island will do what?	count as time spent in Australia
What is the name of the only medical center on Norfolk Island?	Norfolk Island Hospital
What are visitors of Norfolk Island recommended to purchase?	travel insurance
Where are Norfolk Island patients who need serious treatment flown to?	mainland Australia
Who handles serious medical emergencies on Norfolk Island?	the Royal Australian Air Force
Who staffs the one ambulance available on Norfolk Island?	St John Ambulance Australia volunteers
What services do Norfolk Island residents believe should be made available from the Norfolk Island's EEZ profit?	health and infrastructure
What is Norfolk Island's only major natural resource?	fish
What is the name of the area residents of Norfolk Island are permitted to fish recreationally?	the Box
What is speculated to be available in Norfolk Island's EEZ zone?	oil and gas deposits
What percentage of Norfolk Island is a permanent pasture?	25
Norfolk Island inhabitants and visitors don't pay what?	Australian federal taxes
Who is the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island?	David Buffett
What reason did David Buffett give for Norfolk Island surrendering its' tax-free status?	for a financial bailout from the federal government
When will income tax be introduced on Norfolk Island?	July 1, 2016
What type of services were Norfolk Island inhabitants unable to receive prior to this announcement?	social
How many main telephone lines were being used on Norfolk Island, as of 2004?	2532
How many analog telephone lines were being used on Norfolk Island, as of 2004?	2500
How many local radio stations does Norfolk Island have?	one
What is the name of Norfolk Island's only TV station?	Norfolk TV
What is Norfolk Island's Internet country code top-level domain?	.nf
Where are loading jetties found on Norfolk Island?	Kingston and Cascade
How is a supply ship unloaded when it reaches Norfolk Island?	by whaleboats towed by launches
What determines the jetty that's used by supply ships to Norfolk Island?	the prevailing weather on the day
Where can you find the often-used jetty on Norfolk Island?	on the leeward side of the island
Who can usually be found watching supply ships unload at Norfolk Island?	Visitors
Where was Burke born?	Dublin, Ireland
What was Burke's mother's maiden name?	Nagle
When did Burke's mother die?	1770
When did Burke's father die?	1761
When did Burke's ancestors arrive in Ireland?	1185
When did Burke begin attending Trinity College Dublin?	1744
What type of people did Trinity College Dublin not allow to earn degrees there?	Catholics
When did Edmund Burke start a debate club?	1747
What club did Edmund Burke's debate club merge with in 1770?	TCD's Historical Club
When did Edmund Burke graduate?	1748
Which bishop didn't realize the satirical nature of Burke's book?	Bishop Warburton
Which lord didn't realize the satirical nature of Burke's book?	Lord Chesterfield
When was the 2nd edition of Burke's book published?	1757
Where did Burke make it clear that his book was a satire?	in the preface to the second edition
Who thought that Burke's imitation was too perfect to be effective ridicule?	Richard Hurd
Why did a few scholars think Burke hadn't intended his book as a satire yet later claimed it was a satire?	political reasons
Whose principles did Burke imitate?	L. Bol.
When did Burke sign a contract for a history of England?	25 February 1757
How many words long was Burke's history of England contracted to be?	nearly 400,000
How many pages long was Burke's history of England contracted to be?	640 pages
When was Burke's history of England published?	1812
Which author's history of England being published before Burke's might have dissuaded Burke from continuing his?	David Hume
What publication did Burke found?	Annual Register
The Annual Register covered international events of what type?	political
Burke was the only known writer for the Register until what year?	1766
Burke was the chief editor for the Register until at least what year?	1789
Who wrote a biography of Burke?	Philip Magnus
What was William Gerard Hamilton's nickname?	Single-speech Hamilton
Who was William Gerard Hamilton's private secretary?	Burke
When did Burke become the Prime Minister's private secretary?	1765
Who invited Burke to join the Freemasons?	Charles, Marquess of Rockingham
What political party was Charles, Marquess of Rockingham in?	Whig
Who did Burke want constitutional limits on the power of?	the king
What type of institution did Burke think could offer opposition to abuses of power?	political parties
What type of group were the "king's friends"?	neo-Tory
What was Burke's most important publication about limiting royal power?	Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents of 23 April 1770
What country did Burke propose restricting trade with?	Ireland
What city did Burke represent in parliament?	Bristol
When did Burke make a motion to restrict Irish trade?	May 1778
What was Bristol's most important industry?	trading
Where was Burke worried Britain might not win a war?	America
How many reasons against violence did Burke present?	four
How far away was the potential conflict Burke argued against?	thousands of miles
What area could the American colonists retreat to?	the mountains
When did Lord Bathurst die?	1775
When did an angel supposedly speak to Bathurst?	1704
What political position did Samuel Johnson say would soon poison America?	Whiggism
When was Lord Bathurst born?	1684
In Samuel Johnson's writing, who appeared to a Whig?	the devil
When did Lord North take office?	1770
When did Lord North leave office?	1782
Which victories against the Americans did the British celebrate?	New York and Pennsylvania
How did Burke feel about the British celebrating victories against the Americans?	appalled
When was the American Declaration of Independence issued?	1776
Where had Paymasters been able to get money from directly until 1782?	HM Treasury
After 1782, where would money from Paymasters' withdrawal requests go?	the Bank of England
Whose administration repealed the Paymaster General Act?	Shelburne
When was the Paymaster General Act passed?	1782
What type of government did Burke think would be inept?	democratic
For how many reasons did Burke oppose democracy?	three
What did Burke think could arouse common people's dangerous passions?	demagogues
What type of impulses did Burke think could gain power through commoners' passions?	authoritarian
Who did Burke think protected unpopular minorities?	the upper classes
When was Warren Hastings impeached?	1786
Where was Hastings formerly the governor?	Bengal
How long before Hastings's trial had Britain been dealing with Indian unrest?	two decades
What was Burke made chairman of in 1781?	the Commons Select Committee on East Indian Affairs
When Burke said the Indian problems 'began in commerce', where did he say the problems ended in?	empire
When did Burke charge Hastings for impeachment?	4 April 1786
What was the impeachment formally called?	Article of Charge of High Crimes and Misdemeanors
Which house acquitted Hastings?	House of Lords
Which house impeached Hastings?	House of Commons
Like what creature did Burke say Hastings was 'devouring the dead'?	ravenous vulture
Who did Parisian women want to return to Paris?	King Louis XVI
What was Burke's son's name?	Richard Burke
Who requested that Burke support the French Revolution?	Charles-Jean-François Depont
When did Burke first publicly condemn the French Revolution?	9 February 1790
When did Richard Price give a sermon to the Revolution Society?	4 November 1789
What was the Revolution Society commemorating?	the Glorious Revolution of 1688
Who did Price think should see themselves as citizens of the world?	Englishmen
What philosophy did Price support?	universal "Rights of Men"
Which of Burke's writings was inspired by Price's sermon?	Reflections on the Revolution in France
When did Burke publish his Reflections on the Revolution in France?	1790
How many copies did Reflections on the Revolution in France sell in 2 months?	17,500
Who translated 'Reflections on the Revolution in France' into French?	Pierre-Gaëton Dupont
When was the tenth printing of the French translation of 'Reflections on the Revolution in France'?	June 1791
Who did Burke say we look up to with awe?	kings
Who did Burke say we look to with affection?	parliaments
Who did Burke say we look to with reverence?	priests
How did Burke say we look towards nobility?	with respect
How did Burke say we look towards magistrates?	duty
Who was featured in the most well-known part of Burke's Reflections?	Marie-Antoinette
Who said Burke wrote 'pure foppery' about Marie-Antoinette?	Philip Francis
Who adored Burke's chivalry?	Edward Gibbon
How did Marie-Antoinette react to Burke's writing about her?	she burst into tears
Who re-translated the Reflections into French?	Louis XVI
Which British ministers disagreed with Burke's Reflections?	Richard Sheridan and Charles James Fox
What political party was Charles James Fox?	Whig
What political party was Earl Fitzwilliam?	Whigs
What political party was Richard Sheridan?	Whig
Who wrote 'The Rights of Man'?	Thomas Paine
Who wrote 'A Vindication of the Rights of Men'?	Mary Wollstonecraft
Who said the Reflections were "the manifesto of a Counter Revolution"?	James Mackintosh
Who did Mackintosh compare Burke to?	Lord Bacon and Cicero
What types of wisdom did Mackintosh say Burke had?	political and moral
Who asked Burke for more "very refreshing mental food"?	François-Louis-Thibault de Menonville
When did Burke release 'A Letter to a Member of the National Assembly'?	April 1791
Which French philosopher did Burke attack?	Jean-Jacques Rousseau
When did Rousseau visit Britain?	1766–7
Who did Rousseau stay with when visiting Britain?	David Hume
Fox praised revolutionary principles in a debate about which country?	Russia
What type of power did Fox think Burke was wrong about?	hereditary
Which constitution did Burke condemn on May 6, 1791?	French
Fox quoted Burke's speeches from how long ago?	fourteen and fifteen years
When did Burke leave the Whig party?	5 June 1791
Who did Burke turn down money from?	Fitzwilliam
What did Burke say 'envenoms everything it touches'?	French constitution
Who thought that Fox and Burke could still be friends?	Fox
Who thought that Fox and Burke's friendship was lost?	Burke
What did Burke want the Whigs to condemn?	the French Revolution
What did Burke publish on Aug 3, 1791?	Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs
Burke thought the French Revolution was against whose principles?	the Whig party
Burke attacked Whigs who supported what?	the French Revolution
Who thought Burke should have written in a more moderate tone?	Portland and Fitzwilliam
Who said he 'perfectly differed from Mr. Fox'?	Francis Basset
What was Francis Basset's political party?	Whig
How did Burke think the Whigs secretly felt?	galled
Who thought Burke and Fox shouldn't have made their argument public?	Charles Burney
Who did Burke write to on Nov 4, 1793?	William Windham
Which faction's uprising in La Vendee did Burke support?	royalist
Who did Burke urge to send reinforcements to La Vendee?	Henry Dundas
Where did Burke think La Vendee might lead to a march on?	Paris
What did Burke support Britain fighting against?	revolutionary France
When did Prince Charles write to Burke?	23 October
How many foreign supporters did Burke think a French royalist was worth?	twenty
What did Burke see as proof of the importance of French royalists?	La Vendée
What country was Prince Charles part of the ruling family of?	France
In what writing did Burke comment about the importance of La Vendee?	Remarks on the Policy of the Allies with Respect to France
When did Burke receive a vote of thanks?	20 June 1794
When did Burke's son die?	August 1794
What did King George III want to make Burke an Earl of?	Beaconsfield
How much money did Burke accept instead of the Earlship?	£2,500
Who attacked Burke for receiving recognition from King George III?	Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale
What was Burke's final publication?	Letters on a Regicide Peace
When was Burke's final publication?	October 1796
What did Burke think was missing from the French Revolutionary Government?	Individuality
What did Burke think were the French Revolutionary Government's only goals?	dominion and conquest
What negotiations did Burke think were appeasement?	negotiations for peace with France by the Pitt government
What did Burke think the war with France was against?	an "armed doctrine"
Burke hoped which country wouldn't be partitioned?	France
What kind of empire did Burke think the French revolutionaries wanted?	universal
Who did Burke think the war was against, rather than France as a whole?	the revolutionaries governing her
Who did Burke write to about the price of corn?	Pitt
Who introduced a bill in 1795 about minimum wage?	Samuel Whitbread
Who was the Secretary of the Board of Agriculture?	Arthur Young
Burke's unfinished letter to Arthur Young became part of what publication?	Thoughts and Details on Scarcity
When was 'Thoughts and Details on Scarcity' published?	1800
Whose ascendancy did Burke think was malignant?	Protestant
What did Burke call corporate tyranny in India?	Indianism
Which continent did Jacobinism affect?	Europe
When did Burke decide Indianism was the worst threat?	March 1796
What did Burke think was the worst threat in 1795?	Jacobinism
What did Burke think was crucial for human life?	property
What did Burke think a social hierarchy should be based on?	property
Who did Burke think a social class structure benefited?	all subjects
Who wrote that Burke "appealed to property owners"?	Christopher Hitchens
What did Hitchens think Burke supported preserving?	the ancestral and the immemorial
Who thought Burke was prophetic about the French revolution's consequences?	Philip Francis
What did Francis think Burke's writing had too much of?	passion
Who made speeches very similar to Burke's in Parliament?	William Windham
When did Windham speak against peace with France?	1801
When did Wordsworth initially attack Burke?	1793
What political party was Gladstone in?	Liberal
What countries did Gladstone think Burke was wise about?	Ireland and America
What was Cobden an activist against?	Corn Law
Lord Macaulay thought Burke was the best author since whom?	Milton
Who thought Burke was like an architect remodeling an old house instead of tearing it down?	Francis Hirst
Who thought Burke's trial of Hastings was a moral foundation of the British Empire?	Piers Brendon
What did Burke think the British Empire should be governed based on?	a plan of freedom
What did Burke call 'a smuggling adventure'?	opium trade
What did Burke think had disgraced Britain in India?	opium trade
Which church did Burke most defend?	Anglican
What did Burke think was the foundation of society?	religion
What religion was Burke's mother?	Catholic
What religion was Burke's father?	Protestant
Burke thought religion was beneficial to what besides souls?	political arrangements
What was Samoa's old name?	Western Samoa
How many administrative divisions does Samoa have?	eleven
How many little islands are there around Savai'i and Upolu?	four
What's the name of Samoa's capital?	Apia
About how long ago were the Samoan islands discovered?	3,500 years
In what year did new discoveries change the course of research on Samoan origins?	2003
In addition to linguistics and genetics, what field of study researches Samoan origins?	anthropology
One theory posits that Samoans originated from what people during the Lapita expansion period?	Austronesian
What year marks the end of the period of the terminal eastward Lapita expansion?	1,500 BCE
Who was the first missionary in Samoa?	John Williams
What English organization did John Williams belong to?	London Missionary Society
What warring ritual did Barbara A. West say the indigenous Samoans engaged in?	headhunting
What notable author who lived in Samoa called the Samoans "gentle people"?	Robert Louis Stevenson
In what year did Robert Louis Stevenson die?	1894
What country sent their military to protect their interests in Samoa?	Britain
For how many years did the civil war in Samoa last?	eight
How many contenders were vying for power in the war?	three
When did the crucial climax of the civil war occur?	March 1889
What natural disaster put an end to the war in Apia harbour?	A massive storm
What official organization was responsible for Samoa during most of the 20th century?	the Department of External Affairs
About how much of the total population of Samoa died from influenza during the epidemic?	one fifth
What country was in control of Samoa up until 1962?	New Zealand
During what years was the Samoan influenza epidemic?	1918–1919
What new label did the Department of External Affairs receive in 1943?	Department of Island Territories
What decade marked the peak of support for opposition to New Zealand's governance?	1920s
What was the name of the Mau leader who was of Samoan and Swedish descent?	Olaf Frederick Nelson
What philosophy characterized the Mau resistance?	non-violent philosophy
What title was given to the Mau's elected leader, Tupua Tamasese Lealofi?	High Chief
On what date did the Mau demonstrate on the streets of Apia?	28 December 1929
What kind of weapon was used against the Mau demonstrators?	Lewis machine gun
Was Chief Tamasese wounded or killed during the demonstration?	killed
What was the phrase the Mau's chief shouted to try to calm his people?	"Peace, Samoa"
Besides Chief Tamasese, how many Mau died as a result of the violence that erupted on that day?	Ten
What do Samoans call the historical day of the Mau demonstration?	Black Saturday
What act gave Samoa independence?	New Zealand Western Samoa Act 1961
What exact date did Samoan independence go into effect?	1 January 1962
What's the name of the agreement that ended with the start of Samoa's independence from New Zealand?	Trusteeship Agreement
Where was Samoa in the order of small-island countries in their region declaring independence?	first
On what date do Samoans celebrate their independence from New Zealand?	1 June
What office was held by Fiame Mata'afa Faumuina Mulinu'u II?	Prime Minister
What was the term of office for Samoa's first joint heads of state?	life
What year did the first of the two heads of state die?	1963
Who was the head of state in Samoa in 2006?	Malietoa Tanumafili II
Before becoming a de facto parliamentary republic, what form of government did Samoa have?	constitutional monarchy
What do Samoans call their legislative body?	the Fono
How many Fono members are there?	49
How many of the members of the Fono are elected to office?	Forty-seven
What percentage of female matais are there in Samoa?	5%
What position in government is chosen by Fono majority vote?	prime minister
What district is Leulumoega the capital of?	A'ana
What is the Samoan word for the "House of Nine" in Leulumoega?	Faleiva
What is A'ana's paramount title?	the TuiA'ana
What's the paramount title of the Tuamasaga district?	Malietoa
In what town does the FaleTuamasaga conduct business?	Afega
What natural process formed the land masses that would become the Samoan islands?	vulcanism
Which of the Samoan islands has active volcanoes?	Savai'i
What's the name of the highest peak in Samoa?	Mt Silisili,
How many meters is 6,096 feet?	1858
What volcano created the Saleaula lava fields?	Mt Matavanu
What institution is in charge of Samoa's currency?	Central Bank of Samoa
In addition to agriculture, what industry historically supported Samoa's local economy?	fishing
What fruit juice is a major Samoan export?	noni
What portion of Samoa works in agriculture?	two-thirds
What kind of oil does Samoa export?	coconut
In which sector would the government of Samoa like to see deregulation?	financial
The flexibility of what segment could support economic growth in Samoa?	the labour market
What infrastructure has benefited greatly from capital investment?	hotel infrastructure
What's the name of the team-up between Samoa and Virgin Australia?	Virgin Samoa
Is Samoa helped or hurt by political upheaval in the countries around them?	helped
What was Samoa's major production product before the Germans arrived?	copra
What product significantly dropped in price at the end of World War I?	natural rubber
What did Samoa start growing more of to make up for the lost value of rubber?	bananas
Which country's government wanted Samoa to grow bananas for them?	New Zealand
Besides Melanesia, which country sent many workers for the cocoa and rubber plantations in Samoa?	China
What is copra?	dried coconut meat
How many metric tons of bananas and copra does Samoa produce each year?	13,000 to 15,000
What pest is the greatest threat to Samoan crops?	rhinoceros beetle
Are the cocoa beans grown in Samoa high or low quality?	high quality
What company produces more coffee than any other in Samoa?	WSTEC
What's the most popular church in Samoa?	Christian Congregational Church of Samoa
What percentage of Samoa's population is Mormon?	7.6%
Where is the Bahá'í place of worship located in Samoa?	Tiapapata
What Samoan Head of State might have worshiped at the Bahá'í House of Worship?	His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II
What church's religion does 19.4% of the Samoan population practice?	Roman Catholic
What religion is practiced by the vast majority of Samoans?	Christianity
What word that means human relationships is at the core of Samoa's culture?	vāfealoa'i
What word is used in Samoa to mean "respect"?	fa'aaloalo
What percentage of Samoans call themselves Christians?	98%
What does "siva" mean in Samoan?	dance
What's the name of the traditional Samoan dance performed by synchronized rows of dancers?	sasa
What is the name of the Samoan dance only men can perform?	fa'ataupati
What are pates?	wooden drums
The "slap dance" probably mimics the movements of Samoans trying to rid themselves of what creatures?	insects
What Samoan author write Flying Fox in Freedom Tree?	Albert Wendt
In what country was Flying Fox in Freedom Tree made into a feature film?	New Zealand
Which Wendt novel was made into a film directed by Paul Maunder?	Sons for the Return Home
Who won a Commonwealth Writers' Prize for fiction for her book "Where We Once Belonged"?	Sia Figiel
What type of literature does Tusiata Avia write?	poetry
What popular Samoan band has a number in its name?	The Five Stars
What song covered by a Samoan group was a 1974 number one in New Zealand?	Sweet Inspiration
What award did King Kapisi win for his song Reverse Resistance?	New Zealand APRA Silver Scroll Award
Which hip hop artist filmed a music video for his song Suamalie in Samoa?	Tha Feelstyle
What year did King Kapisi become the first hip hop artist to win an APRA Silver Scroll?	1999
What did Lemi Ponifasio name his dance company?	MAU
What genre of music greatly influenced the culture in Samoa?	Hip hop
What Samoan choreographer founded Black Grace?	Neil Ieremia
What professor at the University in Hawaii at Manoa wrote about the relationships between hip hop, dance, and traditional Samoan culture?	Katerina Martina Teaiwa
Among what age group in Samoa is hip hop and dance most popular?	youths
Who made the film O Tamaiti?	Sima Urale
What was Sima Urale's first feature-length production?	Apron Strings
What movie was the first ever all-Samoan production?	The Orator
Who wrote and directed The Orator?	Tusi Tamasese
In what year did Apron Strings star as the opening film of the NZ International Film Festival?	2008
What do Samoans affectionately call their national rugby team?	Manu Samoa
The Samoan team hasn't missed a Rugby World Cup since what year?	1991
What organization governs the Samoan rugby team?	Samoa Rugby Football Union
What team that went on to become World Cup champions was almost bested by Manu Samoa in 2003?	England
In what year did Manu Samoa make it to the second round of the World Cup?	1999
In what competition did the Samoan rugby team reach the quarter finals in 2013?	Rugby League World Cup
Apart from Australia, in what country other than Samoa might Samoan rugby players live?	New Zealand
What Samoan rugby player signed to London Irish rugby club?	Setima Sa
How many teams played in the 2011 domestic Samoan rugby league competition?	10
What rugby club did Maurie Fa'asavalu play for?	St Helens
On What date was Pope Paul VI born?	26 September 1897
On what date did Pope Paul VI die?	6 August 1978)
In what year did Pope Paul VI close the Second Vatican Counsel?	1965
When was Pope Paul VI elected as Pope?	21 June 1963
What was Pope Paul VI's first name at birth?	Giovanni
What type of devotee was Pope Paul VI?	Marian
What name had not been used for a Pope since the year 1605?	"Paul"
In what year was the name "Paul" last used as a pontifical name before Pope Paul VI became Pope?	1605
What did Pope Paul VI re-convene when he became Pope?	the Second Vatican Council
What publication promoted Pope Paul VI's views on abortion?	encyclical Humanae vitae
In what Italian province was Giovanni Battista Montini born?	Brescia, Lombardy
In what Italian village was Giovanni Battista Montini born?	Concesio
What political organization was Giovanni's father a member of?	Italian Parliament
How many brothers did Giovanni have?	two
What was Giovanni's mother descended from?	rural nobility
In what year did Montini enter the Catholic seminary to become a priest?	1916
In what field did Montini obtain a doctorate in?	Canon Law
In what city did Montini finish his doctoral studies?	Milan
At what age did Montini enter the Secretariat of state?	twenty-five
Where did Montini continue to study at the request of Giuseppe Pizzardo?	Accademia dei Nobili Ecclesiastici
What political problem did Montini feel he needed to address as a diplomat in Poland?	excessive nationalism
How did Montini see the nationalism of Poland as a problem?	treats foreigners as enemies
What humanitarian concept did Montini see nationalism as violating?	common frontiers
What type of political stability was compromised as a result of violent nationalism?	Peace
Where was Montini happy to return to after his tenure in Poland?	Rome
What type of natural ability helped Montini in his career in the Roman Curia?	organisational skills
When was Paccelli elected to the papacy?	1939
With whom did Montini have a relationship with that eventually groomed him for the papacy?	Pacelli
Where did Montini teach history?	Papal Academy for Diplomats
Who was Montini's mentor that eventually became a Cardinal?	Giuseppe Pizzardo
What department did Montini oversee when he worked with the Secretariat of State?	ordinary affairs
What organization did Montini, Maglione and Tardini belong to?	Vatican's State Department
What role did Montini fill for Pius XII?	Private Secretary
What did Montini take charge of responding to on behalf of Pius XII?	letters
During what time was Montini responsible for the communications of the Vatican?	war years
In what year was the office for information for prisoners and refugees founded?	1939
How many inquiries did Mintini receive regarding missing persons ?	ten million
What was Montini accused of being by the Italian government?	politician
With whom did Montini feel he had a brother like connection to?	Pope Pius XII
What Italian Prime Minister attacked Montini for his political stances?	Mussolini
Who requested Montini become involved in the Church Asylum movement?	Pius XII
What war time group did the Vatican and Papal residence open their doors to?	refugees
How many people lived at Castel Gofolfo during the war?	15,000
What organization did Montini form with other fellow officials to help refugees?	Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza
What did Montini strive to reestablish to help persecuted Jews and allied soldiers?	Church Asylum
In what year did Pius XII deliver a radio address announcing Montini's papal appointment?	1954
On what date did Montini become the archbishop of Milan?	5 January
In what year did Montini become the archbishop of the Cathedral of Milan?	1955
Where was Pius XII when he announced Montini's appointment as archbishop?	his sick-bed
To what Italian city was Montini appointed archbishop?	Milan
What group did Montini oppose reforming?	Ecumenical Council
In what year was Montini appointed to the Central Preparatory Commission?	1961
Where did the Pope ask Cardinal Montini to live?	Vatican
What did Montini avoid as a member of the Commission for Extraordinary Affairs?	debates
What illness had the Pope contracted?	cancer
What type of political viewpoint was Montini known for as a member of the Catholic leadership?	progressive
What part of Catholic ministry did Montini seek to reform?	pastoral care
What type of media did Montini use to advertise the church's sermons to the people of Milan?	posters
How many "voices" did Montini's posters claim the people of Milan would hear?	1,000
From the 10 of NOvember to the 24 of November how many sermons were actually delivered to the Italian people?	7,000
To whom did Montini speak as an archbishop in the year 1957?	Second World Congress of Lay Apostolate
According to Montini was does the term apostolate mean?	love
How many nations did Montini hope to unify as Pro-secretary?	58
When was Montini's first meeting addressing the unification of Catholic lay followers?	1951
What role was Montini not considered a likely candidate for?	pope
What had Montini yet to become?	a cardinal,
Who was elected pope in 1958?	Angelo Roncalli
When did Montini finally become a cardinal?	15 December 1958
What doicese did Montini become cardinal of?	Ss. Silvestro e Martino
What country did Montini visit as Cardinal?	Africa
In what year did Montini travel to visit Africa as a cardinal?	1962
How many foreign trips did Montini make as Cardinal?	fifteen
In what year did Montini visit the United States?	1960
Where did Montini like to use as a retreat as a cardinal?	Engelberg Abbey
What role was Montini not perceived to fill unlike some of his fellow cardinals?	reformer
In what year did Pope John XXIII die?	1963
What role did Pope John XXIII's death precipitate the election of?	pope
What illness caused the death of Pope John XXIII	stomach cancer
What organization did the church expect Montini to continue?	Second Vatican Council
What did Paul VI donate to the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception ?	Papal Tiara
What group gave Paul VI his Papal tiara?	Archdiocese of Milan
Where is the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception located?	Washington, DC
Who was the last pope to be crowned?	Paul VI
What ceremony had Paul VI left in place in in the 1975 apostolic constitution?	Papal Coronation
Who was President of the Christian Unity Secretariat?	Cardinal Augustin Bea
What did Paul VI believe in keeping friendly to people of other Christian faiths?	Council language
Who insisted that Protestant and Orthodox Christians be invited to all Counsel meetings?	Pope John XXIII
Which cardinal became heavily engaged in the passage of Nostra aetate?	Cardinal Augustin Bea
Which Vatican strove to avoid offending other Christian faiths with counsel session language?	Vatican II
What did Paul VI want to keep open with the modern world and people from all walks of life?	a dialogue
How many days after Paul VI election did he announce he would continue the Vatican II?	Six
On what date was Vatican II re convened?	29 September
Six days after he was elected, what did Paul VI announce he would continue?	Vatican II
What did Paul want to reform as a newly elected pope?	Canon Law
What edict did Pope Pius XXIII issue regarding the body of Christ?	Mystici corporis
How is the body of Christ regarded by Catholic liturgy?	mystical
What type of language did Paul VI want to the church to relay dogma in?	simple
From what area were bishops prevented from attending the ecumenical meeting of Paul VI?	the east
What did Paul VI ask other Christian faiths forgiveness for?	separation
What topic did Paul VI see as the most important to the church counsel?	Church
What did the American Counsel of Bishops rally for?	religious freedom
What Saint did Paul VI denote as mother of the Catholic church?	Mary
Who did Paul VI feel was most important in the Catholic Hierarchy?	papacy
In what year did Paul VI formally appoint Mary as mother of the Catholic church?	1964
What did Paul VI enact between the third and fourth ecumenical sessions?	reforms
What does the Catholic church considered "mixed" in a "mixed marriage"?	faiths
What is celebrated in the Catholic calendar the 8 of December?	the Feast of the Immaculate Conception.
In what year was Paul Vi's final counsel session?	1965
With whom did Paul VI celebrate surviving persecution in other countries?	bishops
For whom did Paul VI work for from 1922 to 1954?	Roman Curia
In what year did Paul VI issue a regulation?	1968
With whom did Paul VI issue a regulation in 1968?	Pontificalis Domus
What did Paul Vi's reforms reduce in the Curia?	bureaucracy
Whose representation was enlarged through reforms in the Curia?	non-Italians
At what age were cardinals restricted by Paul Vi from participating in conclaves?	eighty
At what age were bishops required to retire by Paul VI?	75
At what age were cardinals subsequently required to retire in an edict issued in 1970?	75
What did Paul VI over hall with age and retirement restrictions?	papal elections
When was Paul Vi's Ecclesiae Sanctae issued?	1966
What language was traditionally used in Roman Catholic services?	Latin
What were revised between 1951 and 1955?	Easter liturgies
What was re instated to the Easter liturgy by reform?	Easter Triduum
What type of service did Paul Vi announce reformed in 1969?	Mass
How many new prayers were included in the official mass reforms of 1969?	three
What type of language did Paul Vi's reforms approve for use in the Catholic mass?	vernacular
How old was the mass reformed by Paul VI?	400-year
What type of music was used in traditional mass?	Gregorian Chant
Who unified two previous popes views of the Roman Catholic Mass?	Pope Benedict XVI
In what year were the various versions of the Catholic mass finally synthesized?	2007
Who established the Pontifical Council for Culture?	Pope John Paul II
What organization did Paul VI create to address non believers by the church?	Secretariat for non-Christians
What was the Secretariat for non-believers eventually renamed?	Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue
What Prime Minister did Paul VI attempt to interact with in order to help Catholics in Communist countries?	Andrei Gromyko
What is celebrated by the Catholic church on January 1 of every year?	peace day
In what year was pre and extra marital sex outlawed by the Catholic church?	1976
Who was accused of being a homosexual in 1976?	Montini
Who brought allegations of Montini's homosexuality?	Roger Peyrefitte
On what date did Montini publicly address charges of homosexuality?	April 18
Who was Montini's alleged lover?	Paolo Carlini
How many continents did Paul Vi visit as pope?	six
What was Paul Vi's nickname during his papacy?	the Pilgrim Pope
In what year did Paul VI journey to the Holy Land?	1964
In what country was an assignation attempt made on the life of Paul VI?	Manila
Who organized Paul Vi's visit to Manila?	Msgr. Paul Marcinkus
What group did Paul VI address in New York in 1965?	United Nations
Who was the first pope to visit the United States?	Pope Paul VI
To whom did Paul VI give a diamond cross and ring in hopes it would raise funds to help people globally?	United Nations
What did Paul VI ask the UN to promote during the Vietnam war?	peace
What US president was in office when Paul VI visited America for the first time?	President Johnson
What number doubled during Paul Vi's papacy?	foreign embassies
Who did Paul Vi want to maintain a continuing dialogue with?	nations
What document states that the Catholic church is not subject to any particlar government?	Gaudium et spes
Who did the church retain the right to elect without interference from the state in its constitutional document?	bishops
What organization officially outlined the church's relationship to state?	Vatican II
What catholic document compares the Catholic church to the body of Christ?	Ecclesiam suam
What document declares that the Roman Catholic church lives within the body of Christ?	Lumen Gentium
What was being celebrated in the Catholic calendar when the Eccelsiam suam was given in 1964?	Feast of the Transfiguration
On what date is the Feat of Transfiguration celebrated?	6 August
In what city  is the cathedral of St Peter's  located?	Rome
What is considered an ideal state for priests in the Catholic church?	Celibacy
What is seen as symbolizing the reality of living in the modern world as Roman Catholic priest?	Celibacy
What document  of 1967 promotes the church's stance of celibacy in the priesthood?	Sacerdotalis caelibatus
What type of law locked down the Catholic church's stance on celibacy in the priesthood?	Canon
In what year was Canon Law issued affirming celibacy in the priesthood?	1983
Which one of Paul Vi's encyclicals best known in Catholic history?	Humanae vitae
What did Paul VI's Humanae Vitae condemn?	artificial birth control
What type of birth control is condemned by the Catholic church?	artificial
How many encyclicals did Paul VI publish?	eight
What does Humanae Vitae mean?	Of Human Life
According to Paul VI  to whom are a  man and woman in union with besides each other?	God
What does God contribute to a married couple's child?	soul
Who is considered to be love?	God
From whom is married love generated?	God
What type of relations did Paul VI's Humanae VItae discuss?	marital
Who was president of the World Bank in 1968?	Robert McNamara
What were developing countries encouraged to allow access to by the World Bank?	birth control
In what country did doctors call the World Bank's offer of resources in exchange for liberal birth control policies "insulting"?	Bolivia
Who said Columbia did not want American aid if it required changing the Catholic church's stance on birth control?	Cardinal archbishop Aníbal Muñoz Duque
What country did Cardinal archbishop Anlbal Munoz Duque represent?	Colombia
To whom did Paul VI tell "not to be afraid" when the church released its statement on birth control?	Edouard Gagnon
What did Paul VI declare he would be seen as in 25 years?	prophet
To which pope can the Evangelium Vitae be attributed to?	Pope John Paul II
Which pope affirmed Paul VI Humanae Vitae?	Pope John Paul II
To what did Western Europe and the United States demonstrate a negative response?	the encyclical
In what city did the pope encourage visits from Catholics from other countries?	Rome
In how many ways did Paul VI contribute to an ecumenical dialogue between Catholics?	two
In Paul VI's view what does the Catholic ecumenical dialogue require from someone?	whole person
How much of the person is needed to fully engage in a ecumenical dialogue according to Paul VI?	whole
To what historical figure can the words "Do you love me more" be attributed?	Christ
What statement addressed the relationship of Italy to Greece in the Catholic church?	Catholic-Orthodox Joint declaration of 1965
In what year was the Catholic-Orthodox joint declaration read?	1965
In what city was the Catholic-Orthodox joint declaration read?	Rome
Who visited the Vatican in May of 1973 in an effort to negotiate Orthodox and Catholic relations?	Coptic Patriarch Shenouda III
How many times did Coptic Patriarch Shenouda III meet with Paul VI in 1973?	three
Who was the first pope to meet with an Anglican Archbishop as an official Head of Church since 1960?	Paul VI
Who was Archbishop of Canterbury during Paul VI papacy?	Michael Ramsey
How many times did Archbishop Ramsey meet with Paul VI?	three
What center did Archbishop Ramsey open in Rome to improve Anglican and Catholic relations?	Anglican Centre
In what Italian center was the Anglican center opened in by Archbishop Ramsey?	Rome
What did the Cardinal Augustin Bea's Secretariat promote?	Christian Unity
What group condemned mixed faith marriages?	Congregation of Faith
To what type of non Catholic denomination was Paul VI considered to be a great ally of?	Anglican
Which church did Paul VI call "our beloved sister church"?	Anglican Church
Who described the Anglican church as "our beloved sister Church"?	Paul VI
In what year was a group created to work with the World Council of Churches to increase dialogue between Catholic Christians and other Christian denominations?	1965
In what year did the World Council of Churches meet in Uppsala, Sweden?	1968
What type of theologians did the World Council of Churches decide to include in their committees?	Catholic
In what country did the World Council of Churches meet in 1968?	Sweden
Whose backing did the World Council of Churches require Catholic theologians serving on joint committees to have?	Vatican
Which protestants were the first to reach out to the Catholic church in 1964 in Iceland?	Lutherans
In what year did The Catholic church begin diplomatic relations with the Methodist church?	1965
In what year did the Catholic church begin diplomatic relations with the Lutheran church?	1964
Who was president of the World Council of Churches during the 450th anniversary of the Reformation?	Fredrik A. Schiotz
To whom did Schiotz state one should be grateful for the Reformation?	God
Who was Paul VI in favor of cooperating with in the translation of the bible?	Protestant Bible societies
Who asked Paul VI for permission to cooperate with Protestants to translate the bible?	Cardinal Augustin Bea
In what year did Paul VI officially declare his support of a cross faith translation of the bible?	1967
What group of Christians did Paul VI support and approve of cooperation with?	Protestants
How many future popes did Paul VI create first as cardinals?	three
Who was made a cardinal by Paul VI on June 27 1977?	Joseph Ratzinger
What future pope was made a cardinal by Paul VI on June 26, 1967?	Karol Wojtyła
In what year did Paul VI die?	1978
What name did Albino Luciani take as a pope?	John Paul I
Where was Paul VI headed to on July 14, 1978?	Castel Gandolfo
What was considered to be the papal summer residence?	Castel Gandolfo
Who was the Italian Prime Minister in July of 1978?	Sandro Pertini
For how long did an ailing Paul VI meet with Sandro Pertini in 1978?	two hours
What animals did Paul VI consider to be "the most beautiful animals God ever created"?	horses
In what year was Paul VI beautified?	2014
On what day was Paul VI born?	26 September
Whose liturgical feast is celebrated on the 26th of September?	Paul VI
On what day was the beautification ceremony performed for Paul VI?	19 October
What was attributed to Paul VI and officially approved on May 9, 2014?	A miracle
According to the Vatican who could the healing of an unborn child be attributed to in the 1990's?	pontiff
Who approved the miracle of Paul VI?	Pope Francis
What group was responsible for recognizing Paul Vi's miracle?	Congregation for the Causes of Saints
What is the process called that acknowledges sainthood?	beatification
What magazine broke the story of Paul VI pending saint hood?	Credere
What type of miracle was attributed to Pope Paul VI?	healing
What group declared the healing a miracle by Paul VI?	The Congregation for the Causes of Saints
Who needed to approve the Congregation for the Causes of Saints conclusion that Paul VI performed a miracle?	pope
Who was required to sign a decree declaring Paul VI a saint?	Pope Francis
What was Pius XII accused of not condemning?	Holocaust
Whose theology did Paul VI continue to propagate during his papacy?	Pius XII
What type of work did Paul Vi finish that had been started by two previous popes?	reform
On which anniversary of his Humanae Vitae did Paul VI reconfirm the beliefs set forth by the Humanae Vitae?	tenth
Which pope that preceded Paul VI was noted for his warmth and humor?	John XXIII
Who did Paul VI refuse to excommunicate?	opponents
What did many other Catholics and Christians consider Paul VI reforms to be?	controversial
To what can the dissent among Catholics be attributed to during Paul VI's papacy?	theological freedoms
What was the reintroduction of divorced Catholics into the church considered to be by the Council?	taboo
How many Synod of Bishops took place during Paul VI's papacy?	five
What conferences became a requirement after Vatican II?	National Bishop Conferences
What political movement was Paul VI criticized for having a relationship with?	Communism
The Council, under Paul VI, decided whom could make decisions independently of Rome?	Bishops
How many of his bishop's decisions did Paul VI end up enacting?	all
How long did Paul VI live for after experiencing a massive heart attack in 1978?	three hours
At what time did Paul VI die?	21:41
On what day did Paul VI die?	6 August
From where did Paul VI conduct mass on the day of his death?	bed
What residence was the Paul VI staying in on the day of his death?	Castel Gandolfo
How many cardinals were from Africa in 1976?	five
What country did Cardinal Eduardo Francisco Pironi represent?	Argentina
What country did Cardinal Araujo Sales represent?	Brazil
What group's committees did Paul VI declare both bishops and cardinals could participate in?	Roman Curia
What type of clothing did Paul VI enact reform on?	regal vestments
What type of theatrical uniforms did Paul VI eradicate from the Vatican?	army
Who was the first pope to visit five continents?	Paul VI
Where did Paul Vi turn the focus of the church toward during his papacy?	world
What group of clergy did Paul VI include in Vatican decision making that had previously been denied influence in this realm?	bishops
What papal statement under Paul VI opened the Vatican doors to global influences?	motu proprio Pro Comperto Sane
For which country did George VI stop using the title Emperor but continue to use the title of King?	India
In what month and year did George VI discontinue using the title Emperor of India?	June 1948
In 1949 what country solely proclaimed independence from the Commonwealth?	Ireland
What Child of George VI ascended the throne?	Elizabeth
What was the name used after the dissolution of the British Empire?	Commonwealth of Nations
What year was Britain and allies victorious in the war?	1945
When did India and Pakistan gain independence?	1947
What title did George have in India prior to 1948?	Emperor of India
What did Ireland declare itself in 1950?	republic
What month and day was the death of Prince Albert?	14 December
Who was Prince Albert's great grandmother?	Queen Victoria
What was Prince Albert's nickname?	Bertie
In which church was Prince Albert baptized?	St. Mary Magdalene's Church
Which ship did Alber train on in 1913?	HMS Cumberland
How many months did Albert spend in the Mediterranean in 1913?	three months
Which war did Albert serve in?	First World War
Who gave Albert the nickname of "Mr Johnson"?	fellow officers
What was the cause of Albert's ill health in 1917?	duodenal ulcer
What position was Albert appointed at Cranwell?	Officer in Charge of Boys at the Royal Naval Air Service
Which number squadron was Albert appointed commanding officer in 1918?	4
What year did Albert become a RAF pilot?	1919
Who was the king of Belgium  in 1918?	King Albert
What did Albert study in Trinity College?	history, economics and civics
What was Albert's nickname as he toured coal mines, factories, and railyards?	Industrial Prince
Who is Albert's older brother?	Edward
Which sport was Albert proficient at?	tennis
Which society was Albert the president of?	Industrial Welfare Society
Who was Albert infatuated with?	Sheila, Lady Loughborough
Who was the youngest daughter of Earl and Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne?	Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon
How many times did Elizabeth reject Albert's proposal?	twice
Who were royals usually expected to marry?	fellow royals
Why did Albert fear speaking in public?	his stammer
Who helped Albert improve in public speaking?	Lionel Logue
What did Albert play partnered with a black man?	doubles tennis
What did the Duke open in Australia in 1927?	Parliament House
What was Elizabeth's nickname?	Lilibet
Who were the Duke and Duchess of York's children?	Elizabeth (called "Lilibet" by the family), and Margaret
What was the name of Duke of York's London residence?	145 Piccadilly
Who advised against the Duke becoming the Governor General of Canada?	J. H. Thomas
What position did J. H. Thomas hold?	Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs
Why was Albert the heir presumptive to the throne?	Edward was unmarried and had no children
What was wrong with Edward marrying Wallis Simpson?	divorced woman with two living ex-husbands
What did Edward do to marry Wallis Simpson?	abdication
Who is Edward's mother?	Queen Mary
How did Edward react when he became heir to the throne?	broke down and sobbed like a child
What is the Oireachtas?	the parliament of the Irish Free State
What did the Oireachtas remove from the Irish constitution?	all direct mention of the monarch
Which act gave the monarch limited authority in Ireland?	External Relations Act
What day did the Oireachtas pass an act that started to establish Ireland as a republic?	day of the abdication
What regnal name did Albert adopt?	George VI
What title did Albert give Edward?	His Royal Highness The Duke of Windsor
What did Albert bestow onto his wife on his 41st birthday?	the Order of the Garter
Which two residences did Albert buy from Edward?	Balmoral Castle and Sandringham House
What day did George VI become coronated?	12 May 1937
Who attended the coronation that was a break from tradition?	Queen Mary
How many overseas tours happened after the coronation to France and North America?	Two
In which city are Durbars usually held?	Delhi
Which prime minister was the King constitutionally bound to support?	Neville Chamberlain
Which agreement was signed in 1938?	Munich Agreement
The balcony in which palace is famous for being where the royal family makes appearances?	Buckingham Palace
Which historian commented that the king's act in associating with Chamberlain as unconstitutional?	John Grigg
Which two countries did the King and Queen tour in 1939?	Canada and the United States
Who was the prime minister of Canada in 1939?	William Lyon Mackenzie King
What title was the king and queen presented with when touring Canada?	King and Queen of Canada
What was Roper's position?	U.S. Ambassador to Canada
What did the Statute of Westminster do?	gave full sovereignty to the British Dominions
What kind of tendencies did North America have?	isolationist tendencies
Who was George's predecessor?	Edward VIII
Who was the President of the United States in 1939?	President Franklin D. Roosevelt
Which fair was happening in New York in 1939?	1939 New York World's Fair
Against who did Britain declare war against in 1939?	Nazi Germany
Which city did the king and queen stay in even with the bombing threats?	London
How many people died on the first German raid on London?	one thousand civilians
What year did the King's brother die in service?	1942
Who was Winston Churchill's predecessor?	Neville Chamberlain
What position did Churchill hold?	Prime Minister
What day of the week did Churchill and the King meet?	Tuesday
Who did Churchill appoint to Cabinet that the King did not like?	Lord Beaverbrook
What country did the King and Queen visit in July 1944?	Italy
When did the King and Queen visit North Africa and Malta?	June 1943
What improved when the King and Queen visited different military sites?	morale
What is the association of independent states in Britain called?	the Commonwealth
What two dominions did British India become?	India and Pakistan
What country left the Commonwealth in January 1948?	Burma
What year was the Republic of Ireland formed?	1949
Who was the Prime Minister of South Africa in 1947?	Jan Smuts
What were the King's South African bodyguards referred as?	the Gestapo
Who instructed the King to only shake hands with whites in South Africa?	South African government
What kind of cancer did the King develop?	lung cancer
What developed in the King's right leg that prevented him from touring Australia?	arterial blockage
What treatment helped prevent the loss of the King's right leg?	right lumbar sympathectomy
Who was the King's heir presumptive?	Elizabeth
Who was Elizabeth's spouse?	Duke of Edinburgh
What church did the King's funeral take place on the 15th?	Windsor Castle
What year did Queen Elizabeth die?	2002
What year did Princess Margaret die?	2002
In which chapel does King George's body lie in today?	King George VI Memorial Chapel
How high was public faith in the monarchy when King George assumed the throne?	low
What position did George Hardie hold?	Labour Member of Parliament
Who was George VI's brother?	Edward
What is the largest rating of an electric motor?	100 megawatts
What is the main example of a DC power source?	batteries
What does AC stand for?	alternating current
What does DC stand for?	direct current
In what device are small motors commonly found?	electric watches
Who created the first electrostatic device?	Andrew Gordon
Who discovered the principles of magnetic and electric interactions?	André-Marie Ampère
In what year did Faraday convert electrical energy into mechanical energy?	1821
What toxic substance originally served the function of brine in primitive motors?	mercury
In what year did Jedlik begin experimenting with electromagnetism?	1827
Besides the stator and the communicator, what is an element of a DC motor?	rotor
What did Jedlik call his earliest devices?	electromagnetic self-rotors
What discovery solved the problem of continuous rotation?	commutator
What did Jedlik's improved device eliminate the need for?	permanent magnets
When were developers competing with Jacobi able to match his accomplishments?	1839/40
What was Jacobi's improved motor used to propel?	boat
Who created the first real electric motor?	Moritz von Jacobi
Who broke the world record set by Jacobi's first motor?	Jacobi himself
How long did it take for Jacobi's first world record to be broken?	four years
Who developed the first mnotor capable of being used for machinery?	William Sturgeon
Which inventor went bankrupt?	Thomas Davenport
What was the main problem with applying early electric motors to industry?	the high cost of primary battery power
What necessary technical development had yet to occur to make electric motors useful?	electricity distribution
How fast did Sturgeon and Davenport's motors run?	600 revolutions per minute
What made Pacinotti's motor an important advancement?	non-fluctuating current
Who created a motor similar to Pacinotti?	Zénobe Gramme
How far from each other were the motors in Gramme's demonstrations?	2 km
Besides a motor, what did Gramme use the other device for?	generator
In what two cities did Gramme conduct his demonstrations?	Vienna and Philadelphia
What needs to exist between the rotor and stator for increased efficiency?	small air gap
Which inventor created the first useful DC motor?	Frank Julian Sprague
What was the transportation advancement made possible by Sprague's designs?	electric trolley system
What was the name of Chicago's first electric trolley system?	South Side Elevated Railway
Who did Sprague work for early in his career?	Thomas Edison
How much energy do electric motors use in the modern United States?	more than half
In what domain did electric motors reduce reliance on humans and animals?	agriculture
Besides shafts, belts and compressed air, what did electric motors reduce the need for?	hydraulic pressure
Where did electric motors improve convenience and safety?	in the home
Who built the first induction motor?	Walter Baily
What type of power were early motors unable to use?	AC
Who bought Tesla's patents?	George Westinghouse
For what application was Tesla's motor first used?	mining
What's another name for the bar-winding-rotor?	squirrel-cage
What would a rotor do without current reversal?	brake to a stop
What switches the input of most DC motors?	commutator
From where is current to the motor supplied?	stationary brushes
What two motor types are ascendant today?	externally commutated induction and permanent-magnet
What does the communicator do?	reverses the flow of current in the rotor windings
What type of current is featured in brushed DC motors?	AC
Where do brushes get their power?	external
What is the main feature of the shaft in a commutated DC motor?	rotating
Current flowing to create a temporary magent is called what?	electromagnet
What rotates the motor shaft?	force between the two magnetic fields
What element of the motor keeps the poles from alligning?	commutator
What non-motor device demonstrates why a commutator is needed?	compass
How is RFI generated?	sparking
What do brushes need to be in contact with?	commutator
What is created by contact between parts of the motor?	friction
What does sparking limit?	maximum speed
What motor components most need replacement and maintenance?	Brushes
What are large brushes favorable for?	motor output
Whate are small brushes favorable for?	speed
What type of brushes are cheapest?	small
How can the speed of larger brushes be increased?	Stiffer brush springs
Besides wear, what is a downside of stiff brush springs?	lower efficiency
What can a PM motor not be adjusted for?	speed control
What is another name for PM fields?	stators
What design feature does a PM motor lack?	field winding
What do field windings provide?	flux
Why do miniature PM motors use high energy magnets?	To minimize overall weight and size
What are high energy magnets typically made of?	neodymium-iron-boron alloy
What does the outer housing of a miniature motor resemble?	steel tube
How do PMs rate against other types of electric motors?	least competitive
What is the typical maximum range of universal motors?	1000 watts
What type of motor was used in trailway traction applications?	universal
What is the result of using AC power on a DC motor?	efficiency losses
What were universal motor pole pieces constructed from?	solid (un-laminated) iron
What kind of motor can employ both AC and DC?	universal
What component of a universal motor is most likely to fail?	commutator
When is torque most important in universal motor applications?	starting
Switching the field winding in washing machines causes the drum to agitate how?	forwards and in reverse
How is stepped speed control achieved?	Multiple taps on the field coil provide
At around what RMP do weed trimmer motors operate?	10,000
At around what RMP do miniature grinders operate?	30,000
What type of motor can universal motors operate much faster than?	SCIMs
What attributes make universal motors desireable for consumer applications like hair dryers?	high speed and light weight
What determines the properties of speed and torque?	shape of the rotor bars
At high speed, where is the most current?	interior of the winding
Is the current frequency higher or lower at high speed?	lower
Changing the shapes of the bars creates what?	variable resistance
Where can variable resistance be created?	rotor circuit
Where might a resistor be attached?	rotor circuit
What can a resistor control?	motor speed
How might wasted power be salvaged?	inverter or separate motor-generator
From where may a converter be fed?	rotor circuit
What will a motor do if the load is reduced?	speed up
What will a motor do if the load is increased?	slow down
Where are slip losses dissipated?	secondary resistors
How efficient is such a design?	very poor
How are torque motors used in computer gaming?	feedback steering wheels
A torque motor at low voltage provides what?	constant light tension
A torque motor at high voltage provides what?	higher torque
In a tape drive, what is not needed if a torque motor is used?	gears or clutches
What element of a combustion engine does a governor monitor?	electrical pulses
What is a governor connected to?	return spring
What kinds of adjustments would a governor make?	small
What would a governor do to a too-fast running engine?	reduce the current being applied to the motor
How much slip does a synchronous motor have?	zero
How does an induction motor produce torque?	slip
Whithout rotor windings, how must a Hammond clock be started?	manually
How can a synchronous motor be made more like an induction motor?	DC field
How is current brought to the rotor in a synchronous motor?	Slip rings and brushes
What do hysteresis synchronous motors' rotors do when slip rate decreases?	becomes temporarily magnetized
When in operation, what do hysteresis synchronous motors poles do?	stay in place
What do hysteresis synchronous motors resemble at startup?	induction motors
How can a hysteresis synchronous motor's rotor be described?	a smooth cylinder
What do the distributed poles of a hysteresis synchronous motor resemble?	PMSM
What type of motor has two independent multiphase winding sets?	Doubly fed electric motors
What advanage do independent multiphase winding sets have?	contribute active (i.e., working) power to the energy conversion process
What is one of the independent multiphase winding sets configured for?	variable speed operation
Doubly fed motors have what advantage over single fed?	twice the constant torque speed range
A coreless DC motor is distinguished by what?	rapid acceleration
What is absent in a coreless DC motor?	iron core
What forms can the rotor take?	winding-filled cylinder, or a self-supporting structure
What is a likely problem of coreless DC motors?	Overheating
How does a coreless rotor compare to traditional rotors in terms of weight?	lighter
What advantage does a coreless rotor have over traditional variants?	accelerate much more rapidly
The lack of a metal mass in the core causes what function to be absent?	heat sink
How is a coreless motor cooled?	forced air
What was the original purpose for pancake motors?	drive the capstan(s) of magnetic tape drives
What are advantages of pancake motors?	minimal time to reach operating speed and minimal stopping distance
For what type of military applications are pancake motors currently used?	high temperature
What type of servo-controlled systems use pancake motors?	high-performance
What may servo motors be used for?	machine tools, pen plotters, and other process systems
What must be well understood when applying a servo motor for use?	speed, torque, and power
What factors limit performance of servo motors?	winding inductance and rotor inertia
Large, slow servos can use what types of motors?	conventional AC or DC motors
When might coreless motors be used in servo applications?	As dynamic response requirements increase
How do servo motors differ from stepper motors?	position feedback is continuous
How does a stepper system achieve stability?	a "home" switch
What makes a printer home switch work?	position sensor
What kind of counter keeps track of a print head's position?	bidirectional
A stepper system's motor is relied on to not do what?	miss steps
When are stepper motors most useful?	when precise rotations are required
What two devices can describe a stepper motor?	DC electric motor and a rotary solenoid
What do stepper motor rotors allign themselves with?	magnetic field produced by the energized field winding
How does a stepper motor differ from a synchronous motor?	the stepper motor may not rotate continuously
What types of velocities and positions is the stepper motor capable of?	forwards or backwards, and it may change direction, stop, speed up or slow down
What is a trait of a sophisticated stepper motor?	proportionally control the power to the field windings
What does proportinal control of the field windings in a stepper motor achieve?	rotate extremely smoothly
What is another name for smooth rotation?	microstepping
With what other device are stepper motors most versatile?	digital servo-controlled system
Why were stepper motors abandoned in computer drive designs?	precision and speed limitations
What do newer computer drives use instead of stepper motors?	voice coil-based head actuator systems
In what direction do modern coil actuators move?	perpendicular to the magnetic lines of force
To what device does the term, "voice coil" historically refer?	the structure in a typical (cone type) loudspeaker
List two alternatives to rotary stepper motors in printer applications.	linear stepper motors or servomotors
In scanners, what do stepper motors move?	optical scanning element
In printers and copiers, what do stepper motors move?	print head carriage (of dot matrix and inkjet printers), and the platen or feed rollers
Voltage opposing the motor supply voltage is called what?	back electromotive force
EMP is proportional to what?	the running speed of the motor
Voltage at the brushes is equal to what?	back emf of the motor, plus the voltage drop across the winding internal resistance
If load increases, what happens to current drawn?	more current is drawn from the supply
What needs to be known to calculate torque?	fields in the air gap
How are the many calculations to determine torque done?	FEA
How is torque determined?	from the vector product of the interacting fields
What is the formulia to determine torque?	the integral of all the vectors of force multiplied by the radius of each vector
What are factors that determine shaft torque?	torque current), voltage, pole-pair number, excitation frequency (i.e., synchronous speed), and air-gap flux density
Whate decides the size of an electromagnetic core?	air-gap area with winding slots and back-iron depth
What limits excessive torque?	magnetic core saturation or safe operating temperature rise and voltage
What is the only device with dual ported transformer circuit topology?	brushless wound-rotor
What is a brushless wound-rotor?	both ports independently excited with no short-circuited port
How does a brushless wound rotor achieve stability?	a multiphase slip-ring-brush assembly to propagate limited power to the rotor winding set
What is the theoretical maximum of a brushless wound rotor?	eight times operating torque
What determines continuous torque density?	size of the air-gap area and the back-iron depth
What three elements determine the size of the air-gap area and back iron depth?	power rating of the armature winding set, the speed of the machine, and the achievable air-gap flux density before core saturation
What does continuous torque density refer to?	method of cooling and permissible period of operation before destruction by overheating
How does continuous torque density vary between well designed motors?	virtually the same
What type of motor is based on the attraction and repulsion of electric charge?	electrostatic
What are electrostatic motors like two of?	conventional coil-based motors
What type of power supply do electrostatic motors usually have?	high-voltage
What two inventors developed the first electrostatic motors?	Benjamin Franklin and Andrew Gordon
Micro-electro mechanical systems prefer what type of motor?	electrostatic motor
What is the official name of Switzerland?	Swiss Confederation
What type of government does Switzerland have?	a federal directorial republic
How many cantons are in Switzerland's federal directorial republic?	26
What 3 geographical features divide Switzerland?	the Alps, the Swiss Plateau and the Jura
What is the population of Switzerland?	approximately 8 million
What is the traditional date of the establishment of the Swiss Confederation?	1 August 1291
What year did Switzerland join the United Nations?	2002
What country is the birthplace of the Red Cross?	Switzerland
In what year was Switzerland last involved in a war internationally?	1815
What Swiss holiday is celebrated on August 1st every year?	Swiss National Day
Which four main linguistic and cultural regions make up Switzerland?	German, French, Italian and Romansh
What is the predominant language in Switzerland?	German
What do the French Swiss call Switzerland?	Suisse
What do the German Swiss call Switzerland?	Schweiz
What do the Italian Swiss call Switzerland?	Svizzera
How does Switzerland rank worldwide in areas such as quality of life and civil liberties?	top or close to the top
Which country has the highest nominal wealth per adult in the world according to Credit Suisse?	Switzerland
Which two Swiss cities have been ranked as having the highest quality of life in the world?	Zürich and Geneva
What assets are included in nominal wealth?	financial and non-financial
What is Switzerland's ranking for per capita gross domestic product on the IMF list?	eighth-highest
What was the Swiss term for Switzerland during the 16th - 19th centuries?	Switzer
Where did the English adjective Swiss originate from?	French Suisse
Where did the name Switzer originate from?	the Alemannic Schwiizer
What did the Alemannic Schwiizer help form the nucleus of?	the Old Swiss Confederacy
In what year was the toponym Schwyz first attested as Old High German Suittes?	972
At what time did the name Schwyz begin to be used by the entire Confederation?	after the Swabian War of 1499
What was the Swiss German name for Schwyz?	Schwiiz
What was the name d'Schwiiz used for?	the Confederation
What were the two earliest know cultural tribes in Switerland?	Hallstatt and La Tène
Which Swiss cultural tribe developed and flourished during the late Iron Age?	La Tène
Which Swiss tribal group was defeated by Julius Caesar at the Battle of Bribacti as they tried to escape the Swiss plateau?	the Helvetii
In what year did Tiberius conquer the Alps, integrating them into the Roman Empire?	15 BC
What is the name of the large legionary camp, now a ruin, that the Romans maintained around the start of the Common Era?	Vindonissa
In what year did the fall of the Agri Decumates territory transform today's Switzerland?	about 260 AD
In about 260 AD, what forced the people of Roman towns to find shelter in Roman fortresses?	raids by the Alamanni tribes
What was the name of the concept used by the Roman Empire when building another line of defense at the north border?	the linear defence concept
What increased pressure forced the Romans to abandon their line of defense concept at the end of the 4th century?	Germanic
Who was allowed to settle on the Swiss plateau by the end of the 4th century?	German tribes
From the end of the 4th century, what territory was the western extent of modern-day Switzerland part of?	the Kings of the Burgundians
Where did the Alemanni settle in the 5th century?	the Swiss plateau
Where did the Alemanni settle in the 8th century, forming Alemannia?	valleys of the Alps
In the 8th century, what two kingdoms made up Modern-day Switzerland?	Alemannia and Burgundy
What Empire did the entire region of Modern-day Switzerland become part of in the 6th century?	Frankish Empire
In 1200, what area did the houses of Savoy, Zahringer, Habsburg, and Kyburg comprise?	the Swiss plateau
In 1264 AD, what caused the Kyburg dynasty to fall?	extinction of its male line in 1263
Who claimed the Kyburg lands after their fall in 1264 AD?	the Habsburgs
Which Holy Roman Emperor were the Habsburgs under in 1273 AD?	King Rudolph I
What did the three regions of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden become known as?	Waldstätten
In what year did the three original  cantons join with five other cantons to form the "Old Confederacy" of eight states?	By 1353
Which century did the Old Confederacy of the eight states exist until?	end of the 15th century
What effect did the expansion of the three cantons into eight have on the status of the federation?	increased power and wealth
By 1460, who controlled most of the territory south and west of the Rhine?	the confederates
Which Swiss victory in 1499 amounted to de facto independence within the Holy Roman Empire?	Swabian War
Which Battle was the first to interrupt the seeming invincibility of the Old Swiss Confederacy in 1515?	Battle of Marignano
What inter-cantonal conflicts resulted in the Wars of Kappel?	religious
In what year did European countries first recognize Switzerland's independence from the Holy Roman Empire?	1648
In what two years were the Wars of Kappel?	1529 and 1531
Under the Peace of Westphalia, who finally recognized Switzerland's neutrality?	European countries
Who conquered Switzerland in 1798?	the revolutionary French government
What did the French government impose on Switzerland in 1798, centralizing the Swiss government?	a new unified constitution
What was abolished with the introduction of the unified constitution in Switzerland?	the cantons
What was the name of the new regime created when the Cisalpine Republic separated from Switzerland?	Helvetic Republic
Which unpopular republic destroyed centuries of Swiss traditions?	Helvetic
Who refused to fight alongside the Helvetic Republic when it was invaded by the Russians and Austrians?	The Swiss
During the Helvetic Republic, which forces invaded Switzerland when war broke out between France and its rivals?	Russian and Austrian
What Act was the result of a meeting of Swiss politicians organized by Napolean?	Act of Mediation
What was the Act of Mediation responsible for restoring?	Swiss autonomy
How many cantons were introduced as a Confederation by the Act of Mediation?	19
What did Catholic cantons attempt to set up which caused a civil war in 1839?	a separate alliance (the Sonderbund)
What was the name of the Swiss civil war in 1839?	the Sonderbundskrieg
How big was the impact the Sonderbundskrieg had on the psychology and society of the Swiss and Switzerland?	major
What was responsible for most of the 1100 casualties incurred during the Swiss civil war in 1839?	friendly fire
How long did the Swiss civil war in 1839 last?	less than a month
What example inspired much of a new Swiss constitution providing for a federal layout?	American
Under the new Swiss constitution, what did the cantons have the right to self-govern?	local issues
How many houses was the Swiss national assembly divided into?	two
What was the name of the upper house, which included 2 representatives from each canton?	Council of States
What was the name of the lower house, whose representatives were elected throughout the country?	National Council
Though invasion plans were drawn up the the Germans, which war did Switzerland escape attack during?	World War II
Who was the head of the Swiss central command during World War II?	General Henri Guisan
What did General Henry Guisan order a general mobilisation of during World War II?	armed forces
What was the original goal of the Swiss military strategy?	protect the economic heartland
What were the Reduit?	strong, well-stockpiled positions high in the Alps
Who blockaded Switzerland's trade during World War II?	by both the Allies and by the Axis
What was severed in 1942, leaving Switzerland completely surrounded by the Axis?	a crucial rail link through Vichy France
How many refugees did Switzerland intern during World War II?	over 300,000
When did the financial relationship Switzerland had with Nazi Germany begin to raise controversy?	end of the 20th century
Where was the International Red Cross based?	Geneva
Who did Switzerland finally grant the right to vote to following the rest of the Western republic?	women
When were Switzerland women granted the right to vote on a federal level?	1971
Who was the first woman to serve on the Federal Council?	Elisabeth Kopp
In what year did Ruth Dreifuss become president?	1999
Who was Switzerland's first female president?	Ruth Dreifuss
In what year did Switzerland become a full member of the United Nations?	2002
What did Swiss voters agree to join on June 5, 2005?	Schengen treaty
What percentage of Swiss voters voted to join the Schengen treaty?	55%
Though Switzerland is a founding member of the EFTA, what are they not a member of?	European Economic Area
What has completely surrounded Switzerland and Liechtenstein since 1995?	the EU
How large is Switzerland?	41,285 square kilometres (15,940 sq mi)
What is the average population density of Switzerland?	195 people per square kilometre (500/sq mi)
What is the population density of the largest Canton of Graubunden, located in the Alps?	27 /km² (70 /sq mi)
Which half of Switzerland is more mountainous?	southern
Which mountain range does Switzerland extend over on both the north and south sides?	Alps
Which basic topographical area is in the south of Switzerland?	Swiss Alps
Which basic topographical area is in central Switzerland?	Swiss Plateau
Which basic topographical area is in western Switzerland?	Jura mountains
How much of Switzerland's total area do the Alps comprise?	60%
What is the largest lake in Switzerland?	Lake Geneva
What is the highest mountain in Switzerland?	Monte Rosa
What is often regarded as the most famous mountain in Switzerland?	Matterhorn
How many of Switzerland's mountains are at least 4000 meters above sea level?	48
Where are both Monte Rosa and Matterhorn located?	Pennine Alps in the canton of Valais
Where are Switzerland's glacial conditions located?	mountaintops
What is typical weather in Switzerland during the summer months?	warm and humid at times with periodic rainfall
What can the lower lands, suffering from inversion, sometimes lack for weeks?	sun
What is the climate on Switzerland's southern tip?	Mediterranean
What is the weather phenomena characterized by an unexpected warm wind bringing low reletive humidity to the northern Alps during rainfall in the southern Alps?	föhn
At what time of year can the fohn occur?	all times
Where do clouds lose most of their content before getting to the inner alpine valleys?	crossing the mountains
What type of grapes are grown in the valley of Valais?	wine
During the fohn, from which direction is the blowing wind more efficient?	the south
What rank was Switzerland in safeguarding the environment according to the 2014 Environmental Performance Index?	first among 132 nations
What do mountainous regions have that make their ecosystems particularly fragile?	plants not found at other altitudes
What is the ecosystem in the alpine region particularly sensitive to?	climate change
What sources of energy does Switzerland heavily rely on?	renewable
When was Switzerland's Federal Constitution adopted?	1848
When was a new Constitution adopted in Switzerland?	1999
How many main governing bodies are on the federal level in Switzerland?	three
What is the legislative body of the Swiss government called?	bicameral parliament
What is the executive body of the Swiss government called?	Federal Council
How many members are on the National Council?	200
How long do members of both houses of the Swiss Parliament serve?	4 years
What are both houses of the Swiss Parliament collectively known as when both are in joint session?	Federal Assembly
What can citizens use to challenge any law passed by Parliament?	referendums
What can citizens use to introduce amendments to the federal constitution?	initiatives
What serves as the collective Head of State?	The Federal Council
How many members are in the Federal Council?	seven
Who elects the members of the Federal Council?	Federal Assembly
What is the traditional term for the President of the Confederation?	one-year
Who elects the President of the Confederation from its 7 members?	the Assembly
How many legal jurisdictions are Swiss citizens subject to?	three
What are the legal jurisdictions that Swiss citizens are subject to?	commune, canton and federal levels
What type of democracy was defined in the 1848 federal constitution?	direct
What two things do citizens have the right to submit to overturn parliamentary decisions?	a constitutional initiative and a referendum
What are the two hallmarks of the Swiss political system?	Direct democracy and federalism
How many voters are needed to put a constitutional amendment to a national vote?	100,000
How long do citizens have to collect enough votes for a national vote on a constitutional amendment?	18 months
What can Parliament supplement the amendment proposed by the citizens with?	a counter-proposal
What must voters do on the ballot when Parliament adds a supplement?	indicate a preference
How much of the national popular vote and the cantonal popular vote is needed to pass a constitutional amendment?	a double majority
According to the Federal Constitution, how many cantons are equal in status?	all 26
What are the two major differences between cantons?	population and geographical area
What is the population of the largest canton?	1,253,500 (Zürich)
What is the population of the smallest canton?	15,000 (Appenzell Innerrhoden)
How large is the smallest canton?	37 km2 (14 sq mi) (Basel-Stadt)
When was Switzerland's policy of neutrality internationally recognized?	Congress of Vienna in 1815
What was Switzerland the first state to join the U.N. by?	referendum
What have the Swiss people continually rejected membership in since the 1990's?	European Union
How long has Switzerland traditionally been neutral?	since the end of its expansion in 1515
How does Switzerland treat alliances that might entail military or political action?	avoids
How long has Switzerland hosted the United Nations Human Rights Council?	since 2006
What is the second biggest centre for the U.N.?	Palace of Nations in Geneva
Where did the Red Crescent Movement begin?	Geneva
Where is the League of Nations located?	Switzerland
Besides the U.N. Headquarters, who hosts many U.N. agencies?	Swiss Confederation
What does the ILO stand for?	International Labour Organization
What is disucussed at the World Economic Forum in Davos?	important issues facing the world, including health and the environment
What does BIS stand for?	Bank for International Settlements
What does UNHCR stand for?	United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Where do Swiss militia keep their Army issued equipment?	at home
Who has compulsory military service in Switzerland?	all male Swiss citizens
Who can serve in the Swiss military voluntarily?	women
What replaced Army 95 in 2003?	Army XXI
In Army XXI, how many are active in periodic army training?	120,000
How does the Swiss economy rank worldwide by nominal GDP?	nineteenth largest
How does the Swiss economy rank worldwide by purchasing power parity?	thirty-sixth largest
What ranking does Switzerland hold in terms of GDP per capita, adjusting for purchasing power, according to the World Bank?	8th in the world
Which rating was assigned to Switzerland by the Index of Economic Freedom of 2010?	highest European rating
What did the World Economic Forum's Global Competetiveness Report Rank Switzerland's economy as?	the most competitive in the world
What was the gross median estimate of household income in Switzerland in 2007?	137,094 USD at Purchasing power parity
What was Switzerland's median income in 2007?	95,824 USD
How did the European Union rank Switzerland's economy?	Europe's most innovative country
What is Switzerland's most important economic sector?	manufacturing
What accounts for 34% of Switzerland's exported goods?	chemicals
What accounts for 20.9% of Switzerland's exported goods?	machines/electronics
What accounts for 16.9% of Switzerland's exported goods?	precision instruments/watches
What percentage of exports are exported services?	a third
What percentage of employees belonged to a trade union in 2004?	about 25%
How many people work in Switzerland?	Around 3.8 million
What was the unemployment rate in Switzerland in 2014?	3.2%
What was the foreign citizen population percentage in Switzerland in 2014?	21.8%
What was the peak unemployment rate reached in December, 2009?	4.4%
How is Switzerland ranked of 189 countries in the Ease of Doing Business Index?	20th
According to Credit Suisse, what percentage of residents own their homes?	about 37%
How do Switzerland's tax rates compare by Western World standards?	low
What size was the Swiss Federal budget in 2010?	62.8 billion Swiss francs
What are the two main sources of income for the federal government?	value-added tax (33%) and the direct federal tax (29%)
Which sectors are the main source of expenditures for the federal government?	social welfare and finance & tax
Which sectors have experienced a reduction in federal government expenditures?	agriculture and national defense
How much were expenditures estimated to be cut in agriculture and national defense in 2015?	from 26.5% in to 12.4%
What has contributed to high food prices in Switzerland?	Agricultural protectionism
What type of trade agreements does Switzerland have worldwide?	free
What is the EFTA?	European Free Trade Association
What is Switzerland's world ranking in domestic purchasing power?	one of the best
According to the OECD, what is Switzerland lagging behind many EU countries in?	Product market liberalisation
Who has authority of school systems in Switzerland?	the cantons
What is the minimum age for primary school in all cantons?	six
What do most cantons provide for free when children are 4 or 5 years old?	children's school
When was English introduced as a first foreign language in many cantons?	2000
How long does primary school continue?	until grade four, five or six
How many universities are in Switzerland?	12
How many of the 12 Swiss universities are maintained at the cantonal level?	ten
When was the first university in Switzerland founded?	1460
What is the biggest university in Switzerland?	University of Zurich
How many students attend the University of Zurich?	nearly 25,000
What Swiss world famous physicist developed his Special relativity while working in Bern?	Albert Einstein
How many total Nobel prizes were awarded to Swiss scientists?	113
How many times has the Nobel Peace Prize been awarded to organisations residing in Switzerland?	nine
What is the world's largest laboratory?	CERN
Who co-hosts CERN along with the French department of Ain?	Geneva
What research is CERN dedicated to?	particle physics
What notable Swiss invention won the nobel prize?	scanning tunneling microscope
Who invented the pressurized balloon?	Auguste Piccard
How has Switzerland maintained its relationships with the EU?	through bilateral agreements
In recent years, what have the Swiss brought their economic practices into conformity with?	the EU
What have the Swiss tried to enhance by conforming to EU economic practices?	international competitiveness
How much did the Swiss economy grow in 2010?	3%
Which conservative party is popularly against joining the EU?	SVP party
How many bilateral agreements did Bern and Brussels sign to further liberalise trade ties?	seven
What was included in the first series of bilateral agreements pertaining to people?	free movement of persons
When was a second series of 9 bilateral agreements signed?	2004
What has since happened to the second series of bilateral agreements?	has since been ratified
What were the original bilateral agreements meant to minimize the negative consequences of?	Switzerland's isolation from the rest of Europe
In 2006, what did Switzerland approve 1 billion francs of supportive investment for?	poorer Southern and Central European countries
What have the Swiss been under EU and national pressure to reduce in terms of banking?	secrecy
What have the Swiss been under pressure from the EU to do in terms of tax rates?	raise tax rates to parity with the EU
In February of 2014, what did Swiss voters narrowly approve to restrict?	immigration
What was reintroduced on the influx of foreigners in February of 2014?	a quota system
Which centres of Switzerland mostly rejected the quota system for foreigners?	metropolitan
What was the rejection rate of the quota system by the French speaking part of Switzerland?	58.5%
What do some news commentators claim is violated by the restricted immigration proposal?	bilateral agreements on the free movement of persons
What was the former 10-year moratorium on the construction of nuclear plants the result of?	a citizens' initiative
What accident caused the delay in plans for the new nuclear power plant in Bern?	Fukushima Daiichi power plant in 2011
What does SFOE stand for?	Swiss Federal Office of Energy
What does DETEC stand for?	Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications
What is the 2000-watt society initiative designed to cut by more than half by 2050?	the nation's energy use
In 2011, what time frame did the Swiss government give for ending its use of nuclear energy?	2 or 3 decades
What reason did the Swiss government give for ending its use of nuclear energy?	to ensure a secure and autonomous supply of energy
When is Switzerland's first nuclear reactor scheduled to be taken offline?	2019
When is Switzerland's last nuclear reactor scheduled to be taken offline?	2034
Who is the Doris Leuthard?	Energy Minister
How many passengers does the most dense rail network in Europe carry annualy?	over 350 million
In 2007, what was the average amount of km's travelled by eacg Swiss citizens on the rails?	2,258
Who mainly administers the Swiss railway system?	Federal Railways
What is the Alp-Transit project designed to reduce the time of travel between?	north and south
Under which mountains are the railway tunnels being built for the Alp-Transit project?	the Alps
What is the Swiss private-public managed road network funded by?	road tolls and vehicle taxes
How much does the Swiss autoroute network charge for a toll sticker to use Swiss roadways for a year?	40 Swiss francs
Which airport is Switzerland's largest international flight gateway?	Zürich
What is the name of the flag airline carrier in Switzerland?	Swiss International Air Lines
How many passengers used the Zurich airport in 2012?	22.8 million
When did Switzerland sign the Kyoto Protocol?	1998
When did Switzerland ratify the Kyoto Protocol	2003
What was formed by Switzerland, Mexico, and the Republic of Korea?	Environmental Integrity Group (EIG)
What percentage of recyclable materials are being recycled in Switzerland?	66% to 96%
How did the 2010 Global Green Economy Index rank Switzerland?	among the top 10 green economies in the world
What does Switzerland charge for the disposal of in order to encourage recycling?	Rubbish
What are the fines for not paying the rubbish disposal fee?	from CHF 200–500
What is the charge for recycling in Switzerland?	free
In 2010, what percentage of the population was made up of foreigners?	23.3%
Who were the largest single group of foreigners in 2010?	Italians
What percentage of the population aged 15 and over were shown to have an immigrant background as of 2012?	34.7%
What percentage of the immigrants were born in Switzerland as of 2012?	one fifth
In the 2000's, what was the concern perceived toward immigrants by institutions?	increase in xenophobia
How many official languages does Switzerland have?	four
What is the principal official language in Switzerland?	German
What is the principal official language in the western part of Switzerland?	French
What is the principal official language in the southern part of Switzerland?	Italian
What is the least popular official language of Switzerland?	Romansh
How many linguistic regions of Switzerland have their own form of local dialect?	four
What dialect is increasing in German speaking regions?	Swiss German
What has happened to the local dialects in the French speaking regions?	have almost disappeared
Where do dialects tend to be limited to in the Italian speaking regions?	family settings and casual conversation
What are terms that are not used outside of Switzerland known as?	Helvetisms
Where are the most frequent characteristics of Helvetisms found?	vocabulary, phrases, and pronunciation
What do current French dictionaries include several hundred of?	Helvetisms
Who are Swiss citizens required to buy health insurance from?	private insurance companies
Who are private insurance companies required to accept?	every applicant
In 2012, what was Switzerland's world ranking for life expectancy in 2012?	highest
What population will cause health spending to likely rise in the future?	ageing
What do new high tech healthcare technologies translate to?	high costs of the services provided
How much of the Swiss population live in urban areas?	Between two thirds and three quarters
From the beginning of the 21st century, how does the population growth in urban areas compare to the countryside?	higher
How many years did it take Switzerland to go from a largely urban country to a rural one?	70
What is the population density of the plateau?	450 people per km2
Which 2 centers are recognized for their particularly great quality of life?	Zürich and Geneva
What does the weight of the largest metropolitan areas tend to do?	increase
What is the predominant religion of Switzerland?	Christianity
What religion has immigration brought by 4.95%?	Islam
What religion has immigration brought by 2%?	Eastern Orthodoxy
According to a 2015 Gallup Poll, what percentage of Swiss people are convinced atheists?	12%
What percentage of the Christian population is Catholic?	38.21%
What percentage of Swiss people claimed no church affiliation in 2012?	21.4%
According to the census of 2000, what percentage of Swiss are pentecostal?	0.28%
According to the census of 2000, what percentage of Swiss are Jehova's Witnesses?	0.28%
According to the census of 2000, what percentage of Swiss are Buddhists?	0.29%
When did Geneva convert to Protestantism?	1536
How is a consociational state defined by the Constitution of 1848?	allowing the peaceful co-existence of Catholics and Protestants
When was the calling for a complete separation from church and state rejected by the majority of voters?	1980
What percentage of voters rejected the separation of church and state in 1980?	78.9%
What culture is linguistically isolated from the rest of Switzerland?	Romansh
Where is the Romansh culture located?	in Graubünden in eastern Switzerland
How many of Europe's major languages are official in Switzerland?	Three
What symbolism has played an important role in shaping the history of Switzerland?	Alpine
What highly energetic culture is in some concentrated mountain areas in the winter?	ski resort culture
What is the name of the trumpet like musical instrument made of wood has become the epitome of traditional Swiss music?	alphorn
What traditional culture predominates in many areas of small farms?	farmer and herder culture
What causes the government to exert greater control over broadcast media than print media?	finance and licensing
Where are television programs produced?	Geneva, Zürich and Lugano
What was the Swiss Broadcasting Corporations name recently changed to?	SRG SSR
What 3 mountain sports are among the most popular in Switzerland?	Skiing, snowboarding and mountaineering
Where was the bobsleigh invented?	St. Moritz
When were the first ski championships held in Murren?	1931
Which town hosted the 2nd Winter Olympic Games in 1928?	St. Moritz
What is the nickname for the Swiss national football team?	Nati
What does FIFA stand for?	International Federation of Association Football
Where is Europe's highest football pitch located?	Switzerland
Where is the FIFA located?	Zürich
Which FIFA world cup did Switzerland host?	1954
What was hosted for the 10th time by Switzerland in 2009?	IIHF World Championship
What was the name of the 1st European sailing team to win America's cup in 2013?	Alinghi
Which Swiss professional wrestler is currently signed with WWE?	Claudio Castagnoli
Which Swiss sailing team was the 1st to win America's Cup in 2003?	Alinghi
What was banned in Switzerland in 1955 after the Le Mans disaster?	Motorsport racecourses and events
Who voted to overturn the ban on motorsport events in June 2007?	Swiss National Council
Who rejected the  2007 vote to overturn the motorsport ban in Switzerland?	Swiss Council of States
Which successful World Touring Car Championship driver was produced in Switzerland despite the ban on motorsport events?	Alain Menu
Which Swiss motorcycle racer won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category?	Thomas Lüthi
Which popular Swiss sport is a cross between baseball and golf?	Hornussen
Which old, traditional sport is considered to be the national sport by some Swiss?	Swiss wrestling or "Schwingen"
What is thrown in the Swiss competition Steinstossen?	a heavy stone
Which Swiss population is the only one to have practiced Steinstossen since prehistoric times?	alpine
What was the name of the 83.5 kg stone that symbolized the Unspunnenfest, first held in 1805?	Unspunnenstein
What part of Switzerland has a particularly high number of fine-dining establishments?	western Switzerland
What unique dairy cheese is produced in the Swiss valleys of Gruyeres?	Gruyère
What differences primarily dictated some of the regional variations in Swiss cuisine?	climate and languages
What dairy product is produced in the valley of Emmental?	Emmental
How do the ingredients of traditional Swiss cuisine compare to that of other European countries?	similar
What is the most popular alcoholic drink in Switzerland?	wine
When were vineyards first cultivated in Switzerland?	Roman era
What type of wine comprises a small majority of wine produced in Switzerland?	white
What are the two most widespread varieties of wines in Switzerland?	Chasselas (called Fendant in Valais) and Pinot noir
What 4 terrain variations are credited for Switzerland's notable variety of grapes grown?	specific mixes of soil, air, altitude and light
Of Africa what rank in size country is Mali?	Mali is the eighth-largest country in Africa
What is Mali's capital named?	Bamako
What are two major rivers located inside of Mali?	Niger and Senegal rivers
Besides salt what other major natural resources does Mali produce?	prominent natural resources include gold
More than half of the population is what religion?	(55%) are non-denominational Muslims
In the latter part of the 19th century what country took control of Mali?	France seized control of Mali
What year did Mali gain independence as the Mali Federation?	1960
Along with a new constitution, Mali became what type of state in 1991?	Mali as a democratic, multi-party state
Mali was once part of how many West African empires?	three
What was the name of the Empire that the country is now named after?	Mali Empire (for which Mali is named)
What area of Mali did conflict arise in January of 2012?	northern Mali
What were the rebels named in the conflict of 2012?	Tuareg rebels
What was the name that the rebels declared as a new state?	new state, Azawad
What country sent military in response to terrorism in 2013?	French military
On July 28 2013 what type of elections were held?	Presidential elections
The Sonhgai Empire's demise was due to what invasion?	Moroccan invasion in 1591
What major impact did the falling of the Songhai Empire have?	Saharan trade routes lost significance.
What century did Songhai become independent from Mali?	14th century
Who was the commander of the Moroccan invasion of 1591?	Judar Pasha
What type of trading routes did Europeans make that compounded to the profound effect?	establishment of sea routes
What regime was overthrown in 1968?	Keïta regime
Who led the military on what is now celebrated Liberation Day?	Moussa Traoré
What position did Moussa Traoré take on as a result of his success?	president
Between what years did famine and drought afflict the country?	1968 to 1974
In the 1970's how many attempts were there the overthrow the govenment?	three coup attempts
In what year did Mali get a new constitution?	1991
In January of 1991 what type of protests were violently curbed?	student protests
What type of administration did general Mousa Traoré have?	dictatorial regime
Strict rules were put in place to appease what monetary fund?	International Monetary Fund
It was rumored that people close to the government lived in what type of condition?	growing wealth
What type of rallies were being held in March of 1991?	pro-democracy
There was a nationwide strike being held that was called les envenements and also named what?	March Revolution
After the president declared a state of emergency, what type of curfew was placed on the country?	nightly
How many people died over the course of four days?	300 lives
After all of the governments efforts what types of protests continued?	nonviolent
Who was president during the March protests?	Moussa Traoré
How many people aside from the president received a death sentence?	three associates
What day is now a National holiday in connection to Moussa Traoré?	26 March
All four men were convicted and received what as punishment?	death sentence
Those that received the death sentence had gotten it for their role in what?	their part in the decision-making
Who announced over the Radio that the president had been arrested?	Lieutenant Colonel Amadou Toumani Touré
Thousands of soldiers put their weapons down and joined what type of efforts?	pro-democracy
The non violent protesting led the soldiers to engage in what type of behavior?	refusal of soldiers to fire
Opposing groups met to make and create what kind of democratic laws?	constitution
What group was to approve the new democratic constitution?	a national referendum
What rebellion began in January of 2012?	Tuareg rebellion
In March of 2012 whom gained control of Mali?	Amadou Sanogo
What group led the rebellion in Northern Mali?	National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad
The embargo of the Economic Community of West African States imposed what type of punishment?	sanctions
What group declared independence as Asawad?	MNLA
Mali is located in what Zone?	torrid
What months are have a rainy season in the South?	June to early December
Flooding of what river is typical during these months?	Niger River
What is the name of the Delta that these floods cause?	Inner Niger
What part of the country has the Köppen Climate Classification of (BWh)?	northern desert
What year was the constitution amended from the previous one of 1992?	1999
The newer constitution divide power among what branches of government?	the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government
How many years is one presidential term for?	five-year
How many total terms can a president be elected for?	two terms
Executive power is given to what person within the government?	president
Who is given both titles of commander of armed forces and chief of state?	president
What group is Mali's sole legislative party?	The unicameral National Assembly
The Alliance of democracy and Progress has how many seats as of 2007?	113
How many legislative assemblies are  held each year?	two regular sessions
Who is considered head of government and assigns the council of ministers?	prime minister
What is Mali's highest court?	Supreme Court
What controls do the supreme court have?	both judicial and administrative powers
Constitutional Court provides what type of review of legislative acts?	judicial review
Constitutional Court also serves as what type of arbiter?	election
Local disputes in rural areas are usually handled by what individuals?	village chiefs and elders
In what year did Mali start economic changes?	1988
Mali signed agreements with what to parties that began their economic changes?	World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
In what years did Mali restructure public enterprises?	1988 to 1996
How many enterprises have been made completely private since the agreement?	sixteen enterprises
How many companies were completely liquidated?	20
In 2007 what percent of people were 12 and under?	48
What was the total fertility rate per woman as of 2012?	6.4 children
In 2007 what was the death rate per 1000 people?	16.5
Mali has one of the highest rates of what type of mortality?	infant
For both men and women average life expectancy is how many years?	53.06
Roughly how many Malians are descendants of slaves?	800,000
What is the estimate of current Mali enslavement?	200,000
What group of people were known to keep Malian salves into the 20th century?	Arabic population
The darker skinned Bella people are also refereed to as what name?	Tamasheq
What region of the country is historical slavery well known?	far north
Ethnic tension are between what two groups of people?	Songhai and nomadic Tuaregs
Radical Islam and the Tuaregs are both considered problematic according to whom?	Malian government
What group of people are trying to establish sharia law?	radical Islamists
What type of hereditary relationships still exist today?	servitude and bondage
Songhai and Tuaregs both complain about what same issue towards each other?	discrimination
What four main health problems do the Malian people currently have?	poverty, malnutrition, and inadequate hygiene and sanitation
How does Malian Health and development rank globally?	among the worst in the world
As of 2012 50.3 years is considered the Malian peoples averages of what statistic?	Life expectancy
In 2000 what percentage of the population had access to safe drinking water?	62–65
In 2000 roughly how much of the population had access to sanitation services?	69
What does ICRISTAT stand for?	International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
What types of efforts to aid in health problems have been made?	improve nutrition
The local communities have accepted equinut because it is similar to what native recipe?	recipe di-dèguè
ICRISTAT had success in teaching women how to make what product of nutritional value?	equinut
What ingredients are in both the traditional and nutritional version of this dish?	peanut paste, honey and millet or rice flour
What are the two main prevalent infectious diseases of Mali?	cholera and tuberculosis
what arthropod born disease has plagued the nation?	Malaria
According to the data from 2001 to 2006 what percent of female genitalia are mutilated?	85–91
What Sexually transmitted disease afflicts roughly 1.9 percent of the population?	HIV/AIDS
Malians suffer from malnutrition and low rates of what type of medical need?	immunization
What is the translation or meaning of a griot?	Keepers of Memories
Aside from music what other activity plays a significant role in culture?	Dance
What type of garment or accessory is traditionally worn at some of the dances held?	mask
What is the name of the musician that was a part of the roots and was also a blues guitarist?	Ali Farka Touré
What is a well known Afro-pop artist?	Salif Keita
What is the purpose of an NPO?	A nonprofit organization (NPO, also known as a non-business entity) is an organization whose purposes are other than making a profit.
What does an NPO do with it's surplus income?	In economic terms, a nonprofit organization uses its surplus revenues to further achieve its purpose or mission
What is the constraint's upon an NPO's financial distributions called?	the distribution constraint
What is the definition of a non-profit organization?	purposes are other than making a profit
What is an NPO also known as?	non-business entity
What is the purpose of an NPO?	furthering a particular social cause or advocating for a particular point of view
What does a non-profit do with the money it takes in, instead of using it for a profit?	further achieve its purpose or mission, rather than distributing its surplus income to the organization's shareholders (or equivalents) as profit
What is it called when a non-profit uses it's money as it should?	distribution constraint
What types of organizations are NPOs usually associated with?	charitable
Who does an NPO usually serve?	member-serving or community-serving
What do NPOs that center around community usually focus on?	providing services to the community in general, either globally or locally
What are member serving NPOs really focused on?	by directly supporting them
What are community serving NPOs focused on?	a helping service for fellow citizens
How does an NPO have to handle surplus money?	they must be retained by the organization for its self-preservation, expansion, or plans
Who makes most of the decisions for an NPO?	controlling members or a board of directors
How do NPOs handle staffing?	Many have paid staff including management, whereas others employ unpaid volunteers and even executives who work with or without compensation
What are token fees used for?	to meet legal requirements for establishing a contract between the executive and the organization
How are charity or service NPOs usually organized?	profit corporation or as a trust, a cooperative, or they exist informally
What type of organization behaves much like a foundation?	a supporting organization
 What is a major function of a foundation?	giving value to the groups of people they administer to
What are the two top types of NPOs?	membership and board-only
How is a membership organization run?	elects the board and has regular meetings and the power to amend the bylaws
How is a board only organization run?	self-selected board, and a membership whose powers are limited to those delegated to it by the board
What is a further constraint of an NPO, depending on their legal structure?	financial benefit as far as distribution of profit to its members/directors is concerned
What should one be aware of when dealing with a board run NPO?	Board members who decide what percentage of your donations will increase their personal wealth are rampant in abusing this designation
How are NPOs classified in Canada?	incorporated or unincorporated
How has Canada's government kept up with the changing forms of NPOs?	nonprofit legislation has not kept pace with legislation that governs for-profit corporations
How do NPOs change their by-laws, if they had to apply for incorporation by Letters Permit, in Canada?	formal approval by the appropriate government
How does Alberta handle NPOs filing for incorporation?	by the filing of Articles of Incorporation or Articles of Association
How is incorporation handled in Ontario?	Letters Patent
When was the Canada Corporations Act, Part II repealed?	2009
What did the creation of the Canada Not-for-Profit Corporations Act mean for NPOs?	incorporation as of right, by Articles of Incorporation
When did Ontario adopt the Canada Not-for-Profit Corporations Act?	2010
When does Ontario expect the Canada Not-for-Profits Corpaoations Act to go into effect?	1 July 2013
When was the Canada Not-for-Profit corporations Act last ammended?	10 October 2011
Who grants a charitable status to an NPO in Canada?	Canada Revenue Agency (CRA)
What are donors to receive from a NPO?	income tax receipts
How does an NPO keep their charitable status?	file annual reports
How does the Canada Revenue Agency decide who can have a charitable status?	a common law test to its stated objects and activities
What kinds of assets must the NPO spend in order to keep it's charitable status?	cash, investments and fixed assets
What do NPOs in South Africa give to their donors?	a tax certificate
What can a tax certificate issued by a South Africian NPO be used for?	a tax deduction by the donor
Where are South Africian NPOs registered?	Companies and Intellectual Property Commission as Nonprofit Companies (NPCs)
Who keeps track of the trusts of South Africian NPOs?	Master of the High Court
Who would a South Africian NPO register with if they were a voluntary organization?	South Africa Revenue Services "SARS"
What is the definition of a charity?	nonprofit organisation that meets stricter criteria regarding its purpose and the method in which it makes decisions and reports its finances
Where are charity organizations registered in England and Wales?	Charity Commission
Where would an NPO or charity organization register in Scotland?	Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator
What is one of the contraints of an NPO with regards to assets?	generally not allowed to pay its Trustees
Is a trade union governed by the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator?	not regarded as "charities" in the technical sense
How does a US NPO apply for tax exempt status?	applying to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
What are some things the IRS looks at in a charity applying for tax exempt status?	purpose, limitations on spending, and internal safeguards for a charity
Does this tax exempt status apply to other taxes?	must pay federal tax on income that is unrelated to their exempt purpose
What happens if an NPO does not abide by the tax laws?	losing its tax exempt status
Who has the final say on whether or not an NPO is granted tax exempt status?	Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
What form must an NPO make available to the public?	990 forms
Are the state requirements to be tax exempt the same as the Federal requirements?	generally have separate applications and their requirements may differ from the IRS requirements
What financial form must be filed with both the state and federal governments each year?	IRS Form 990
What is one example of an NPO in the United States?	Project Vote Smart
What can states or cities offer to NPOs?	exemptions from other taxes such as sales tax or property tax
Who is in control of the organization?	board of directors
Who does the board hire to help with running the organization?	executive director
How is the board of directors most often chosen?	self-perpetuating
How is a board of directors less commonly chosen?	elected by a membership
Where, on Form 990, does an organization have to list what type of board they have?	Part VI, section A, question 7a
What are ways that a charitable foundation receives money for it's cause?	government funds, grants from charitable foundations, direct donations
What type of funding do charitable organizations typically rely on?	external funding
What are some problems that affect employee retention and volunteers?	unreliable funding, long hours and low pay
What legislation did the US introduce to try and help the NPOs?	Nonprofit Capacity Building Program
When was the Nonprofit Sector and Community Solutions Act adopted?	2010
What is the biggest concern of non-profits in Australia?	a purpose relating to a public good
When was the Commonwealth Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act adopted?	1976
When was the Associations Incorporation Act adopted?	1985
What does the Associations Incorporation Act cover?	incorporated association
Who covers incorporated associations or councils?	Commonwealth Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act
What kind of marketing budgets do NPOs usually have?	minimal or nonexistent
Why is marketing harder for NPOs?	taboo word that NPOs or others don't like to associate with such community benefit organizations
What does an NPO need to have in order to begin thinking about expansion or rebranding?	an outreach strategy which includes a financial plan to execute that outreach/marketing strategy
What is a moer low-key way that NPOs can get access to marketing and word of mouth?	leverage their access to various community stakeholders to get their name and cause recognized by the public
How is resource mismanagement allowed to happen so easily?	employees are not accountable to anybody with a direct stake in the organization
How can an NPO help to prevent financial problems?	strict controls
What can a large influx of money from a for-profit company do to an organization?	alter the NPO's functions
What can constitute accounting fraud when nothing is recorded?	Liabilities promised on the full faith and credit of the organization
What is a major hurdle of the financial aspect of an NPO?	Resource mismanagement
What problems with employment do Non Profits face?	Competition for employees with the public and private sector
What are positions that employees really want, but there are never enough of?	management
How important do NPOs consider hiring?	secondary priority
What is a primary interest to prospective NPO employees?	wage and benefits package
How do employees that are no longer with NPOs feel about the time that they worked there?	stressful work environments and implacable work that drove them away
What can the public and private sector offer employers that NPOs usually cannot?	higher wages, more comprehensive benefit packages, or less tedious work
What types of employees do NPOs usually attract?	mission-driven individuals who want to assist their chosen cause
What is something that causes a huge problem with employment in NPOs?	do not operate in a manner similar to most businesses, or only seasonally
Where are young grads looking for that NPOs?	more stable employment
Can Npos match the wages of public and private sector employers?	will never be able to match the pay
What should NPOs focus on offering employees instead of high wages?	benefits packages, incentives and implementing pleasurable work environments
What is better than having high pay at an NPO?	Pleasurable work conditions
How much should an NPO pay employees?	as much as they are able
What are other incentives that NPO emplotees can be offered instead of higher wages?	generous vacation allowances or flexible work hours
What is one of the wealthiest nonprofit organizations in America?	Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
What NPO was origionally funded by Hughes Aircraft?	Howard Hughes Medical Institute
How much is the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation worth?	US$38 billion
How much is the Howard Hughes Medical Institute worth?	$14.8 billion
What is one of the largest NPOs outside of the United States?	British Wellcome Trust
What is a well known NPO that helps people from low incomes become homeowners?	Habitat for Humanity
What is a international NPO that works on local levels to help communities thrive?	Rotary International
What is a national charite that helps to bring food and health care to low income families?	United Way
Which NPO is on the fore front of help when national disasters strike?	Red Cross and Red Crescent
Which organization is a leader in promoting nature and preserving the enviornment?	World Wide Fund for Nature
What does .org on a URL mean?	organizations that didn't fit anywhere else
Are only NPOs allowed to use .org?	not designated specifically for charitable organizations or any specific organizational or tax-law status
What is included in the list of organizations allowed to use .org?	encompasses anything that is not classifiable as another category
Is there an agency that decides if someone is using the domain designation incorrectly?	Currently, no restrictions are enforced on registration of .com or .org
What new domain designation should a museum use?	.museum
What type of language has it been suggested that NPOs should begin to get away from?	"non" words
What type of language are organizations being directed towards?	new, positive-sounding terminology
What is a new term for NPOs that has started to see more use?	civil society organization
What is a term being used for organizations that are for the citizens, by the citizens?	citizen sector organization
What would a group like Crowdfund, GoFundMe or Kickstarter possibly belong to?	Social Benefit Organization
What state is Raleigh the capital of?	North Carolina
What is the biggest city in NC?	Charlotte
Who is it named after?	Sir Walter Raleigh
What county is Raleigh in?	Dare
What is the population of the city?	439,896
What university is in Raleigh?	North Carolina State University
What is the MSA of Raleigh?	1,214,516
What is the Triangle?	Research Triangle area
What is another university in the triangle?	Duke
When was the Triangle created?	1959
What kind of city is Raleigh?	planned
What year was it incorporated?	1792
What happened in the 20th century?	Research Triangle Park
What war was near the city?	Civil War
What type of community is it?	fastest growing
What energy center is downtown?	Duke
What university is in Raleigh?	North Carolina State University,
What is the first historically black university?	Shaw
What president was born in Raleigh?	Andrew Johnson
What is the name of the amphitheater in Raleigh?	Walnut Creek Amphitheatre
How many miles is the city from Isaac's Tavern?	11
Why is Isaac Hunter's Tavern popular?	state legislators.
What was Raleigh as a city?	planned
What were the original boundaries?	the downtown streets of North, East, West and South streets
What city was the plan based on?	Philadelphia
Who was the governor during the Civil War?	Zebulon Baird Vance
What did the governor order constructed?	breastworks
What was Raleigh captured by in the Civil War?	Union cavalry
Who led the cavalry in the capture?	Hugh Judson Kilpatrick
Why did the city not grow during the Civil War?	a state economy based on agriculture,
What year did the News and the Observer merge?	1880
What is Raleigh's daily newspaper?	The News & Observer
What was North Carolina State called before?	The North Carolina College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts,
What year was the college founded?	1887
When did Merideth College open?	1891
When was the last time two black congressmen were elected?	1898
What district were the congressmen in 1898 from?	2nd
What happened in 1900?	the state legislature passed a new constitution
When did blacks lose the right to vote?	1908
When did black regain the right to vote?	mid-1960s
When was the Great Depression?	1930s
What did the city provide during the Great Depression?	recreational and educational programs
What was dedicated in 1932?	Raleigh Memorial Auditorium
What year was the North Carolina Symphony founded?	1932
What was charted in 1939?	Raleigh-Durham Aeronautical Authority to build a larger airport between Raleigh and Durham,
Where is Raleigh located?	northeast central region of North Carolina
What is the area known as?	"fall line"
What type of geography is in Raleigh?	gently rolling hills that slope eastward toward the state's flat coastal plain.
How far is Raleigh from Atlantic Beach?	two hours
How far is Raleigh from Richmond?	155
What historic hotel is downtown?	Fayetteville Street downtown business district,
What is in the Fayetteville business district?	PNC Plaza and Wells Fargo Capitol Center
What are some neighborhoods in Raleigh?	Cameron Park, Boylan Heights, Country Club Hills,
Who separated the neighborhoods in the early 2000's?	Downtown Raleigh Alliance
What are some common names in the area?	Warehouse, Fayetteville Street
Where is Midtown Raleigh?	North of the I-440 Beltline
What frames Midtown Raleigh?	Glenwood/Creedmoor Road to the West, Wake Forest Road to the East, and Millbrook Road
Where is the North Hills Shopping center?	Midtown Raleigh
Who was the area developer?	John Kane
When was the Midtown Raleigh Alliance formed?	July 25, 2011
Where is West Raleigh?	along Hillsborough Street and Western Boulevard.
What is West Raleigh the home of?	North Carolina State University
What arena is in the area?	PNC Arena
What is the name of the hospital in West Raleigh?	Rex Hospital.
How far is Rex Hospital from the fairgrounds?	2 miles
What are in the area?	large shopping areas.
What neighborhoods are in North Raleigh?	Harrington Grove, Springdale, Dominion Park
What are the means of transportation in the area?	U.S. Route 70, Interstate 540,
What type of area is North Raleigh?	expansive, diverse, and fast-growing
Where is South Raleigh?	along U.S. 401 south toward Fuquay-Varina
What is different about South Raleigh?	least developed and least dense
What borders South Raleigh to the west?	Cary,
Where is Holly Springs compared to South Raleigh?	southwest
What are some neighborhoods in South Raleigh?	Renaissance Park, Lake Wheeler, Swift Creek
What is to the west of Southeast Raleigh?	downtown
What areas are in Southeast Raleigh?	Rock Quarry Road, Poole Road, and New Bern Avenue
What neighborhoods does Southeast Raleigh have?	Chastain, Chavis Heights, Raleigh Country Club,
What concert venue is in the area?	Time Warner Cable Music Pavilion
What university is in this part of Raleigh?	Shaw University
What is the climate of Raleigh?	humid subtropical climate
How many seasons are there in Raleigh?	four
How many nights in a year are there in Raleigh that are freezing?	69 nights per year
What month has the most precipitation?	July
What is the hottest temperature in Raleigh?	105
How much snow does Raleigh get?	6.0 inches
When was the greatest snowfall?	January 24–25, 2000
How much snow did Raleigh get on January 24, 2000?	20.3 inches
What caused the Winter Storm of 2000?	cold air damming
What mountains are the city near?	Appalachian Mountains.
What does the area experience?	drought
How does drought effect the city?	restricted water use
When does Raleigh experience hurricanes?	late summer and early fall
What was the name of the hurricane in 2003?	Isabel
How big was the tornado in 2011?	F3
How many families lived in Raleigh in 2000?	61,371
What is the population density of Raleigh?	2,409.2 people per square mile
How many housing units were in Raleigh?	120,699 housing
What percentage of people in Raleigh are white?	63.31%
How many Native Hawaiian are in Raleigh?	0.04%
What percent of households had children in 2000?	26.5%
39.5% of the households comprised of what?	married couples living together
How many people lived alone in 2000?	33.1%
How many households had someone 65 or older?	6.2%
What was the average family size?	2.97 persons.
How many people are affiliated with religion?	46.41% of people
What is the main religion of Raleigh?	Christianity
What percent of Baptists are there in Raleigh?	10.85
What other denominations are there in Raleigh?	Eastern Orthodox, Coptic Orthodox, Jehovah's Witness,
How large of a percent does Lutheran's take up?	1.06%
What is the main industrial area of Raleigh?	banking/financial services;
What is Raleigh part of?	North Carolina's Research Triangle
What does the Research Triangle do?	high-tech and biotech research
Is the city concerned with shipping?	The city is a major retail shipping point
What industry is Raleigh a major wholesaler for?	grocery
Where are major touring acts hosted in the city?	The Time Warner Cable Music Pavilion
What is the Red Hat Amphitheater also called?	Downtown Raleigh Amphitheater
What event plaza is in Cary?	Koka Booth Amphitheatre
Where is the North Carolina State Fair?	Dorton Arena
What is the Lincoln Theater downtown?	one of several clubs in downtown Raleigh that schedules many concerts
Where is the Raleigh Memorial Auditorium?	Duke Energy Center for the Performing Arts
What other theater is in the Duke Energy Center?	Fletcher Opera Theater
When did the Meymandi Theater open?	2008
Where else can one see a theater performance?	Raleigh Little Theatre
What theaters are at North Carolina State University?	Stewart and Thompson Theaters
What is the North Carolina Museum of Art near?	North Carolina State Fairgrounds
What type of art is in the Museum of Art?	American Art, European Art and ancient art,
When was the Auguste Rodine exhibit?	2000
How many people attended the Monet exhibit?	200,000
How did the museum get the artworks they have?	public funds
When did the Carolina Hurricanes start in Raleigh?	1997
Where did the Hurricanes play their first two seasons?	Greensboro Coliseum
What is the home stadium of the Carolina Hurricanes called?	PNC Arena
What is the only professional sports team in North Carolina?	National Hockey League's Carolina Hurricanes
When did the Carolina Hurricanes win the Stanley Cup?	2006
What sports teams have been in Raleigh?	Raleigh IceCaps of the ECHL (1991–1998); Carolina Cobras of the Arena Football
What was the name of the GBA team in Raleigh?	Raleigh Bullfrogs
When did the Raleigh Cougars play?	1997–1999
What type of team was the Carolina Courage?	Women's United Soccer
What year did the Carolina Courage win the Founders Cup?	2002
Where is North Carolina State University?	southwest Raleigh
What is the mascot for North Carolina State University?	Wolfpack
Where does the football team for North Carolina State University play?	Carter-Finley Stadium
How big is Carter Finley Stadium?	third largest football stadium in North Carolina
Where does North Carolina State University men's wrestling compete?	Reynolds Coliseum
How many sites are throughout Raleigh?	150
What are there 8,100 acres of in Raleigh?	park land,
What type of race track is in Raleigh?	BMX championship-caliber
How many public lakes are in Raleigh?	5 public lakes,
What is the name of the arboretum?	J. C. Raulston Arboretum
How many incidents of violent crime were there in 2010?	1,740
What were there 12,995 of in 2010?	property crime
How does Raleigh compare in crime to the rest of the country?	far below both the national average
How many murders were in Raleigh in 2010?	14
How many incidents of motor vehicle theft were there in 2010?	870
Who operates the public schools in Raleigh?	Wake County Public School System
What is the school system praised for?	innovative efforts to maintain a socially, economically and racial balanced system
How many magnet schools are there in Raleigh?	three
What type of degree can you get from a high school in Raleigh?	International Baccalaureate
Does Raleigh have alternate high schools?	Raleigh also has two alternative high schools.
What is the area's primary airport?	Raleigh-Durham International Airport,
Where is Raleigh-Durham International Airport?	Interstate-40 between Raleigh and Durham
How many destinations does the airport offer internationally?	35
What are there 10 million of each year at the airport?	passengers
What was Terminal 2 formerly called at the airport?	Terminal C
What was Triangle Transit called before?	Triangle Transit Authority,
What does Triangle Transit offer?	scheduled, fixed-route regional and commuter bus service
Where else does Triangle Transit go to?	Raleigh-Durham International Airport, Research Triangle Park
Does Triangle Transit have a van service?	Triangle Transit also coordinates an extensive vanpool
Are employers connected with Triangle Transit?	rideshare program that serves the region's larger employers
What does RDN stand for?	Registered dietitian nutritionists
Who offers dietary advice on the role of nutrition in chronic diseases?	Certified Clinical Nutritionists
For which health professional is Governmental regulation more universal?	RDN
Who typically specializes in obesity and chronic disease?	Certified Nutrition Specialist
In which time period did the study of nutrition begin?	6th century BC
What is the European equivalent of "Qi"?	pneuma
What kind of food classification does ginger belong to?	hot
What nationality was Alcmaeon of Croton?	Greek
Other than obesity, what else would trademark an imbalance in nutrition?	emaciation
What does the Book of Daniel contain?	first recorded nutritional experiment with human subjects
Which country was being invaded when Daniel and his friends were captured?	Israel
What occupation were Daniel and his friends originally meant to have?	court servants
How long did the trial diet last?	10 days
What is another term for vegetables that was used?	pulses
How long was the doctrines of Galen in use for?	1500 years
Which famous emperor did Galen serve as a physician to?	Marcus Aurelius
Who resided at the School of Salerno in Regimen sanitatis Salernitanum?	Benedictine monks
What did Galen believe that pneuma was?	the source of life
What did each pair of attributes supposedly consist of?	four humours
Who criticized Galen in the 1500s?	Paracelsus
Which famous artist did not agree with Galen's theories?	Leonardo da Vinci
What was a burning candle comparable to?	metabolism
Which well known gas did Jan Baptist van Helmont discover?	carbon dioxide
Which scientist was able to create a model for the digestive process?	Herman Boerhaave
When was the first nutrition experiment performed?	1747
What was the name of the overlooked physician that served in the British Navy?	James Lind
The juice of which fruit was determined to have helped sailors from contracting scurvy?	lime
How many sailors died from scurvy between the years 1500 and 1800?	two million
Which nickname was given to the British sailors?	limeys
Which dietary component was not fed to dogs resulting in their death?	protein
Who first began dividing foods into categories?	William Prout
Who did Justus von Liebig argue with over the belief that animals get protein from plants?	Jean-Baptiste Dumas
Which credientials did Liebig lack despite being a leading organic chemist?	animal physiology
What can be synthesized using carbohydrates and proteins?	body fat
What was the main component of Japanese sailor's diet?	white rice
What is the scientific term for beriberi?	endemic neuritis
What major symptom other than heart problems did beriberi cause?	paralysis
Who made the observation that the Japanese sailor's diet was the cause for them developing beriberi?	Kanehiro Takaki
What was introduced to the diet on a molecular level that prevented the sailors from contracting the disease?	thiamine
What element can be found in thyroid glands?	iodine
What group of natives suffered from beriberi?	Java
Who worked with the natives to help solve their dietary issues?	Christiaan Eijkman
What simple alternative food prevented the development of beriberi in chickens?	unprocessed brown rice with the outer bran intact
How long after the natives were cured did it take for people to figure out the reason that brown rice cured them?	two decades
What was measured in the early 20th century?	caloric energy expenditure
What did Carl von Voit and Max Rubner apply to nutrition in order to receive their results?	principles of physics
Which amino acid can assist with the well - being of mice but not necessarily their growth?	tryptophan
What did Hopkins believe was required other than calories, protein and minerals to help prevent deficiency diseases?	unsuspected dietetic factors
Which experiment related to diet was conducted that required four years to complete?	single-grain experiment
What was notable about the discovered vitamin A?	fat-soluble
Which property was vitamin B found to have?	water-soluble
Which disease was vitamin C claimed to help prevent?	scurvy
What was cod liver oil able to help cure in dogs?	rickets
What was referred to as "food factor X"?	vitamin E
Who claims that the list of nutrients that humans require is incomplete?	Marion Nestle
What is the other category of nutrients that people require other than micronutrients?	macro-nutrients
What is notable about cellulose in humans?	non-digestible
What else, other than antioxidants, helps protect body systems?	phytochemicals
In which year were nutrients categorized into their two respective categories?	2014
Which category is represented by carbohydrates and fats among other nutrients?	macronutrients
What other significant aspect do macronutrients provide other than energy?	structural material
What unit other than calories is used to measure the energy generated by nutrients?	Joules
Which nutrient generally provides around 37 kJ per gram?	fats
Although vitamins are important for many reasons, which role do they not play in the human body?	provide energy
Other than fats, what else consists of atoms of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen?	carbohydrates
If a carbohydrate is not a simple monosaccharide, what else could it be?	complex polysaccharides
What do fatty acid monomers that are bound to glycerol backbones make up?	triglycerides
What characteristic about fatty acids requires them to be an essential component in a diet?	cannot be synthesized in the body
Which element do the amino acids that make up the core component of protein have in common?	nitrogen
What was traditionally believed to be absorbed quickly causing blood - glucose levels to rapidly rise?	simple carbohydrates
What is an example of a simple carbohydrate?	fructose
When simple carbohydrates undergo metabolic pathways, what do they result in after partial catabolism?	glucose
What is glucose able to stimulate that is required in the human body?	production of insulin
Where are beta cells that attach to insulin located?	pancreas
What example of a carbohydrate is unable to be fully absorbed in humans?	Dietary fiber
How many kilocalories of energy per gram is dietary fiber able to produce when successfully metabolized?	four
What is the main component that makes up dietary fiber?	cellulose
What is an example of a gastrointestinal problem other than diarrhea?	constipation
What does soluble fiber do to help lower blood glucose levels?	slow the absorption of sugar
Dietary fat can be said to consist of fatty acids bonded to which molecule?	glycerol
How many glycerol backbones does a triglyceride contain?	one
What needs to be examined to determine whether a fat can be classified as saturated or unsaturated?	the detailed structure of the fatty acids involved
Which element is present that is bonded to all of the carbons in a saturated fat?	hydrogen
What kind of fat can a trans fat be categorized as?	unsaturated fat
Where do saturated fats in a diet typically originate from?	animal sources
Which kind of fat is generally considered to be healthiest?	Unsaturated fats
Which type of fat should people attempt to avoid?	trans fats
What kind of state of matter do unsaturated fats typically have at room temperature?	liquids
Although trans fats are harmful to human health, what property do they have that makes them useful in food processing?	rancidity resistance
What does it mean when it is claimed that many fatty acids are non - essential?	the body can produce them as needed
At least how many fatty acids are essential to the human health and have to be consumed rather than produced by the body?	two
What does EPA stand for?	eicosapentaenoic acid
Outside of consumption, what would be broken down in the body to obtain DGLA and AA?	omega-6 linoleic acid
What do people consume that has low amounts of the necessary essential fatty acids?	processed vegetable oils
What is able to prevent AA from being released from membranes?	Omega-3 EPA
The conversion of omega-6 DGLA to AA is able to help regulate which process?	the production of the prostaglandins PGE1 and PGE2
What kind of process is the conversion of DGLA to AA?	desaturation
What is an example of a hormone other than insulin that is able to control the enzyme delta-5-desaturase?	glucagon
What is the scientific name for cell division?	mitosis
What primarily makes up the enzymes in our body that regulate the chemical reactions that occur?	Proteins
What is the primary component of every protein?	amino acids
What is the term that refers to the body process that produces new proteins?	protein retention
When the body no longer needs the amino acids that are present, through which excretion are they lost?	urine
Approximately how many amino acid types does the human body generally have?	twenty
What would be required for the human body to potentially have a chance to create a complete protein source?	two incomplete protein sources
Other than rice, what would be another example of an incomplete protein source?	beans
What is taken from proteins and converted to glucose by the body?	Excess amino acids
What is the term for the conversion of amino acids into glucose?	gluconeogenesis
What happens to amino acids that are left over after the body has converted what it can to glucose?	discarded
What was the early recommended amount of water that was supposedly required to keep the body hydrated?	6–8 glasses of water daily
Who originally made a water intake recommendation in 1945?	Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council
How much water should be taken in for each calorie of food that is consumed?	1 milliliter
What does ADI stand for?	adequate daily intakes
Where do humans get the 20% of water that does not come from the beverages we drink?	food
Who was similar recommended intake volumes as adults?	the elderly
Other then breastfeeding women, who what other category of woman should have increased water intake?	Pregnant
How much more water should pregnant women consumed compared to an average non - pregnant woman?	300 mL/day
Why should lactating women increase their water consumption?	To compensate for additional fluid output
How much more water do lactating women need to consume in relation to the average woman?	700 mL/day
What kind of element are dietary minerals?	inorganic chemical elements
What was the term "mineral" originally meant to describe?	the less common elements in the diet
In what form are some metals commonly found in the body?	ions
In what form should minerals be to be absorbed easier?	ionic forms
What is the most famous mineral that is artificially added that prevents goiter?	iodine
Which vitamin can be synthesized in the skin?	Vitamin D
What is required for vitamin D to be synthesized?	UVB radiation
What is an example of a vitamin - like compound that is not considered an essential dietary nutrient?	carnitine
What has recently been discovered in the thousands, especially from examining fresh vegetables?	phytochemicals
What is choline not an example of?	vitamins
What is another term that can be used to describe "potentially damaging" compounds?	mutation causing
What are oxidizers?	acceptors of electrons
In order for the body to function normally, what must be used to neutralize free radicals?	antioxidant compounds
What subgroup of phytochemicals helps make up the majority of the body's antioxidants?	polyphenols
Which area of the body does vitamin A protect?	fat areas
What term collectively describes "Firmicutes" and "Bacteroidetes" among others?	phyla
What is the importance of having phyla in the body?	essential to digestion
Which vitamin are the bacteria present in the gut responsible for producing?	vitamin B12
What role specifically in digestion do bacteria in the gut have?	breaking down and aiding in the absorption of otherwise indigestible food
Where could one find a large population of gut flora?	Animal intestines
Heart disease and obesity are examples of what kind of disease?	"Western" diseases
In which country was a study about the presence of cancer and heart disease in different regions done?	China
How much of an increase in presence of "Western" diseases was there in communities that primarily had animal - based diets as opposed to vegetable diets?	100-fold
Other than meat, what else is lacking from the people in China's diet compared to diets from the Western world?	dairy
What disease was said to possibly be the result of diets that are high in meat and dairy products?	cancers
Who released a guideline that recommends that people follow a whole plant food diet?	United Healthcare/Pacificare
Which magazine also recommended that people follow a whole plant food diet?	National Geographic
In which year was there a cover article on the National Geographic regarding diet recommendations?	2005
How many populations were studied and surveyed for the cover article?	three
Other than fruits and vegetables, what other product was highly recommended to be a part of a healthy diet?	whole grains
Other than nitrogen, what other element varies greatly between a carnivore and herbivore diet?	carbon
What percentage of nitrogen content is generally found in fungi?	5% to 10%
What process of breaking down cellulose do herbivores rely on for their essential nutrients?	bacterial fermentation
Other than sugar and fiber, what else are carbohydrates consisted of?	starch
Where can fatty acids be found?	lipids
Through what part of the body are nutrients transported to feed cells?	bloodstream
In which specific circumstance is the digestive system not the first system involved in nutrient processing?	unborn fetus
What is able to break bonds in ingested molecules?	Digestive juices
Molecules that are released from ingested foods are done so through which process?	digestive processes
Through which manner are unabsorbed matter and waste products excreted?	feces
What needs to be compared to the waste products from humans to determine what is absorbed in the body?	food
It is important to examine both the feces and what other excrement when studying absorption?	urine
Other than time consuming, what else are nutritional studies due to their length and variable count?	expensive
At which rate is the science behind nutrition continuing to evolve?	slowly
How do plants absorb essential elements that are present in the soil?	through their roots
Having leaves allows plants to absorb nutrients through which medium?	air
What is the process that plants undergo in order to obtain carbohydrates?	photosynthesis
What is the process called in which plants gather nutrients from the soil around their roots?	cation exchange
What part of the leaf in a plant takes in carbon dioxide and releases oxygen?	stomata
What can environmental depletion lead to?	crucial nutrition-related health problems
Other than malnutrition and a spread of disease, what is an example of a health problem that arose due to environmental depletion?	contamination
Other than industrial chemicals, what other industry discharges chemicals that can contaminate the environment?	agricultural
The release and contamination of the environment affects what important system other than the human race?	the ecosystem
If people's nutritional status and health changes, what could this affect in their daily routine?	diet habits
What is the abbreviation for licensed dietitians in the US?	LD
Who do dietitians have to register with other than the American Dietetic Association in order to be recognized as such in the US?	Commission for Dietetic Registration
Which specific term is unregulated but still oft associated with professionals when it comes to food and diets?	nutritionist
Which state has started to regulate the word "nutritionist"?	Florida
What are restaurants and food manufacturers required to follow in order to assist consumers looking to follow dietary guidelines?	disclosure/labeling requirements
Nutritional standards and recommendations are produced by a joint effort between the US Department of Agriculture and which other department?	US Department of Health and Human Services
Who releases guidelines that revolve around diet and physical activity recommendations?	USDA
What is the name of the concept that has replaced the food pyramid?	MyPlate
The USDA's effort sand actions are overseen by which governmental committee?	Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry Committee
On which channel are committee meetings often shown?	C-SPAN
What is the goal of Smart Bodies?	to promote nutrition literacy
Smart Bodies is an example of an initiative that was started by what level of government?	state
The Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana Foundation joined together with which University to help develop Smart Bodies?	Louisiana State Agricultural Center
When was the Smart Bodies initiative first released?	2005
What does the initiative specifically target?	childhood obesity
In England and which other country is there a curricula that revolves around nutritional education?	Wales
What is the official name of the curricula that promotes nutritional education in schools?	Personal and Social Education and Food Technology curricula
What does FCS stand for?	Family and Consumer Science
Aside from dieting and general nutritional information, what else does the curricula in England and Wales aim to teach students?	how to read nutrition labels on packaging
In which type of school are kids required to take a number of health related courses?	American
In which country were there no specific nutritional literacy studies on a national level that could be found?	U.S.
What does the abbreviation NAAL represent?	National Assessment of Adult Literacy
How many Americans were found to have intermediate health literacy?	44%
What percentage of Americans fell below the basics of health literacy?	14
People who had a lower health literacy rate were found to be living below what standard?	level of poverty
What percentage of people were were found to have a high likelihood of low literacy skills in the Mississippi Delta region?	52
What primary difference was there between the NAAL and Delta study that made comparisons difficult?	methodological differences
Who was the main author of the study that suggested that the Mississippi Delta study identified a problem of health literacy?	Zoellner
For how many years had the My Pyramid graphic been released at the time of the Mississippi Delta study?	two
Income level was found to have a signification correlation to which outcome in the study?	nutrition literacy
What did the studies show there was a lack of understanding of by the population?	nutritional information
The studies indicated that there was a lack of information in the area about what kind of choice?	food
What was found to be limited or at least difficult to get access to in the studied region?	healthful foods
What kind of constraint was found to have a significant effect on the nutritional literacy?	socioeconomic
Aside from large people living in poverty, what else is considered a socioeconomic constraint that resulted in a decrease in opportunity for healthy food choices?	low levels of education
An imbalance in the intake of nutrients by any organism can be referred by which term?	Malnutrition
In what kind of country is malnutrition often found as excessive consumption or as a nutritional imbalance?	developed
Aside from inadequate knowledge, what else is characteristic of malnutrition found in developing countries?	poor access to a range of nutritious foods
What is the name of the traditional Mali recipe that equinut is a twist on?	di-dèguè
What is the abbreviation ICRISAT short for?	International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
What is the term that refers to a viewpoint that believes a reliance on food science is a cause of poor nutrition and ill health?	Nutritionism
Who is originally claimed to have given birth to the concept of nutritionism?	Gyorgy Scrinis
Although he was not the creator of the concept, who popularized the idea of nutritionism?	Michael Pollan
Who has to rely on nutrition experts when it comes to making decisions regarding food and nutritional values?	policy makers
Which region of the world does Pollan claim could trace their health problems back to nutritionism?	Western World
What are organizations targeting with the aim of improving nutritional content or resources?	school cafeterias
Outside of policymakers and teachers, who else is a key component to improving nutritional content in schools?	managed foodservice contractors
What are health and nutrition shown to have a link to in terms of education?	overall educational success
What percentage of American students report that they currently eat the recommended servings of fruits and vegetables?	10
Which animal was shown to have a negative effect on learning behavior due to nutritional deficiencies back in 1951?	mice
Which health issue is now becoming a common issue in developing countries?	Cancer
Which organization did a study on cancer in developing countries?	International Agency for Research on Cancer
What were cancers such as liver cancer or stomach cancer found to have a link to?	consumption of carcinogenic preserved foods
The rise of lung cancer in poor nations can be attributed to the use of which product?	tobacco
Obesity, lack of exercise, age and diet are risk factors attributed to cancer that are all apart of what kind of lifestyle?	Western
Reduced insulin function can also go by what other term?	insulin resistance
Other than the reduced insulin function, what else contributes greatly to many disease states?	lifestyle-induced hyperinsulinemia
Arterial microinjuries and heart disease can all be linked back to which health issue that is caused by hyperinsulinemia?	chronic inflammation
The metabolic syndrome is a term that refers to which health issue?	insulin resistance
Hyperinsulinemia has a negative effect on the levels of which important molecules in the body?	prostaglandin PGE1/PGE2
Insulin resistance has been strongly linked to which health issue?	obesity
If someone struggles with insulin resistance, what kind of diabetes can develop as a result?	type 2
Almost all individuals who suffer from type 2 diabetes and/or obesity are found to have which trait?	marked insulin resistance
Appropriate exercise and reducing glycemic load are two examples of ways to stimulate which process?	reverse insulin resistance
Obesity can cause resistance to which hormone?	leptin
In the so called vicious cycle, what aggravates obesity to continue the cycle?	insulin/leptin resistance
A characteristic of the cycle other than fat storage is a continuously high stimulation of what?	insulin/leptin
What function do insulin and leptin normally provide in the body?	satiety signals to the hypothalamus
What effect does insulin/leptin resistance have on the function of insulin/leptin?	reduce this signal
The debate regarding factors influencing the development of insulin and leptin is not just about how, but also about what other factor?	to what extent
Other than processed foods, what else was recently introduced to the human diet?	high glycemic index
What is an example of the body's ability to maintain homeostasis being overwhelmed?	metabolic syndrome epidemic
Hyponatremia is the term that refers to which action by a human?	Excess water intake, without replenishment of sodium and potassium salts
In 2007, what kind of contest was Jennifer Strange participating in upon her death?	water-drinking
In which specific kind of events can one often find people drinking too much water?	long-distance endurance
When a human is suffering from hyponatremia, what is the main cause of damage that may occur?	swelling of the brain
Damage to the brain occurs because of the increase in which process?	osmosis
The increase in cases of diabetes, obesity and heart disease can be traced back to an increase in the consumption of what product?	sugar
What has been the increase in obesity among adults in the last 30 years in the United States?	more than doubled
What is the current percentage of obese adults in the United States?	35
Within the past 30 years, how has the number of diabetes cases changed?	quadrupled
What does the term LDL stand for?	Low-density lipoprotein
When did the Industrial Revolution roughly begin?	two hundred years ago
Apart from altering the state of food, what is the other main focus in technology increases for the food processing industry?	keep foods fresh longer
Which technology is primarily responsible for helping keep food fresh?	Cooling
Pasteurisation is an an example of a technology that aims to do what to food?	last longer without becoming spoiled
Pasteurisation and autoclavation are examples of what kind of technique?	heating
Centrifugation and pressing are prime examples of what?	Modern separation techniques
An unfortunate side effect of concentrating food components is that it causes what change in the food?	nutritional content
What kind of nutritional value do the processed foods have in comparison to their fresh variants?	reduced
What is another term other than 'fortified' that can be used to describe the addition of nutrients to processed food?	enriched
Outside of oxidized fats, what is another substance that is deemed harmful that can be found in processed foods?	trans fatty acids
What did people who became ill with beri-beri have as their main food source?	polished rice
What vitamin is removed during the polishing of rice?	thiamine
Which disease became prevalent among infants in the United States as an effect of processed foods?	scurvy
What treatment did the milk that was fed to infants undergo to control bacterial disease?	Pasteurisation
What was destroyed during the pasteurisation of the milk?	vitamin C
What is undoubtedly a cause of the increase in obesity related diseases that are becoming prevalent?	widespread application of some modern food processing technologies
Aside from agricultural subsidizing, what else does the food processing industry influence in terms of political decisions?	nutritional recommendations
What is perceived as the general priority of the food processing industry in this sort of economy?	effective production of cheap foods with a long shelf-life
The more expensive fresh foods have what nutritional value in relation to processed food?	superior
Other than being cheaper, what is another main draw of processed foods?	more convenient
What year did the Crimean War begin?	1853
What year did the Crimean War end?	1856
Who controlled the rights of Christian minorities in the Holy Land?	Ottoman Empire
Who promoted the rights of the Catholic people?	The French
Who promoted the rights of the Eastern Orthodox Christians?	Russia
Which two figures refused to back down after the churches worked out their disagreements?	Nicholas I of Russia and Napoleon III
Who wanted the Orthodox subjects to be placed under their protection?	Nicholas
Who arranged the compromise that Nicholas agreed to?	Britain
Who demanded the changes that Nicholas later refused?	Ottomans
What month did the Ottomans declare war on Russia?	October
Where did the war begin?	Balkans
Russian troops took over which provinces first?	modern Romania
Who were the Ottomans led by?	Omar Pasha
When the Turkish tried to provide reinforcements, where were they stopped at?	Sinop
Who hurried their forces to Gallipoli when they feared the Ottoman for would collapse?	France and the UK
Near what sea did the allies decide to attack the Russians?	Black Sea
In what year did the allies land on the Crimean peninsula?	1854
The battle of Battle of Balaclava took place in what month?	October
Who defeated Nicholas's second counter strike at the Battle of Balaclava?	Omar Pasha
The Crimean peninsula is located in what city?	Sevastopol
How long did it take for Sevastopol to fall?	eleven months
Who wanted peace when they feared of being invaded from the west?	Russia
What was the name of the treaty that ended the war?	Treaty of Paris
When was the Treaty of Paris signed?	30 March 1856
Who regained control of the Christian churches after the war was over?	Orthodox church
What modern technologies were first used during the Crimean War?	explosive naval shells, railways, and telegraphs
Who was recognized for treating the wounded while pioneering modern nursing?	Florence Nightingale
The war was one of the first to be documented in what two ways?	written reports and photographs
In what year did The Greek Uprising take place?	1821
Who disbanded the Janissary corps?	Sultan Mahmud II
In what year was the Janissary corp disbanded?	1826
Who destroyed most of the Ottoman's naval forces during the Battle of Navarino?	the allied Anglo-Franco-Russian fleet
In what year did Greece finally become an independent state?	1830
In what year did France move into Alger?	1830
In 1831, who was the strongest vassal of the Ottoman Empire?	Muhammad Ali of Egypt
Who wanted to take over Constantinople?	Egyptians
What military force did Mahmud II ask for aid?	Russian
How many Russians troops were sent to the Bosphorus shores?	10 000
In 1838, who was not pleased of their lack of power in Syria?	Muhammad Ali of Egypt
Who did the Ottomans lose to at the Battle of Nezib?	Egyptians
In what year did the Battle of Nezib take place?	1839
Who helped save the Ottomans by signing a convention in London?	Great Britain, Austria, Prussia and Russia
In what year did Muhammad Ali  finally accept the terms of the London convention?	1840
Who operated as the "police of Europe"?	Russia
What treaty was signing in 1815?	Treaty of Vienna
In what year did the Hungarian Revolution take place?	1848
Who did Russia help during the Hungarian Revolution?	Austria
In exchange for helping Austria, Russia wanted to be freely able to handle any issues they had with who?	Ottoman Empire
For 200 years, Russia been expanding across what area?	Wild Fields
Why did Russia move towards the warmer ports of the Black Sea?	to promote year-round trade and a year-round navy
Who did Russia first have issues with when moving towards the warmer ports in the Black Sea?	Ukrainian Cossacks
Who was treated as second class citizens under the Ottomans?	Orthodox Christians
During the Russian imperial times, what other name was southern Ukraine known by?	New Russia
What did Russia fail to build south?	railroad network
What did some feel the Russian army was only good for?	parades
What did Russian colonels due to the men who served under them?	pocketed their men's pay
In what year did France and the U.K declare war on Russia?	1854
What individual was responsible for France and the U.K declaring war on Russia?	Napoleon III
Who demanded protection for Roman Catholic rights in sacred places in Palestine?	Charles de La Valette
Charles de La Valette was a devoted and leading member of what party?	clerical party
What position did Napoleon III appoint to La Valette?	ambassador to the Porte
What was the name of the ship that Napoleon sent to the Black Sea?	Charlemagne
Sending a ship to the Black Sea violated the terms made during what agreement?	London Straits Convention
Who felt threaten by France's force and ended up signing a new treaty?	Sultan Abdülmecid I
Who previously held the keys to the Church of the Nativity?	Greek Orthodox Church
Who held authority over Roman Catholic holy places after Sultan Abdülmecid I agreed to the new treaty?	France and the Roman Catholic Church
Who was the British ambassador in 1853?	George Hamilton Seymour
Who declared they no longer wanted to spread Imperial Russian?	Nicholas
Who did the Tsar send on a mission to Ottoman Sublime Porte?	Prince Menshikov
In what year was Prince Menshikov sent to the Ottoman Sublime Porte?	1853
Who wanted to ruled over the 12 million Orthodox Christians in the Empire?	Menshikov
Who was the Prime Minister of the British Government in 1853?	Lord Aberdeen
Who did Aberdeen appoint the position of British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire to?	Stratford Canning
Who replaced Stratford Canning after he first resigned as British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire ?	Colonel Rose
After resigning where did Stratford Canning sail off to?	Constantinople
Who did Stratford Canning convince to turn down the treaty proposal?	Sultan
Who sent armies across the Pruth River?	the Tsar
Who commanded the armies across the Pruth River?	Field Marshal Ivan Paskevich and General Mikhail Gorchakov
Who was in control of the Danubian Principalities?	Ottoman
In what year did Russian soldiers cross the Pruth River?	1853
How did most Russians die when crossing the Pruth River?	sickness
Who was given the special role of guardian over the Orthodox Christians in Moldavia and Wallachia?	Russia
Who recognized and gave Russia the special guardian role?	Ottoman Empire of the Tsar's
Who felt Europe would not object to the joining of neighboring Ottoman provinces?	Nicholas
What European powers met in Vienna for a conference?	United Kingdom, France, Austria and Prussia
Who delivered the peace terms of the Vienna Conference to the Russians?	Count Karl von Buol
In what year did Count Karl von Buol deliver the Vienna Conference news to the Russians?	1853
Who rejected the proposal due to poor word phrasing?	Abdülmecid I
Who approved the proposal given by Count Karl von Buol ?	Nicholas I
What battle took place on November 30, 1853?	Battle of Sinop
What did the Russian send to Sinop?	a fleet
While anchored in the port, what did the Russians destroy?	a patrol squadron of Ottoman frigates and corvettes
What did Battle of Sinop provide for France and the U.K?	cause for war
When did the Russia disregard the ultimatum to leave the Danubian Principalities?	28 March 1854
Who was concerned with Russia  capturing Constantinople?	Britain
Who sent men to the Dardanelles?	The Corps of Royal Engineers
As men were sent to the Dardanelles, where did Burgoyne go?	Paris
Who was Burgoyne visiting in Paris?	British Ambassador and the French Emperor
Who wrote to Burgoyne on February 8th?	Lord Cowley
In what year did the Hungarian revolution take place?	1848
Who felt Austria would side with him due to the Hungarian revolution outcome?	Nicholas
Who did Austria feel threatened by?	Russian troops in the Balkans
Who wanted the Russian forces to leave the principalities?	the United Kingdom and France
Why did the U.K and France get involved with the war against the Russia?	Russia's rejection of the ultimatum
The Ottoman ultimatum took place in what year?	1853
What general crossed across the Danube at Vidin?	Omar Pasha
After crossing the Danube at Vidin, what city did General Omar Pasha take control over?	Calafat
After crossing the Danube at Silistra, in what city did the Ottomans attack the Russians?	Oltenița
What is the name of the village 9 miles north of Calafat where the Ottoman forces attacked the Russians?	Chetatea or Cetate
Who advanced on Dobruja in the spring of 1854?	the Russians
What river did the Russians cross to get to Dobruja?	Danube River
How man troops did the Russians have when they attacked Silistra ?	60,000 troops
When did the siege of Silistra end?	23 June 1854
Why couldn't the French and English take control of the field?	lack of equipment
Who stopped the Russians from attacking Vidin?	Austrian forces
How man men did the Austrian forces have when stopping the attack on Vidin?	280,000
What river did the Russians crossed when they entered the city of Moldavia?	River Pruth
Who didn't show any signs of rising up against the Turks?	Orthodox Christians
After the settlement between Russia and Turkey, who did the Austrians decide to join?	Turkey
The city of Varna is located on what coast of the Black Sea?	western coast
Who lead the Turks when crossing the Danube into Wallachia ?	Omar Pasha
In what year did the Turks cross the Danube into Wallachia ?	1854
In what city did Omar Pasha attack the Russians after crossing the Danube into Wallachia ?	Giurgiu
The ordered the Russian troops to leave the Principalities?	Tsar Nicholas I
At what harbor did a Russian fleet attacked a Ottoman force?	harbour at Sinop
What was the name of the ship that was attacked outside of the Odessa harbor?	Furious
Who attacked the port after the attack outside of Odessa harbor?	an Anglo-French fleet
After the battle of Sinop, what steamship approached the Port of Sevastopol to show support for Turkey?	HMS Retribution
Where was the port where most of the Black Sea fleet was located?	Sevastopol
What did the Russians turn their warships into?	blockships
Why did the Russians strip their warships of their guns?	to reinforce batteries on shore
How many 60-gun frigates did the Russians lose in the Black Sea?	four
How many 84-gun two-deckers did the Russians lose in the Black Sea?	twelve
In what year did the Russians leave Wallachia and Moldavia?	1854
War fever from what two countries caused the war to continue on?	UK and France
Who voted to have a committee investigate the mismanagement during the war?	Parliament
In what year did the Crimean campaign open?	1854
360 ships landed in what bay?	bay of Eupatoria
How many Marines cause Eupatoria to surrender?	500 Marines
What is the name of the bay located at the south west coast of the Crimean Peninsula?	Calamita Bay
The Russians were surprised because they were expecting the fleet to land where?	Katcha
How many men did the Russians lose after three hours?	6000 men
Which river did the allies come across the Russian Army?	Alma river
How many hours did it take to force the Russians away during the attack?	three hours
How many allies were lost during the battle?	3,300
Which way did the Russians believe they should have traveled?	south
When did the army march to the southeast?	25 September
Where did the Russians retreat to?	into the city.
Who was the engineer adviser?	Sir John Burgoyne
Who were the joint commanders?	Raglan and St Arnaud
When did the continuous attack start?	17 October
When the continuous attack started, how many guns were firing?	126 guns
Who was not ready to start the attack?	the French
Who was outgunned due to heavy guns at a southern defense?	the allies
Who wanted to commence with the attack during the afternoon?	The British
Who did the Russians attack at the beginning off the Battle of Balaclava?	93rd Highlanders
Near what village were the 93rd Highlanders posted at?	Kadikoi
What risky maneuver did Sir Colin Campbell have the 93rd Highlanders form?	a single line, two men deep
Who led the 93rd Highlanders?	Sir Colin Campbell
What weapon did Sir Colin Campbell troops use during the Battle of Alma?	Minie rifles
Who countered the Russian cavalry's movement?	Heavy Brigade
Who failed to take advantage of the retreat?	local commanders
Who sent the order to have them advance their position?	Lord Raglan
Who ignored Lord Raglan's advice to advance?	The local commanders
Who led the charge on the Valley of Balaclava?	Cardigan
Who was Cardigan under fire from when advancing on the Valley of Balaclava?	Russian batteries
How many people did Cardigan lose during the Light Brigade?	278
Who wrote the famous poem about the Light Brigade?	Alfred Lord Tennyson
What was the name of the poem that memorialized the Light Brigade?	The Charge of the Light Brigade
What stopped ground operations during the winter?	a deteriorating supply situation
What caused the HMS Prince to sink?	a storm
What was the HMS Prince carrying when it sunk?	a cargo of winter clothing
What arrived in January with an engineering crew?	A tramroad
What caused the electrical telegraph to be delayed for some time?	the frozen ground
What did the French believe was instrumental in their defense?	the Malakoff
Where was the Russians building a new fort?	Mamelon
Mamelon is found on a hill in front of what suburban commune?	Malakoff
After fighting for weeks, what did the Russians continue to have control over?	the Mamelon
Who was the garrison commander that died on June 30th 1855?	Admiral Nakhimov
What figure died on June 28th 1855?	Raglan
What did the Russians try to attack during the month of August?	the base at Balaclava
Who defended the base at Balaclava?	newly arrived Sardinian and Ottoman troops
Who was defeated at the battle of Tchernaya?	the Russians
What was being built that caused unpremeditated fighting on each side?	forward rifle pits and defensive positions
What month did the capture of Malakoff take place?	September
Who captured Malakoff?	the French
Who failed to take back Malakoff?	the Russian defences
Who took control of the Great Redan?	the British
What did the British-French commanders send to disrupt Russian communications and supplies?	Anglo-French naval squadron
What sea was the Anglo-French naval squadron sent to?	Azov Sea
Where did British-French warships enter on May 12th 1855?	the Kerch Strait
What seaport did the British-French attack with steamers and gunboats?	the seaport of Taganrog
The seaport of Taganrog is near what port city?	Rostov on Don
What caused the HMS Jasper to get stuck in shallow water?	a fisherman who moved buoys
Who blew up the HMS Jasper?	The Cossacks
During what days did the allied squadron third siege attempt take place?	19–31 August
The allied fleet departed the Gulf of Taganrog on what date?	2nd September
Why did the third siege attempt fail?	the city was already fortified
Who captured the border front of Saint Nicholas during a night attack?	the Turks
How many troops did the Turks have when crossing the Cholok River?	20000 troops
After giving up their position at Poti and Redut Kale, where did the Russians retreat to?	Marani
How many troops did the Turks send to Gyumri?	30000
What were the Turks waiting for when positioned near Akhaltsike?	reinforcements
Who make the Turks retreat back to Batum?	Eristov
Who occupied Bayazit?	Wrangel
Where did the main forces stand?	Kars and Gyumri
On August 4th, who thought the other side was withdrawing?	the Russians
Who made a secret agreement to remain neutral?	the Persians
What caused the number of Turkish soldiers to decrease?	disease
How man troops were the Turks forces in the east reduced to?	75,000
Who kept Muravyev informed about the Turks at Kar?	The local Armenian population
What did Muravyev attend to do to the Turks in order to defeat them?	starve them out
What city did Muravyev decide not to take control over?	Erzerum
Who vetoed Omar Pasha from landing in Georgia?	the western powers
In September of 1855, how many Turks could be found at Batum?	8000
When landing at Batum, what were the Turks primary focus?	Sukhum Kale
What river divides Abkhazia from Georgia?	the Ingur River
What did Omar Pasha finally reach on December 2nd 1855?	the Tskhenis-dzqali
What is the Russian capital?	Saint Petersburg
Which theater was next to Saint Petersburg?	The Baltic
Which fleet joined the Baltic attack?	Anglo-French fleet
When did the Anglo-French fleet join the Baltic attack?	April 1854
Which two fleets returned to Kronstadt?	British and French fleet
When did the French and British capture the Russian Bomarsund fortress?	August 1855
Where was the Russian Bomarsund fortress at?	Åland Islands
Who led the ship Rossiya?	Captain Viktor Poplonsky
What was captain Viktor Poplonsky defending?	entrance to the harbor
What greatly benefited the Russian resistance?	newly invented blockade mines
Who contributed the most to developing naval mining?	Immanuel Nobel
Immanuel Noble had expensive knowledge in what field?	industrial explosives
Who named the torpedo mines?	Fulton
What was Immanuel Nobel son's name?	Alfred Nobel
Who was in charge of the HMS Pique?	Rear Admiral David Price
The Russians escaped under the cover of what in 1855?	snow
Petropavlovsk is located on what peninsula?	the Kamchatka Peninsula
Who gave Camillo di Cavour the orders to send soldiers to aid the French and British forces?	Victor Emmanuel II
Camillo di Cavour sent how many troops to aid the French and British forces?	15,000
Who commanded the soldiers sent by Camillo di Cavour?	General Alfonso La Marmora
The Battle of the Chernaya took place in what year?	1855
Where was Victor Emmanuel II from?	Piedmont-Sardinia
When Russia attacked the Ottoman Empire who glimpsed an opportunity to advance North and South?	King Otto of Greece
When the Ottoman forces were busy, who did Greece invade?	Thessaly and Epirus
From April 1854 to February 1857, what port did the British and French lock down?	Greek port at Piraeus
In what year did the Epirus Revolt take place?	1854
Who stirred up the Epirus Revolt of 1854?	Greeks
On January 21 1855, where did people protest the war?	Trafalgar Square
How did troops stop the riot?	with truncheons
What were the people using during the protest?	snowballs
Who resigned as Prime Minister on January 30, 1855?	Aberdeen
What position did Lord Palmerston previously hold before becoming a Prime Minister?	Foreign Secretary
Where was the Treaty of Paris signed?	the Congress of Paris
What year was the Treaty of Paris signed?	1856
Who agreed to not have any military arsenal on the Black Sea coast?	the Tsar and the Sultan
Who were the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia later return to?	the Ottoman Empire
Who returned towns and seaports to Russia?	The United Kingdom, France, Sardinia and Turkey
What year did the Treaty of Paris fall?	1871
In what war was France defeated by Prussia?	Franco-Prussian War
Between what years did the  Franco-Prussian War take place?	1870–1871
Napoleon III was removed to form what?	a Third French Republic
Who renounced the Black Sea clause?	Russia
Who lost the most due to the Crimean War?	Austria
Russia failed to help Austria during what war that took place in 1866?	Austro-Prussian War
Who became diplomatically isolated after the war?	Kingdom of Sardinia
France rose to power after what war?	The Crimean War
What empire declined after the Crimean War?	the Ottoman Empire
The Crimean war marked the end of what dominant European power?	Concert of Europe
Who made the view of diplomatic drift popular?	A. W, Kinglake
What did A.W Kinglake make the British out to be?	as victims
Who believed Britain was following a strategy when trying to destroy Russian Navy?	Andrew Lambert and Winfried Baumgart
What did the Russians fear losing without compensation?	British Columbia
What province became more popular and saw a increase in population after the war?	British Columbia
Who made the call to sell Alaska?	Alexander II
Who did the Russians offer to sell Alaska to?	the United States
Who is Russia's largest regional rival?	the United Kingdom
Who provided notable documentation of the war?	William Howard Russell
 William Howard Russell wrote for what newspaper at the time?	The Times
Who's photographs accompanied William Howard Russell documentation?	Roger Fenton
Who extended the telegraph to the coast of the Black Sea?	the French
After the telegraph was extended to the coast of the Black Sea, how long did it take news of the war to reach London?	two days
Who demanded drastic reforms after the war?	the newspapers
The outbreak of the Indian Revolution took place in what year?	1857
What poem demonstrates that the war became a symbol of failures?	Charge of the Light Brigade
The tactical use of railways was first used during what war?	The Crimean War
Who gave the first live war report?	William Howard Russell
Due to his reporting skills, some give Russell credit for doing what?	prompting the resignation of the sitting British government
What reduced the independence of British overseas possessions from their commanders in London?	the telegraph
What was the first European war to be photographed?	The Crimean War
What two key elements that distinguish literature as a written form of art?	deemed to have artistic or intellectual value
What are two major divisions of literature?	fiction or non-fiction
Besides this major division, what are two other sub-divisions to describe literature?	poetry or prose
Prose literature can be sub-divided into what formats?	the novel, short story or drama
What words are the Latin roots of the word "literature?"	literatura/litteratura
The changing nature of the meaning of the term "literature" can be described as what?	a "culturally relative definition"
In Western Europe until the 1700s, literature was a term used to describe what?	all books and writing
During what literary movement did the definition of literature begin to narrow?	the Romantic period
During that 18th century period, literature began to be applied how?	it began to demarcate "imaginative" literature
What is the main component of the qualitative judgment definition of literature?	writing that possesses high quality or distinction
What French term for value-based literature literally translates as "fine writing?"	belles-lettres
Encyclopedia Britannica defined literature in its 1911 editions how?	"the best expression of the best thought reduced to writing."
What effect does the evolving definition of literature have?	anything which is universally regarded as literature has the potential to be excluded
A definition of literature that incorporates style and the poetic nature of prose is what?	formalist
What is one example of writing that the formalist definition distinguishes literature from?	journalism
What element of the formalist definition makes it difficult to apply?	"ordinary language"
What part of ordinary language makes it difficult to apply the formalist definition?	an unstable category, differing according to social categories and across history
The formalist definition when applied to industry writing allows it to be called literature when it does what?	must use language according to particular standards
What elements of language make for poetic literature?	aesthetic and rhythmic qualities
Poetry is usually differentiated from prose by what factor?	verse
If prose uses sentences, what is the equivalent in poetry?	lines
Poetry was considered to need lines and meter until when?	the nineteenth century
The structure of poetry may have existed before what?	literacy
Literature intended for performance is what?	Drama
Drama is sometimes blended with what other elements?	music and dance
What are two types of drama that incorporate music or dance?	opera and musical theatre
Drama meant to be performed in a theater is what?	A play
What do we call the author of a play?	a playwright
The earliest form of drama we know of was part of what culture?	Greek
Tragedy was a dramatic style that evolved from what?	performance associated with religious and civic festivals
A tragedy typically involved what subject matter?	historical or mythological themes
What media was the play War Of The Worlds written for?	radio
In what year was War Of The Worlds originally presented?	1938
Literature, regardless of how the definition is applied, can be interpreted as what?	written records
We can learn what by carefully examining our literature?	our history
Who wrote "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: Canto I"?	Lord Byron
Passing information down through generations was made easier when our society did what?	once we began to write it down
Authors of literature frequently reference what antecedents?	Greek mythology and other old religious texts or historical moments
What are some classical societies whose literature is still studied today?	Ancient China, Ancient India, Persia and Ancient Greece and Rome
Besides entertainment or informational value, classic literature also possessed what quality?	a covert moral or didactic purpose
What societal evolution helped to develop drama and satire by providing a ready audience?	urban culture
From what settings did lyric poetry derive?	courts and aristocratic circles
What is an example of a collection of classic Chinese lyric poetry?	the Shijing or Book of Songs
Subjects featured in Ancient Chinese literature include what?	philosophy, historiography, military science, agriculture, and poetry
What two inventions helped make Chinese literature especially important and portable?	modern paper making and woodblock printing
What historic period was the foundry for classic Chinese literature in the ancient world?	the Hundred Schools of Thought period
What classic work of war science originated during this period?	The Art of War
Who wrote The Art Of War?	Sun Tzu
What were some different genres that emerged from ancient India's oral literary traditions?	drama, fables, sutras and epic poetry
An important language for ancient Indian literature is what?	Sanskrit
What ancient religious scriptures were among the first examples of Indian literature?	The Vedas
The Vedic Period refers to what expanse of time?	the mid 2nd to mid 1st millennium BCE
The Vedic Period began in the Late Bronze Age and extended until when?	the Iron Age
What two epic narratives were written by Homer?	the Iliad and the Odyssey
Who wrote Works and Days and Theogony?	Hesiod
Plato and Aristotle wrote what type of literature?	philosophical texts
Who were two important Classic Greek lyric poets?	Sappho and Pindar
The two great ancient Greek historians were?	Herodotus and Thucydides
Much medieval literature was influenced by the works of what classic culture?	Roman
What form of literature enjoyed the most widespread popularity during the Middle Ages?	the romance
What element is characteristic of a medieval romance?	an adventurous and sometimes magical narrative
What helped cause the widespread appearance of multiple forms of literature in the Renaissance?	the invention of printing
What is an early example of the novel form of literature from Europe?	the German Faust books
What literary movement in the 1700s recalled the fantastical literature of medieval times?	Romanticism
What elements in 19th century European literature were a reaction to the romanticism movement?	realism and naturalism
What are two elements prevalent among characters at the center of romanticism works?	individual experience and emotion
How did naturalism effect the greater world?	influenced social and political change
20th century literature reacted to the objectivity of naturalism in the 19th century to what?	the subjective
What sub-group of literature emerged in the 20th century?	Genre fiction
Alternative reality genre fiction is also known as what?	science fiction
Who were two 20th century writers who blurred the lines between journalism and literature?	William Burroughs, in his early works, and Hunter S. Thompson
By what means did these two writers create and emergent convergence of literature and journalism?	strong subjective statements
Critics based in what movement find fault in objective realism?	post-modern
What two elements have reduced the literary nature of scientific journals?	advances and specialization
The segregation of science writing means that articles in those subjects primarily appear where?	journals
The work of what classical scientists is caught between being outdated and of literary importance?	Aristotle, Copernicus, and Newton
In what coursework is one still likely to encounter the works of these classic scientists?	"history of science" programmes
What classic area of study is now mostly reserved for academic consideration?	Philosophy
Most serious studies in philosophy are segregated to what publications?	academic journals
Who are some of the most important philosophers in history?	Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, Augustine, Descartes, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche
What aspect of modern academic philosophy is less literary than technical in nature?	logic
Serious studies in logic tend to resemble what discipline, moreso than literature?	mathematics
Literature gives the reader insights into what areas of its characters?	intimate emotional aspects
How does literary fiction aid the person who reads it?	It benefits the psychological development and understanding
What writer's entry in "The English Journal" was concerned with young adult fiction?	D. Mitchell
Why did this author embrace young adult literature as a grownup?	to re-experience the emotional psychology she experienced as a child
How did the writer refer to this psychological state experienced as a youth?	“wonder”
How does literature unite members of a society?	by provoking universal emotions
How does literature expand the horizons of its readers?	allows readers to access cultural aspects that they are not exposed to
What determines what literary structure a literary author uses for expression of ideas?	what psychological emotion he or she is attempting to describe
What are the levers an author uses in literature to describe a psychological emotion?	literary devices
Who conceived of "The Third Force Psychology Theory?"	Maslow
The theory states that at the center of humans beings is what?	a nature within them that demonstrates their true “self”
The theory suggests that the quest for this nature represents what?	the reason for living
What causes a person to become separated from their "true self"?	neurological development
What author espoused the theory of the "pristine unconscious?"	D.H Lawrence
What is literary historical writing sometimes called?	creative nonfiction
Reporting that attempts a creative or literary bent is sometimes called what?	literary journalism
What is the main function of journalism or historical documentation?	to record data or convey immediate information
Who are some classic historians regarded as literary historians?	Herodotus, Thucydides and Procopius
What Babylonian ruler created formal law tables?	Hammurabi
What religious scripture can be fit into a large, loose definition of legal literature?	the Bible
Roman civil law was written and codified into a unified system by what group?	the Corpus Juris Civilis
Under what Emperor did this group sit?	Justinian I
What empire did Justinian preside over?	the Byzantine Empire
Literary devices are employed for what reason?	produce specific effects
What is one form of narration in literature?	first-person
What are two types of narrative structure in literature?	linear narrative or a nonlinear narrative
Why would an author utilize experimental narratives in literature?	to surprise the reader
In what type of writing would a more familiar, standard literary narrative structure be employed?	a conventional murder-mystery novel
What was the term used to describe the age in which Ibn Sina created a big body of work?	the Islamic Golden Age
What is one example of the type of translations done in the Islamic Golden Age?	Persian
What school translated Greco-Roman texts during the Islamic Golden Age?	the Kindi school
What was one dynasty that provided a great atmosphere for cultural development?	the Buyid dynasty
What city was known as a cultural capital of the Islamic world?	Baghdad
What was one subject that Avicenna further developed?	theology
Who is another philosopher during this Islamic Golden Age?	Al-Farabi
What is the name of one library that Avicenna had access to?	Hamadan
Who was the famous astronomer that Avicenna met before he left Khwarezm?	Al-Biruni
What text was proof that Avicenna debated philosophy with some of the greatest scholars of the time?	the 'Ahd with Bahmanyar
What present-day country was Avicenna born in?	Uzbekistan
What Samanid dynasty capital was Avicenna born near?	Bukhara
What present-day country is Avicenna's father thought to have come from?	Afghanistan
What was Avicenna's mother's name?	Setareh
By what age had Avicenna learned the entire Quran?	ten
What secret society was Avicenna considered to be a follower of?	the Brethren of Purity
Who thought that Avicenna was a Brethren of Purity follower?	Medieval historian Ẓahīr al-dīn al-Bayhaqī
What Islamic denomination was Avicenna thought to be a member of?	Sunni
Who thought Avicenna was a Shia?	Nurullah Shushtari
What was the name of one man who thought Avicenna was Sunni?	Jules J. Janssens
What had Avicenna memorized by the age of 10?	Quran
Who did Avicenna learn Indian arithmetic from?	ءMahmoud Massahi
What did Avicenna learn from the Sunni scholar Ismail al-Zahid?	Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence)
What was one philosophy book that Avicenna was taught from?	Euclid's Elements
What unpopular philosopher's text did Avicenna learn from?	Abu Abdullah Nateli
What text could Avicenna not understand?	the Metaphysics of Aristotle
What helped Avicenna understand the Metaphysics of Aristotle?	al-Farabi's commentary
How long did Avicenna study philosophy?	year and a half
How many times did Avicenna read through the Metaphysics of Aristotle?	Forty times
How much did Avicenna pay for the book that helped him understand the Aristotle text?	three dirhams
At what age did Avicenna turn to away from philosophy?	16
What subject did Avicenna start studying at 16?	medicine
Avicenna became a qualified physician at what age?	18
Avicenna found medicine to be much easier than what subject?	mathematics
Who was Ibn Sina's first appontment?	the emir, Nuh II
What did Ibn Sina receive as payment for helping the emir?	access to the royal library of the Samanids
Why did some accuse Ibn Sina of burning down the royal library?	to conceal the sources of his knowledge
Who did Ibn Sina assist in his financial labors?	his father
What year did the emir Null II recover from his illness?	997
At what age did Avicenna lose his father?	22
What dynasty ended in December 1004?	The Samanid dynasty
What modern country did Ibn Sina travel to after the end of the Samanid dynasty?	Turkmenistan
What is one district that Ibn Sina traveled through in search of more work?	Nishapur
Who did Ibn Sina turn down in order to travel westwards after the Samanid dynasty ended?	Mahmud of Ghazni
What city did Ibn Sina settle in?	Rey
What modern city of today was Rey in the vicinity of?	Tehran
How many of Ibn Sina's shorter works were said to have been created in Rey?	thirty
Ibn Sina left Rey and moved southwards to what city?	Hamadãn
What office did Ibn Sina receive in Hamadan?	office of vizier
Where did Ibn Sina hope to flee to after Hamadan?	city of Isfahan
What two cities were at war during this time?	Isfahan and Hamadãn
What year did Isfahan gain victory over Hamadan?	1024
What mercenaries were expelled after Isfahan's victory over Hamadan?	the Tajik
How did Ibn Sina escape from Hamadan?	in the dress of a Sufi ascetic
In what language was most of Ibn Sina's works written in?	Arabic
What is one subject that Ibn SIna specialized in?	ethics
Ibn Sina also wrote some of his works in what other language?	Persian
What famous philosopher did Ibn Sina criticize heavily?	Aristotle
What is one of the subjects of a treatise by Ibn Sina?	Metaphysics
Ibn Sina's Book of Healing was partially available in what language?	Latin
How many years did it take for Ibn Sina's Book of Healing to be available in Latin?	fifty
On what continent was the Book of Healing finally available fifty years after its composition?	Europe
What was the title of Ibn Sina's Book of Healing?	Sufficientia
Who did Avicenna's metaphysics works have an influence on?	Thomas Aquinas
What does Islamic philosophy more clearly explain than Aristotelianism?	essence and existence
Who does Ibn Sina's philosophy owe much to?	al-Farabi
What is early Islamic metaphysics imbued with?	Islamic theology
What did Avicenna start an inquiry into?	the question of being
What two points did he write about?	essence (Mahiat) and existence (Wujud)
Who also began an inquiry into the question of being?	al-Farabi
What is the Arabic term for existence?	Wujud
Mahiat is Arabic for what?	essence
What is one modality of being that Avicenna analyzed?	necessity
According to Avicenna, what could eventually be actualized by an external cause?	contingency-in-itself
What is the necessary according to Avicenna?	the source of its own being without borrowed existence
According to Avicenna, what always exists?	The necessary
If necessary being is true in itself, what is contingent?	false in itself
The necessary exists due to what?	Its-Self
What is something that the necessary does not have?	a definition
What is the Arabic for situation?	wad
What is one thing that the Necessary is detached from?	time
What religion was Avicenna?	Muslim
What did Avicenna want to reconcile with Islamic theology?	rational philosophy
What did Avicenna hope to do through his work?	prove the existence of God
Up until what century was Avicenna's work highly influential?	19th century
Who did Avicenna view as inspired philosophers?	the prophets
What did Avicenna consider to be the only way to distinguish real philosophy from illusion?	philosophy
What did Avicenna fear about stating his theories on philosophy more clearly?	the political implications of such a theory
What did Avicenna not consider when explaining his theories on philosophy?	epistemological matters
Which interpretation of Avicenna's work was more taught in Islamic schools?	al-Razi
Interpretations of Avicenna's work split into how many different schools?	three
Who used only parts of Avicenna's works to support their own great spiritual insights?	al-Ghazali
Who used Avicenna's work to help understand future political events?	al-Tusi
What are Islamic schools also known as?	madrasahs
Where was Avicenna once imprisoned?	the castle of Fardajan
What did Avicenna write while he was imprisoned?	"Floating Man"
What was the soul according to Avicenna?	a substance
How is the soul perceived according to Avicenna's work "Floating Man"?	intellectually
How did Avicenna want man to think of themselves as?	suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations
Where did reason interact with sensation according to Avicenna?	the brain
What is the universal agent?	Intellect
In Avicenna's work "Floating Man", what is the core of a human being?	the knowledge that "I am"
What is the body's perfection?	the soul
In Avicenna's "Floating Man", what could the essence of a person not be?	the body
What philosopher did Avicenna discuss in his The Book of Healing text?	Aristotle
What work of Aristotle's does Avicenna focus on?	Posterior Analytics
What method did Avicenna criticize as not leading to absolute certainty?	Aristotelian induction
What was a subject that Avicenna studied, but did not develop a theory on?	temporal logic
Who expanded on Avicenna's work in temporal logic?	Najm al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī
What became the dominant system of Islamic logic?	Avicennian logic
What European logician was greatly influenced by Avicenna?	Albertus Magnus
Whose law of noncontradiction did Avicenna endorse?	Aristotle
What is Avicenna's Book of Healing referred to in Arabic?	Kitab al-shifa
What subject is seen throughout Avicenna's Book of Healing?	classical psychology
In an argument by Avicenna, the soul is without what?	quantitative extension
Whose argument is similar to Avicenna's that the soul is without quantitative extension?	Descartes
What is the Latin for Avicenna's psychology parts in his Book of Healing?	De Anima
What does Avicenna ground his psychology on?	physiology
According to Avicenna, the body and soul must be what in order to ensure the soul's individuation?	strong enough
How does Avicenna  explain the connection between body and soul?	his understanding of perception
How does man first perceive features of an object?	external senses
The body and soul's interaction takes place where?	the physical body
What Muslim astronomer did Avicenna influence?	Al-Biruni
What subject did Avicenna consider to be a separate discipline from astrology?	mathematical astronomy
What philosopher thought the stars received their light from the sun?	Aristotle
What planet did Aristotle think was a spot on the sun?	Venus
Where did Avicenna think Venus was in relation to the sun?	below the Sun
What work by Avicenna is thought to be a fake?	Liber Aboali Abincine de Anima in arte Alchemiae
What is another work of Avicenna that is said to not be his creation?	the Declaratio
What is definitely seen as being written by Avicenna?	The Book of Minerals
What is the kitab al-Shifa?	Book of the Remedy
What did Ibn Sina classify into stones?	minerals
Who said that Ibn Sina was one of the greatest thinkers?	George Sarton
What did George Sarton write?	The History of Science
Ibn Sina was described as the most famous scientist in what religion?	Islam
Who is another leading Islamic figure in medicine?	Abulcasis
During what centuries was Ibn Sina ranked among such medical greats as Hippocrates?	early fourteenth to the mid-sixteenth centuries
In what modern country is Avicenna considered an icon?	Iran
Where is a monument located that honors Avicenna?	the Bukhara museum
In what European school does Avicenna's portrait hang in their hall of medicine?	the University of Paris
Where is the Avicenna Mausoleum and Museum located?	Hamadan
What plant genus is named after Avicenna?	Avicennia
What superpower in 1980 created a stamp in honor of Avicenna?	the Soviet Union
What was Avicenna's birthplace?	Bukhara
A medical staff training college named in his honor is how many miles away from his birthplace?	16
In 1980, how many years had it been since Avicenna's birth?	thousand
Besides stamps, what did the Soviet Union also create in Avicenna's honor?	a bust
When was it announced that Avicenna would have medical directories named after him?	March 2008
What does the Avicenna Directories contain?	where doctors, public health practitioners, pharmacists and others, are educated
What was Avicenna known for?	his synthesis of knowledge from both east and west
What is Avicenna's name needed for?	worldwide partnership
What movie was made about Avicenna's younger years?	Youth of Genius
What is a rare discipline that Avicenna worked on?	alchemy
On what subject is one of Avicenna's treatise based on?	Physics
What doctrine is some of Avicenna's works based around?	Aristotelian doctrine
According to some, what was Ibn Sina trying to do regarding his works?	"re-Aristotelianise" Muslim philosophy
Who published Avicenna's poem on logic?	Schmoelders
What is the name of Avicenna's larger encyclopedic treatise?	Al-Shifa'
Where is Avicenna's Al-Shifa manuscript located?	the Bodleian Library
What is the shorter form of Al-Shifa called?	the An-najat
What two subjects of Avicenna's have been reprinted extensively?	Logic and Metaphysics
What are logograms used in the writing of Chinese?	Chinese characters
What are Chinese characters called in standard Chinese?	Hanzi
What have been adapted to write in a number of other languages?	Chinese characters
What number in the tens of thousands?	Chinese characters
What requires a knowledge of three to four thousand characters?	literacy in written Chinese
Which are identical to Chinese forms?	kyūjitai
What use the traditional radical-based character index?	modern Chinese dictionaries
What will have the character's pronunciation in pinyin?	character's entry
What is at the front of most modern Chinese dictionaries?	traditional radical-based character index
What are most words in Old Chinese?	monosyllabic
What almost always corresponds to a single syllable?	character
What is written with two characters?	bisyllabic morphemes
What has many homophones?	Modern Chinese
What may have a wide range of meanings?	single character
What have been beneficial in the reconstruction of Middle Chinese?	Sino-Xenic pronunciations
What represent words of the language using several strategies?	Chinese characters
What were most words written in?	rebus principle
What are some words expressed in?	compound ideograms
What are the most numerous characters?	Semantic-phonetic compounds
What is the radical under which the character is listed in dictionaries?	semantic indicator
What suggests the general meaning of a compound character?	semantic indicator
What side is a phonetic indicator located on?	right-hand side
What is the process of historical phonetic change?	phonetic indicator
What process can sometimes seem arbitrary today?	phonetic change
What is occasionally written with two characters that contain the same radical?	bisyllabic word
What is also a fruit?	pipa
What may share a radical without being meaningful?	compound word
What may have been found at Neolithic sites in China in recent decades?	series of inscribed graphs and pictures
What has demonstrated a history of sign use in the Yellow River valley?	Chinese characters
What color was the famous valley during the Neolithic through to the Shang period?	Yellow
What was the earliest confirmed evidence of the Chinese script?	oracle bones
Where were the symbols carved on?	pieces of bone and turtle shell
Where was the source of Oracle bones traced to?	village near Anyang in Henan Province
What existed as early as the Shang dynasty?	oracle-bone script
What did the oracle-bone script coexist alongside?	bamboo books
What were preserved in typical bronze inscriptions?	bamboo books
What has evolved over time?	scripts
What type of forms are bird and insect scripts considered?	decorative
What is guwen considered as?	ancient forms
What has evolved slowly in the State of of Qin?	Seal script
What script runs counter to the traditional belief that the Qin dynasty had one script only?	clerical
What was invented in the early Han dynasty from the small seal script?	clerical script
Were multiple scripts used during the Han period?	there were in fact multiple scripts in use
What was one of the more dominant scripts during the time?	bāfēn
What name stood for "orderly"?	zhāng
What appeared at the end of the late Eastern Han period?	early form of semi-cursive script
What script was traditionally attributed to Liu Desheng?	semi-cursive
Who showed examples of early semi-cursive script?	Qiu
What had been linked to Zhong Yao?	Regular script
What was Zhong Yao known for?	father of regular script
Who was the son of Wang Zishi?	Wang Xianzhi
What were the North and South considered as?	dynasties
What continued to evolve stylistically?	regular script
What script saw no more stages of evolution?	mainstream
What contains four strokes?	right half of the character
What do some dictionaries have?	sub-index
What gives remaining stroke numbers?	sub-index
What often allow users to locate entries in several ways?	Chinese character dictionaries
What lists Chinese characters in radical order?	Korean dictionaries
What is grouped together by radicals?	characters
What can be easily coined by writing on paper?	characters
What has their been a prominent supply of in the 20th century?	symbols
What can be difficult to represent on a computer?	characters
What can be coined at any time?	New characters
What may not be adopted?	new words
What are also known as Japanese-coinages?	kokuji
What are not used in formal written Chinese?	dialect characters
What contains a block of characters used to showcase Hokkien Chinese?	Taiwan
What was the preference for all mainland regions?	Mandarin
What supports 48,027 characters?	the official national encoding standard
What supports 13,053 characters?	BIG-5
What area uses traditional Chinese characters?	Taiwan
What country uses simplified Chinese characters?	China
What lists 2,500 common characters?	Chart of Common Characters of Modern Chinese
What is an early version of the national encoding standard used in the people's public of China?	GB2312
What is written in modern usage?	new characters
What is one consequence of modifying radicals?	fossilization
What combines "grain radical" with the "mouth radical"?	"harmony, peace"
What does not include characters in the Chinese family?	Zhonghua Zihai
What is formed by Chinese principles?	Characters
What created over 5,000 characters with similar strokes?	Tangut script
What remains unknowable?	The total number of Chinese characters from past to present
What becomes developed all the time?	Chinese characters
What is the best means of estimating the historical growth of character inventory?	number of entries in major Chinese dictionaries
What is one of the most complex characters in modern Chinese dictionaries?	U+9F49
What features 33 strokes?	xiān
What are among the most complex characters in modern dictionaries?	yù
What have become more rare?	complex characters
What is the most complex Chinese character?	zhé
What is one 64-stroke character?	zhèng
Who is a Taiwanese politician?	Yu Shyi-kun
What will often add bopomofo phonetic symbols?	movie posters
What may render certain names in katakana instead of kanji?	Japanese newspapers
What have been constantly found in religious or ritual use?	Chinese characters
What seeks to limit the use of polysyllabic characters?	CPC
What is sometimes written as a single character?	bodhisattva
What are disyllabic and usually written with two characters?	SI units
What is a less systematic example?	túshūguǎn
What is commonly written with a single character formed by combining the last character with the radical of the first?	socialism
What characters are often non-standard?	polysyllabic
What is a commonly seen example?	double happiness symbol
What is formed as a ligature?	double happiness symbol
What may be contracted into single characters?	compound words and set phrases
What can be considered as set phrases?	single characters
What are logograms?	characters represent whole words rather than syllable-morphemes
What are primarily morphosyllabic?	Chinese characters
What are written with a single character?	Chinese morphemes
What have the same phonetic, but different radicals?	蝴 hú of húdié and the 瑚 hú of shānhú
What are written with very precise rules?	Chinese characters
What has standardized character forms?	Chinese characters
What are also written with different stroke orders due to character simplification?	characters
What have a characteristic shape?	Roman letters
What occupy a more or less space area?	Chinese characters
What can sometimes be translated as tetragraph?	Square-Block Characters
What are commonly used?	Regular script typefaces
What are often used to teach students Chinese characters?	Regular script typefaces
What resembles an actual person's handwriting?	handwriting of Ouyang Xun
What is the art of writing Chinese characters?	Chinese calligraphy
What is one of the Four Arts of the Chinese Scholars?	Chinese calligraphy
What is not required?	strict regularity
What script is used informally?	cursive
What are suggested, rather than explicitly realized?	basic character shapes
What script is derived from the cursive script?	Japanese hiragana script
What script is only used in artistic seals?	seal
What script is the oldest and still in use today?	Seal
Who work in the style of carving a traditional seal in the script?	calligraphers
What are also known as "traditional"?	characters in the Hong Kong standard and the Kangxi Dictionary
What is usually more similar to traditional Chinese characters?	jōyō kanji
What is commonly used in Taiwan?	Table of General Standard Chinese Characters
What did the Japanese government institute?	series of orthographic reforms
What was restricted?	The number of characters in common use
When was the 2136 character reformed?	2010
What are drawn from conventional abbreviated forms?	majority of simplified characters
What was written with the structure in the clerical script?	orthodox character
What script uses one fewer stroke?	clerical script
Who issued its first round of character simplifications in two documents?	The People's Republic of China
When was a second round announced?	1977
How was the second round received?	poorly
What almost always includes character simplification?	Caoshu
What is Caoshu?	cursive written text
When did discussions of character simplification take place?	In the 1930s and 1940s
What varies greatly?	The use of traditional Chinese characters versus simplified Chinese characters
What were mandatory in printed works?	Orthodox variants
What were adopted for use in mainland China?	Chinese characters
Who is John Gulick?	Rev
Who constantly selected unaspirated characters?	Mongols, Manchu, and Japanese
Who have followed this method?	Muslims from Arabia and Persia
What is now limited to ceremonial uses?	Chinese characters in Vietnam
What were once in widespread use?	Chinese characters in Vietnam
What was used in schooling?	Literary Chinese
When did the second ruler of North Korea pass away?	December 2011
Who stepped up after 2011?	Kim Jong Un
Who began moderating the use of Hanja?	Kim Jong Un
What are students taught to memorize?	native Korean pronunciation for the hanja's meaning
What is name of the hanja?	mul-su
What is the Korean pronunciation of water?	mul
What is still being used according to experts?	Hanja
What is used in situations where ambiguity must be avoided?	Hanja
What is considered a location with a high level of ambiguity?	weddings
What was the dominant form of written communication?	Literary Chinese
What is treated as being conservative and confucian?	Chinese characters
What comes directly from China?	science and sociology
What also includes a pair of syllabaries?	Written Japanese
Why do the syllabaries differ?	they sometimes selected different characters for a syllable
What uses a composite system?	Modern Japanese writing
What has been promoted as a justification for spelling reforms?	literacy
Character simplification predated the republic's formation in what year?	1949
Who issued the first round of official characters?	The People's Republic of China
The first known European explorer to reach Bermuda was of what nationality?	Spanish
What is the name of the first European explorer to reach Bermuda?	Juan de Bermúdez
What animal did the Spaniards or other Europeans bring to the island that then became wild inhabitants?	pigs
What company permanently settled Bermuda?	the English Virginia Company
Who was the first known European explorer to reach Bermuda?	Juan de Bermúdez
In what year did Jaun de Bermudez first reach Bermuda?	1503
How many times did Bermudez visit the archipelago?	two
What animal are European parties responsible for releasing in Bermuda?	pigs
In what year did the English Virginia Company settle permanently in Bermuda?	1609
What is the capital of Bermuda?	St. George's
What spin-off company took over operations in Bermuda in 1615?	Somers Isles Company
In what year did Bermuda enter British rule?	1707
What is the name of the company that managed the colony from 1615-1684?	the Somers Isles Company
In what year did the islands become a British colony?	1707
What event occured that automatically ranked Bermuda as the oldest remaining British Overseas Territory?	Newfoundland became part of Canada
What was Bermuda's first capital?	St. George
What two business drive Bermuda's economy?	offshore insurance and reinsurance, and tourism
What type of climate does Bermuda have?	subtropical
Bermuda stands as a northern point in what susposed area of strange activity and disappearances?	Bermuda Triangle
What protects the island from storms?	coral reef that surrounds the island
What are Bermuda's largest economic sectors?	insurance and reinsurance, and tourism
What occurance is the greatest factor affecting Bermuda's economy?	global recession
Why is the Bermuda Triangle an area of interest?	a number of aircraft and surface vessels have disappeared under supposedly unexplained or mysterious circumstances.
Why is the island safe from full hurricane devastation?	protected from the full force of a hurricane by the coral reef that surrounds the island.
What is the climate of Bermuda?	subtropical
Bermuda is located in what ocean?	Atlantic Ocean
Bermuda is on the western fringe of what Sea?	Sargasso Sea
Travel from Puerto Rico to Bermuda would be in which direction?	north
Travel from Portugal to Bermuda would be in which direction?	west
Travel from South Carolina to Bermuda would be in which direction?	due east
What natural features compose Bermuda?	low-forming volcanoes
In what major ocean is Bermuda located?	Atlantic Ocean
Bermuda is located 898 nautical miles from what US city?	Miami
Bermuda is closest (in nautical miles) to which US state?	North Carolina
What is the limestone cap of the seamount made from?	marine organisms
During the ice age, what area of land was above water?	approximately two hundred square miles
Has the seamount always been above sealevel?	The top of the seamount has gone through periods of complete submergence
What type of volcano forms the archipelago?	a submarine volcano
Why is the top of the seamount formed by marine organisms?	periods of complete submergence,
What was the result of the whole cladera being above sea level during the Ice Ages?	an island
The submarine volcano was formed as part of the same proces as what two things?	the floor of the Atlantic, and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
In the Bermuda land mass, how many islands are named "Long Island"?	two
In the Bermuda land mass, how many bays are named "Horseshoe Bay"?	two
In the Bermuda land mass, how many bays are named "Long Bay"?	three
Where can St. George's Town be found?	St George's Island within St George's Parish
What are three of the bays named?	Long Bay
What name do the bays in Southampton and Morgan's Point share?	Horseshoe
St. George's Town, St. George's Island and St. George's Parish are all referred to as what?	St George's
What is the name of the Parish located in the City of Hamilton?	Hamilton Parish
What directional shore of Bermuda is home to the majority of its hotels?	the south shore of the island
Bermuda's coral reefs, shipwrecks, and shallow waters are great for what activity in particular?	Scuba
Historic St. George's has been given what distinction?	World Heritage Site
What odd color of sand draws tourists to Bermuda's beaches?	pink
Where are the majority of Bermuda's hotels?	south shore of the island
What makes Bermuda a popular tourist destination?	pink sand beaches and clear, cerulean blue ocean waters
What has St. George been designated as?	World Heritage Site
Why are divers attracted to Bermuda?	numerous wrecks and coral reefs in relatively shallow water
Why is Bermuda a great place for snorkellers?	Many nearby reefs are readily accessible from shore
The only indigenous mammals of Bermuda are five species of what animal?	bats
What is the national bird of Bermuda?	Bermuda petrel or cahow
What animal was believe to be the only land vertebrate of Bermuda?	Bermuda rock skink
What animal was found, through DNA testing, to pre-date the arrival of humans to the archipelago?	diamondback terrapin
What are the only native mammals found in Bermuda?	bats
What is the national bird of Bermuda?	Bermuda petrel or cahow
Why is the National bird of importance?	example of a Lazarus species
What animal has held the title of Bermuda's only native land vertabrate?	Bermuda rock skink
Why is there a debate as to dubbing the diamondback terrapin the oldest indigenous land vertebrate?	this species spends most of its time in brackish ponds
When did Bermuda have a large amount of people immigrating to it?	20th century, especially after the Second World War.
Where are the largest group of non-native people in Bermuda from?	Britain
According to census result, there was the greatest decline in people claiming what ancestry?	Bermudian
Which cultural group can claim 79% residency?	Portuguese
There is no distinction between what two ethnicities of Bermudians?	black and white
Which ethnicity claimed the majority in Bermuda during the 17th century?	white Protestants of English heritage
Anyone in Bermuda that is not considered 100% of European heritage is referred to as what?	coloured
Why is it problematic that the "coloured" population of Bermuda is now referred to as "black" or "African heritage"?	obscures their non-African heritage
There has been a double in the population of people born in which country?	Asian
What term is used to refer to the majority of black people in Bermuda?	Bermudian blacks
Why were so many blacks repeatedly being imported from Africa?	conditions so harsh as to drop their birth rate below the death rate
Why can Bermudian blacks trace their ancestry back over centuries in Bermuda?	Bermuda's black population was self-sustaining, with its growth resulting largely from natural expansion
What is one way that the ancestry of Bermudian black population differs from that of British West Indian black population?	the source of the African ancestry
Why is the black population in Bermuda different from that in the British West Indies and the United States?	The first blacks to arrive in Bermuda in any numbers were free blacks from Spanish-speaking areas of the West Indies
Where did the Spanish and Portugese enslave most of their black people from?	South-West Africa
What is one way we can show that black Bermudians are of different heritage than African Americans?	Genetic studies
What is one group that Bermuda's black population can link some of their ancestry to?	Native Americans
Residents of what particular area have awareness of this link to Native American heritage?	St David's Islanders
During what period were there hundreds of Native Americans shipped to Bermuda?	colonial period
Why was there a large population of Algonquian people in Bermuda?	exiled from the southern New England colonies and sold into slavery
What is considered the primary language of Bermuda?	English
What is a lesser spoken, secondary language in Bermuda?	Portuguese
What are the greatest influences to Bermudian culture?	British influences, together with Afro-Caribbean
Which cultures claim to be a dominant source of Bermuda's cultural heritage?	Native American, Spanish-Caribbean, English, Irish, and Scots
What historical significance can the book The History of Mary Prince claim?	The first notable, and historically important, book credited to a Bermudian
What contribution to history is it believed the History of Mary Prince made?	thought to have contributed to the abolition of slavery in the British Empire
The majority of books published by local authors were of what nature?	scholarly
Which local author most recently enjoyed success for published works of fiction?	Angela Barry
What type of painting are Bermuda artists known for?	watercolours
What type of art work does Chesley Trott produce?	Hand-carved cedar sculptures
What significant event does the sculpture The Arrival portray?	the freeing of slaves from the American brig Enterprise in 1835
Who is one of Bermuda's most famous watercolourists?	Alfred Birdsey
Who is credited with discovering Bermuda?	Juan de Bermúdez
What did Spanish and Portugese ships use the islands for?	a replenishment spot to take on fresh meat and water
What did early visitors attribute the noises of the islands to?	spirits and devils,
Crazy noises from indigenous animals, frequent storms and hazardous reefs earned the islands what name?	Isle of Devils
Sir George Somers embarked on a mission to do what?	relieve the colony of Jamestown
The devastating wreck of the flotilla is said to have inspired what playwrite?	William Shakespeare
How long did Sommer's settlers stay in Bermuda?	10 months
Who did Sommer's claim the island for?	the English Crown
Who was one of the original survivor's to sail on to Jamestown.	John Rolfe
What is one of the main things John Rolfe is known for?	married Pocahontas
When did the English begin their intentional settlement of Bermuda?	1612,
What is St. George credited with?	oldest continually inhabited English town in the New World.
What is a major reason that Bermuda has problems with overpopulation?	limited land area,
What does Bermuda rely on to counteract overpopulation?	steady human emigration
Where did a large number of Bermudians emigrate to before the American Revolution?	the Southern United States
Why does a third of the population spend time at sea?	seafaring the only real industry
Why did the Somers Isles Company decide to surpress shipbuilding?	needed Bermudians to farm to generate income from the land
Why wasn't agriculture successful?	colony of Virginia far surpassed Bermuda in both quality and quantity of tobacco produced
What did Bermudians do when agriculture failed?	turn to maritime trades
Why was the Somers Isles Company's charter revoked?	islanders demanding
What event caused major changes in Bermuda?	end of the war
Why did defence infrastructure become the major source of Bermuda's economy?	buildup of Naval and military forces in Bermuda,
How does the British crown view Bermuda?	a base more than a colony
What happened to Bermuda's independance due to British importance on them for military reasons?	the colony's independence on the world stage was diminished
Who was Bermuda's main trading partner before the war?	American colonies
What is a factor that hurt Bermuda's merchant shipping?	deforestation
Why didn't Bermuda produce metal ships?	it did not have raw materials
Why did the need for Bermuda's salt diminish?	Americans developed their own sources
Why is Captain Fritz Joubert Duquesne famous?	most famous escapee
After Duquesne made his way to St. George, what did he do?	stowed away on a boat heading to Baltimore, Maryland
After settling in the US, what did Duquesne do?	became a spy for Germany in both World Wars
When did the first aeroplane reach Bermuda?	1930
Why did the plane have to land twice before reaching Bermuda?	once because of darkness and again to refuel
What improved thanks to the Royal Air Force in 1933?	Navigation and weather forecasting
Who began experimenting with flights from Berlin to New York, stopping in the azores?	Luft Hansa
What did Imperial Airways and Pan American begin scheduling in 1937?	flying-boat airline services from New York and Baltimore to Darrell's Island, Bermuda
What helped tourism grow to new heights in the 1960-1970's?	regularly scheduled commercial airline service by land-based aeroplanes
What became the main source of Bermuda's economy in the 1970's?	international business
The Governor of Bermuda gets his authority from whom?	the monarch
Who appoints the Governor of Bermuda?	the Queen on the advice of the British Government.
Who is currently the governor of Bermuda?	George Fergusson
Who is responsible for defence and foreign affairs?	United Kingdom
What is Bermuda officially classified as?	British Overseas Territory
When was the Constitution of Bermuda enforced?	1 June 1967
Has Bermuda's constitution ever been amended?	it was amended in 1989 and 2003
What is the head of Bermuda's government referred to as?	the premier
What is the legislative branch of Bermuda modeled after?	Westminster system.
What does the population get to vote for?	The House of Assembly, or lower house
Who has the largest accredited diplomats in Bermuda?	The United States
Who is the current US Consul General?	Robert Settje
Why is the US so important to Bermuda?	The United States is Bermuda's largest trading partner
What percentage of Bermuda's residents are US citizens?	5%
Where were the Uyghurs transferred from?	United States Guantánamo Bay detention camp
What were the Uyghurs claiming to be?	refugees, who were captured in 2001 in Pakistan
What were the Ugyhurs accused of?	training to assist the Taliban's military.
Why weren't the Ugyhurs deported back to China?	the US government determined that China was likely to violate their human rights.
When was homosexuality legalized in Bermuda?	May 1994.
What occurred in February of 2016?	The OBA government simultaneously introduced a bill to permit Civil Unions
What did the Chief Justice decide?	same sex spouses of Bermuda citizens could not be denied basic Human Rights.
What did the Virgin Islands announce in 2007?	they would seek ties with CARICOM
Why did Bermuda join CARICOM?	primarily to strengthen cultural links.
Who has "observer status" to CARICOM?	US Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Why did the English originally colonize Bermuda?	an extension of Virginia
What two areas have provided a constant stream of immigration to Bermuda since the 20th century?	West Indies, as well as continued immigration from Portuguese Atlantic islands
Why have these recent immigrants had trouble becoming permanent residents?	they lacked British citizenship
When did Bermuda ease up on its immigration laws?	1950s
Why were Black politicians upset about the change in immigration laws?	accused the government of using this device to counter the West Indian immigration of previous decades.
What cultural group has dominated the PLP?	West Indians and their descendants.
Who are two prominent members of the PLP?	Dame Lois Browne-Evans, and her Trinidadian-born husband, John Evans
What are Dame Lois Browne-Evans and her husband putting an emphasis on?	Bermuda's cultural connections with the West Indies
Why are some Bermudians against the emphasis of West Indies cultural connections?	Many Bermudians, both black and white, who lack family connections to the West Indies
Due to the British goverment's defense forces, what are two nicknames for bermuda?	the Gibraltar of the West" and "Fortress Bermuda"
What did Bermuda's merchant shipping fleet do whenever it had the chance?	turned to privateering
What was Bermuda established as after the American Revolutionary War?	Western Atlantic headquarters of the Royal Navy.
When were the militias in Bermuda disbanded?	following the War of 1812
How did the colony form a military garrison in the 19th century?	raised volunteer units to form a reserve
What did the US ask of Britain in May 1940?	base rights in Bermuda
What did the Destroyers for Bases Agreement do?	granted the US base rights in Bermuda
What was one thing the UK wanted in return for granting access to Bermuda?	the airfield the US Army built would be used jointly by the US and the UK
Who was the Prime Minister who reached this agreement with the US?	Winston Churchill
What did the US begin building in 1941?	two airbases
Who primarily used the bases in Bermuda?	US Air Force transport and refuelling aircraft and by US Navy aircraft
What was the navy patrolling for?	enemy submarines, first German and, later, Soviet
What was the Naval Air Station Bermuda originally?	Kindley Air Force Base
What is the Naval Air Station used for?	host both transient and deployed USN and USAF aircraft, as well as transitioning or deployed Royal Air Force and Canadian Forces aircraft.
What was the NAS primarily a base for?	seaplane
What did the NAS Bermuda offer once designated Annex?	anchorage and/or dockage facilities for transiting US Navy, US Coast Guard and NATO vessels
What is located west of the NAS Annex?	additional US Navy compound known as Naval Facility Bermuda
What happened at the end of the Cold War?	US forces withdrew
When did Bermudians serve in the British Armed forces?	World War I and World War II
Who was key to establishing Bermuda's Regiment?	Major-General Glyn Charles Anglim Gilbert
Who was the youngest Royal Marine Brigadier?	Brigadier Harvey
What is the site for Bermuda's Remembrance Day?	Cenotaph in front of the Cabinet Building
What was the new currency in Bermuda as of 1970?	Bermudian dollar
The Bermudian dollar is equal to what other currency and can be used interchangeably?	US dollar
Who is pictured on Bermudian dollars?	Queen Elizabeth II.
Where can you see a permanent exhibition of Bermuda currency?	Royal Naval Dockyard Museum
Who regulates all financial institutions as well as the issuing of money?	Bermuda Monetary Authority
Why is Bermuda considered an offshore financial center?	minimal standards of business regulation/laws and direct taxation on personal or corporate income
What does it do in place of an income tax system?	taxes all imports
What is Bermuda's legal system derived from?	United Kingdom, with recourse to English courts of final appeal
What three things does the tax system depend on?	import duties, payroll taxes and consumption taxes
What does Bermuda use the consumption tax for?	funds government and infrastructure expenditures
What does the Exchange specialize in?	listing and trading of capital market instruments such as equities, debt issues, funds
What is the BSX a member of?	the World Federation of Exchanges
Where is the BSX located?	an OECD member nation
Which foreign country offers the BSX Approved Stock Exchange Status?	Australia
Who created and popularized many of the sports that we love today?	British Public schools and universities in the 19th century
Why were sports important in these schools?	sports were considered a vital tool for training their students to think and act as part of a team
Who founded organizations like the FA?	Former public schoolboys
What changed in 1885 due to the FA changing rules?	association of football with the working classes
What happened to the Public schoolboys in these sports?	professionals soon displaced the amateur ex-Public schoolboys
How were sports introduced in Bermuda?	Bermuda's role as the primary Royal Navy base in the Western Hemisphere,
Which sport did not transfer well to Bermuda?	rowing
Which sport was quickly adopted?	sail racing
What Bermuda sport team participated in the 2007 world cup?	national cricket team
Who is Bermuda's most popular Cricket player?	Dwayne Leverock
Who defeated Bermuda?	India
What began in 1872 when the game of cricket was introduced to Bermuda?	annual "Cup Match"
Why is there an East End/West End rivalry?	rivalry resulted from the locations
What events did Bermuda compete in at the 2004 Summer Olympics?	sailing, athletics, swimming, diving, triathlon and equestrian events
What did Katura Horton-Perinchief do?	made history by becoming the first black female diver to compete in the Olympic Games.
What is the only medal Bermuda has ever won?	bronze medal in boxing.
What is the Olympic tradition for Bermuda, regardless of season?	march in the Opening Ceremony in Bermuda shorts
Who won the 2011 Caribbean championships?	The Bermuda Rugby Union team
How many clubs are on the island?	There are four clubs on the island
Who are the reigning league champions?	Police (Men)
Where are the Women's games played?	Warwick Academy.
What did the Bermuda u/19 team win?	2010 Caribbean Championships
When did the Southern and Northern Nigeria Protectorates merge?	1914
Which empire ruled Nigeria as a colony?	British
When did Nigeria become independent from Britain?	1960
When did a Nigerian Civil War begin?	1967
When did Nigeria have a fair presidential election?	2011
Which country is called the 'Giant of Africa'?	Nigeria
How many people live in Nigeria?	182 million
How does Nigeria rank among the largest-population countries in the world?	seventh
How many languages are spoken by Nigerians?	over 500
What is Nigeria's official language?	English
What is Nigeria's 2015 GDP?	$500 billion
What is Nigeria's 2015 purchasing power parity?	$1 trillion
When did Nigeria's economy become larger than South Africa's?	2014
What is the largest economy in Africa?	Nigeria
What is Nigeria's debt-to-GDP ratio?	11 percent
When did Boko Haram become active in Nigeria?	2002
Who is the President of Nigeria?	Goodluck Jonathan
How many people had Boko Haram killed by May 2014?	at least 12,000
How many schoolgirls did Boko Haram kidnap?	276
What is Nigeria named after?	the Niger River
Who came up with the name Nigeria in the 19th century?	Flora Shaw
What was Nigeria's region called by the British before the name Nigeria?	Central Sudan
What language does the name of the Niger River come from?	Tuareg
Which river reaches Timbuktu?	Niger
Which tribe ran the city of Nri?	Igbo
When was Nri taken over by the British?	1911
Igbo Ukwu made the oldest bronze art using which process?	lost-wax
Who ruled Nri?	the Eze Nri
Which clan is Nri in the territory of?	Umeuri
What region has Nigeria traded with for centuries?	North Africa
Which countries' explorers were the first Europeans to trade with Nigeria?	Spanish and Portuguese
Calabar is on which historical Bight?	Biafra
What is the current name of the Bight of Biafra?	Bight of Bonny
Who were the major slave traders through Nigeria from the southwest?	Oyo Empire
When did Britain outlaw slave trade?	1807
After which war did Britain establish its West Africa Squadron?	Napoleonic Wars
Which Lagos king had supported the slave trade?	Oba Kosoko
Where did Britain intervene in a power struggle?	Lagos
Where did Britain take slaves it seized from traders?	Freetown
Where was Britain's claim to West Africa recognized in 1885?	the Berlin Conference
What company was led by Sir George Taubman Goldie?	Royal Niger Company
When did the British government take over the Royal Niger Company's territory?	1900
When did Nigeria become a British protectorate?	1 January 1901
Which country did Britain conquer in 1897?	Benin
What religion built Western schools in Nigeria?	Christian
Britain discouraged building Christian missions in which part of Nigeria?	northern
What religion was the majority in the northern part of Nigeria?	Islamic
When did Nigeria receive independence?	1960
When did northern Nigeria ban slavery?	1936
What was Nigeria's status after independence from the UK?	a Commonwealth Realm
Which Nigerian political party was mostly Islamic?	Nigerian People's Congress
Which Nigerian political party was mostly Christian?	National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons
Who led the NCNC party?	Nnamdi Azikiwe
Which Nigerian political party was mostly Yoruba?	Obafemi Awolowo
In what year were there two military coups in Nigeria?	1966
Which group led the first 1966 coup?	Igbo soldiers
Which Prime Minister was murdered in the Igbo coup?	Abubakar Tafawa Balewa
Which Northern Premier was murdered in the Igbo coup?	Ahmadu Bello
Which Western Premier was murdered in the Igbo coup?	Ladoke Akintola
What did Eastern Nigeria want to call itself as an independent nation?	Republic of Biafra
When did Eastern Nigeria declare its independence?	May 1967
Who led Eastern Nigeria during the Nigerian Civil War?	Lt. Colonel Emeka Ojukwu
How many months did the Nigerian Civil War last?	30
How many people died during the Nigerian Civil War?	between 1 and 3 million
Which oil group did Nigeria join?	OPEC
Who failed to use the oil revenues to invest in infrastructure?	the military administration
Overdependence on oil income led to the fall of what form of government in Nigeria?	federalism
Which Nigerian leader transferred power in 1979?	Olusegun Obasanjo
Which Nigerian leader received power in 1979?	Shehu Shagari
How did Nigerians view the Shagari administration?	corrupt and incompetent
Who led a military coup against Shagari?	Muhammadu Buhari
When did another military coup overthrow Buhari?	1985
Which Nigerian leader decided Nigeria would return to democracy in 1990?	Ibrahim Babangida
What did Babangida set up to help pay Nigeria's national debt?	International Monetary Fund's Structural Adjustment Program
What was most of Nigeria's federal income being spent on?	debt
What controversial religious group did Nigeria join?	Organisation of the Islamic Conference
To when did Babangida delay the return to democracy?	1992
When did Nigeria finally hold a fair election?	12 June 1993
Who won the 1993 Nigerian election?	Moshood Kashimawo Olawale Abiola
Babangida's reaction to the election results caused violent protests for how long?	weeks
Who did Babangida appoint as head of an interim government when he finally stepped down?	Ernest Shonekan
When did Nigeria regain democracy?	1999
Who won the 1999 Nigerian election?	Olusegun Obasanjo
Nigeria was under military rule for how long?	almost 33 years
How was the 1999 election regarded?	unfree and unfair
How was the 2003 election regarded?	unfree and unfair
Who won the 2011 election?	Goodluck Jonathan
Who was the CPC's 2011 candidate?	Muhammadu Buhari
How many votes did Goodluck get in 2011?	22,495,187
How many votes did Buhari get?	12,214,853
What was the main opposition political party in 2011?	Congress for Progressive Change
What is Nigeria's form of government?	Federal Republic
What houses does the Nigerian legislature have?	upper and lower
How many times can a Nigerian president be elected?	two 4-year terms
Who won the 2015 Nigerian presidential election?	General Muhammadu Buhari
Who lost the 2015 Nigerian presidential election?	Goodluck Jonathan
What are Nigeria's 3 biggest ethnic groups?	Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba
When did Nigeria get independence?	1960
What major secession movement has Nigeria had?	MASSOB
What major nationalist movement has Nigeria had?	Oodua Peoples Congress
How many seats does the People's Democratic Party of Nigeria have in the House?	223
How many seats does the People's Democratic Party of Nigeria have in the Senate?	76
How many seats does the  All Progressives Congress have in the House?	96
How many seats does the  All Progressives Congress have in the Senate?	27
How many minor opposition parties does Nigeria have?	About twenty
What group did Nigeria support against white governments in Southern Africa?	African National Congress
What group was Nigeria a founding member of?	Organisation for African Unity
What is the Organisation for African Unity now known as?	the African Union
Nigeria is a 'standard-bearer' in what international group?	the Economic Community of West African States
How many inches of rain does southern Nigeria get each year?	60 to 80 inches
What type of climate is southern Nigeria?	tropical rainforest
What part of Nigeria is the Obudu Plateau in?	southeast
What is Nigeria's northernmost climate?	rain forest
What does the Cross River State area of Nigeria have the world's largest variety of?	butterflies
Southern Nigeria is turning from a forest to what type of environment?	grassland
What type of monkey is only found in parts of Nigeria and Cameroon?	the drill monkey
What ecoregion is in Nigeria near the Cameroon border?	Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests
Why is southern Nigeria losing its forests?	development and harvesting by increased population
What type of vegetation is in central Nigeria?	savannah
How many inches of rain does central Nigeria get each year?	between 500 and 1,500 millimetres (20 and 60 in)
How many subregions are there of Nigeria's savannah zone?	three
How much rain does the Sahel savannah area get per year?	less than 500 millimetres (20 in)
Which desert is encroaching into northeastern Nigeria?	Sahara
What is the largest Nigerian city?	Lagos
What type of groups have been failing to keep up with waste management in Nigeria?	municipal councils
What Nigerian community has the worst unsustainable waste management?	Kubwa Community
What territory is Kubwa Community in?	Federal Capital Territory
How many states does Nigeria have?	thirty-six
What non-state area does Nigeria have?	Federal Capital Territory
How many smaller areas are the Nigerian states divided into?	774
What are the Nigerian states' sub-divisions called?	Local Government Areas
How many geopolitical zones do people consider the Nigerian states to be in?	six
Where did Nigeria's 2012 GDP rank?	30th in the world
Which sub-Saharan African nation does the most trade with the US?	Nigeria
How much of the US's oil comes from Nigeria?	a fifth
How much of the US's oil imports come from Nigeria?	11%
How much growth did the IMF expect Nigeria's economy to have in 2009?	8.3%
When was the Niger Delta Nembe Creek Oil field found?	1973
What is the depth of the Niger Delta Nembe Creek Oil field?	2–4 km
What type of geology is the Niger Delta Nembe Creek Oil field?	middle Miocene deltaic sandstone-shale in an anticline structural trap
How long have international oil companies been in Nigeria?	decades
How much money did overseas Nigerians send home in 2004?	USD 2.3 billion
How much money did overseas Nigerians send home in 2007?	17.9 billion
Which country has Nigerians sending the most money home?	United States
Which country has Nigerians sending the second-most money home?	United Kingdom
Which Asian country has Nigerians sending the most money home?	China
What is Nigeria's local vehicle manufacturer?	Innoson Motors
What is Nigeria's branded electronics manufacturer?	Zinox
When did Nigeria change its import policies to encourage local manufacturers?	2013
What city is Nigeria's main industrial area?	Ogun
What city is Nigeria's secondary industrial area?	Lagos
When did Nigeria launch its first satellite?	27 September 2003
What was Nigeria's first satellite called?	Nigeriasat-1
Where did Nigeria launch its first satellite?	Russia
How many satellites has the Nigerian government commissioned?	four
What was Nigeria's second satellite called?	NigeriaSat-2
Who manufactured Nigeria's second satellite?	Surrey Space Technology Limited
Where was Nigeria's second satellite manufactured?	United Kingdom
Where is Nigeria's second satellite's ground receiving station?	Abuja
Where was Nigeria's second satellite launched?	China
What was Nigeria's third satellite called?	NigComSat-1
When was Nigeria's third satellite built?	2004
When was Nigeria's third satellite launched?	13 May 2007
When did Nigeria's third satellite run out of power?	11 November 2008
where was Nigeria's third satellite launched?	China
When was Nigeria's fourth satellite launched?	December 19, 2011
Where was Nigeria's fourth satellite launched?	China
What paid for Nigeria's fourth satellite?	the insurance policy on NigComSat-1
What was Nigeria's fourth satellite called?	NigComSat-1R
What satellite did Nigeria's fourth satellite replace?	NigComSat-1
What was Nigeria's population in 2009?	154,729,000
How much of Nigeria's population in 2009 was rural?	51.7%
How much of Nigeria's population in 2009 was urban?	48.3%
What was Nigeria's population density in 2009?	167.5 people per square kilometre
When did President Goodluck Jonathan advocate limiting childbirth?	June 2012
What is the official language of Nigeria?	English
How much of Nigeria uses English as a first language?	a small minority of the country's urban elite
What is the most popular language in Nigeria?	Hausa
What are the top 3 languages in Nigeria?	Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba
What is Nigerian Pidgin English often called?	'Pidgin' or 'Broken'
What regions is Nigerian English commonly spoken in?	Niger Delta Regions
What type of region does a majority of Nigerians live in?	rural
What type of languages are the most popular in Nigeria?	indigenous
What are the most popular religions in Nigeria?	Islam and Christianity
What religions does Nigeria have besides the top two?	a tiny minority of adherents of Animism and other religions
How much of Nigeria's population is Muslim?	over 40%
How much of Nigeria's population is Christian?	58%
How much of Nigeria's population is Animist and other religions?	1.4%
What type of Islam is most common in Nigeria?	Sunni
What school of Sunni Islam is most common in Nigeria?	Maliki school of jurisprudence
What Islamic law is being used in some Nigerian states?	Sharia
What Nigerian state is trying to make Sharia law part of its constitution?	Kano
In 2001, what percent of Nigeria's population was Muslim?	about 50%
In 2001, what percent of Nigeria's population was Christian?	40%
In 2001, what percent of Nigeria's population followed local religions?	10%
According to Pew, in 2010, what percent of Nigeria's population was Muslim?	48.8 percent
According to Pew, in 2010, what percent of Nigeria's population was Christian?	49.3 percent
How many Nigerian Christians are Protestant?	74%
How many Nigerian Christians are Catholic?	25%
How many Nigerian Christians are Orthodox and other sects?	1%
Which Nigerian tribe is 95% Muslim?	Hausa
Which Eastern Nigerian tribe is 98% Christian?	Igbos
When did many newer churches start growing in Nigeria?	Since the 1990s
What is the largest Anglican church in Nigeria?	the Church of Nigeria of the Anglican Communion
What is the largest Baptist church in Nigeria?	the Nigerian Baptist Convention
When did the Bamako Initiative begin?	1987
Nigeria is adding what kind of costs to its healthcare system?	user fees
When did Nigeria start reorganizing its healthcare system?	1987
How much of Nigeria has HIV as of 2012?	3.1 percent
What is Nigeria's life expectancy?	52.62 years
How much of the Nigerian population has access to clean water?	just over half
What was Nigeria's infant mortality rate as of 2010?	8.4 deaths per 1000 live births
What was the last African country to still have significant Polio problems?	Nigeria
When had Nigeria not had a reported polio case in 6 months for the first time?	December 2014
When did Nigeria launch a bone marrow donation program?	2012
Which entity runs Nigeria's bone marrow donation program?	the University of Nigeria
Nigeria was the second African country to perform which medical procedure?	bone marrow transplant
What department runs Nigeria's schools?	the Ministry of Education
When did Nigeria improve its tertiary education?	After the 1970s oil boom
How much of Nigeria's population can read?	68%
How much of Nigeria's male population can read?	75.7%
How much of Nigeria's female population can read?	60.6%
What is Nigeria's most popular organized-crime activity?	drug trafficking
What drug does Nigeria ship from Asia to Europe and America?	heroin
What drug does Nigeria ship from South America to Europe and South Africa?	cocaine
How many civilians were killed in Lagos in Aug 2000-May 2001?	273
How many police were killed in Lagos in Aug 2000-May 2001?	84
What law is the Nigerian 419 scam nicknamed after?	Section 419 of the Nigerian Penal Code
What organization was created to combat the 419 scams?	the Nigerian Economic and Financial Crimes Commission
When was the Nigerian EFCC created?	2003
What type of scam is the 419 scam?	advance fee fraud
What type of entity is complicit in the 419 scams?	bank
In 2011 rankings, how bad was Nigeria's corruption ranking?	143 out of 182 countries
In 2014 rankings, how bad was Nigeria's corruption ranking?	136th position
How much was embezzled from the Nigerian government in 1960-1999?	More than $400 billion
The state oil company NNPC was initially thought to owe how much to the government?	US$20 billion
In a corrected audit, the state oil company NNPC was found to only owe how much to the government?	US$1.48billion
When did the Nigerian film industry begin?	the 1960s
Which African country has the continent's largest movie industry?	Nigerian
Which cities are Nigeria's movie studios located in?	Lagos, Kano and Enugu
What is the nickname for Nigeria's movie industry?	Nollywood
Where does Nigeria's movie industry rank worldwide?	2nd-largest
Which years did Nigeria win the African Cup of Nations?	1980, 1994, and 2013
When did Nigeria win a Summer Olympics gold medal?	1996
What did Nigeria win a Summer Olympics gold medal for?	football
What country did Nigeria beat to win a Summer Olympics gold medal?	Argentina
What is Nigeria's national football team called?	Super Eagles
Nwankwo Kanu won what honor twice?	African Footballer of the year
Nwankwo Kanu won in what championship league?	European Champions League
What team did Nwankwo Kanu go on to play on?	Inter Milan, Arsenal
How are Nigerian prisoners mistreated?	rape, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
What are the conditions like in Nigerian prisons?	harsh and life‑threatening
How are children mistreated in Nigeria?	child labour, child abuse and child sexual exploitation
What types of discrimination are common in Nigeria?	sex, ethnicity, region and religion
How far back does evidence of inhabitation date back	inhabitation in the region of Utrecht, dating back to the Stone Age (app. 2200 BCE)
 What did the Roman emperor Claudius decide	Claudius decided the empire should not expand north.
What was built along the Rhine	To consolidate the border the limes Germanicus defense line was constructed  along the main branch of the river Rhine
How many soldiers did the fortress hold	These fortresses were designed to house a cohort of about 500 Roman soldiers
Who settled near the fort	Near the fort settlements would grow housing artisans, traders and soldiers' wives and children
Who raided German territories regularly	Germanic tribes regularly invaded the Roman territories.
When did the Romans leave Utrecht	Around 275 the Romans could no longer maintain the northern border and Utrecht was abandoned
What happens between 275 and 650	Little is known about the next period 270–650.
What was built in the 7th century	a church was built within the walls of the Roman fortress
How was the the church destroyed	In ongoing border conflicts with the Frisians this first church was destroyed.
Who tried to convert Frisians	English and Irish missionaries set out to convert the Frisians
Who did the pope appoint Bishop	The pope appointed their leader, Willibrordus, bishop of the Frisians
What did Charles Martel do	Frankish leader Charles Martel bestowed the fortress in Utrecht and the surrounding lands as the base of the bishops
What year did Utrecht gain in power	After the fall of Dorestad around 850, Utrecht became one of the most important cities in the Netherlands
What showed the importance of Utrecht	Utrecht as a centre of Christianity is illustrated by the election of the Utrecht-born Adriaan Florenszoon Boeyens as pope in 1522
What hapend when Frankish rulers established the system of feudalism	the Bishops of Utrecht came to exercise worldly power as prince-bishops
What was part of the territory of bishopric	not only included the modern province of Utrecht (Nedersticht, 'lower Sticht'), but also extended to the northeast
What conflict affected Utrecht	The feudal conflict of the Middle Ages heavily affected Utrecht
Who was in conflict with the prince bishopric	the Counts of Holland and the Dukes of Guelders
What region was seized	The Veluwe region was seized by Guelders
What was the Most dominant Cathedral in Utrecht	The most dominant of these was the Cathedral of Saint Martin, inside the old Roman fortress
What began in 1254	The construction of the present Gothic building was begun in 1254 after an earlier romanesque construction had been badly damaged by fire
Was the cathedral finished	the age of the great cathedrals had come to an end and declining finances prevented the ambitious project from being finished
How many collegiate churches existed in Utecht besides the cathedral	Besides the cathedral there were four collegiate churches in Utrecht
What else was housed in the city	the city housed St. Paul's Abbey, the 15th-century beguinage of St. Nicholas, and a 14th-century chapter house of the Teutonic Knights.
What did Utrecht's location allow	allowed Utrecht to become an important trade centre in the Northern Netherlands.
Who granted Utrecht city rights	Henry V in 1122
What was the relationship with the bishop like for citizens of Utrecht	the bishop, who controlled many lands outside of the city, and the citizens of Utrecht was not always easy
What Industry did the bishop hurt	The bishop, for example dammed the Kromme Rijn at Wijk bij Duurstede to protect his estates from flooding
What year did the bishop lose power	In 1528 the bishop lost secular power over both Neder- and Oversticht – which included the city of Utrecht – to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
What did Charles V combine	Charles V combined the Seventeen Provinces (the current Benelux and the northern parts of France) as a personal union
What did the loss of power end	the prince-bishopric Utrecht, as the secular rule was now the lordship of Utrecht, with the religious power remaining with the bishop
What was the bishop of Utrecht raised to	In 1559 the bishopric of Utrecht was raised to archbishopric to make it the religious center of the Northern ecclesiastical province in the Seventeen provinces
Why was the transition to a new union difficult	Charles V was struggling to exert his power over the citizens of the city, who had struggled to gain a certain level of independence from the bishops
What was the purpose of the castle	The heavily fortified castle Vredenburg was built to house a large garrison whose main task was to maintain control over the city
How long did the castle last	The castle would last less than 50 years before it was demolished in an uprising in the early stages of the Dutch Revolt
What was signed in 1579	the northern seven provinces signed the Union of Utrecht, in which they decided to join forces against Spanish rule
What is this union seen as	The Union of Utrecht is seen as the beginning of the Dutch Republic
What became the dominant province	towards its dominant province Holland
What was the state of Utrecht	Utrecht remained an atypical city in the new republic with about 40% Catholic in the mid-17th century, and even more among the elite groups
Who did the fortified city fall to in 1672	temporarily fell to the French invasion in 1672 (the Disaster Year); where the French invasion was only stopped west of Utrecht
In 1674 what hit Utrecht	the centre of Utrecht was struck by a tornado
What collapsed during the tornado	The halt to building before construction of flying buttresses in the 15th century now proved to be the undoing of the central section of the cathedral
What did Utrecht host in 1713	In 1713, Utrecht hosted one of the first international peace negotiations when the Treaty of Utrecht settled the War of the Spanish Succession
Since 1723 what has Utrecht become	Utrecht became the centre of the non-Roman Old Catholic Churches in the world
What hapend in the early 19th century	the role of Utrecht as a fortified town had become obsolete
In 1843 what brought growth to Utrecht	a railway connecting Utrecht to Amsterdam was opened
What was reinstated in 1853	the Dutch government allowed the bishopric of Utrecht to be reinstated by Rome, and Utrecht became the centre of Dutch Catholicism
what was built in the 1920's and 1930's	New middle class residential areas, such as Tuindorp and Oog in Al, were built
What was railway area developed into	were developed following modernist ideas of the 1960s, in a brutalist style
What mall was constructed	the shopping mall Hoog Catharijne
What happened in the early 21 st century	In the early 21st century the whole area is being redeveloped
What Socio economic problems does Utrecht face	About 38% percent of its population either earns a minimum income or is dependent on social welfare
percentage of population that's dutch	About 69% of the population is of Dutch ancestry
What boroughs are known for high crime	Kanaleneiland, Overvecht and Hoograven consist primarily of high-rise housing developments, and are known for relatively high poverty and crime rate
What does the dense population make difficult	which makes concise definitions of its agglomeration difficult, and somewhat arbitrary.
Least populates areas of Utrecht	smaller Utrecht agglomeration of continuously built up areas counts some 420,000 inhabitants and includes Nieuwegein, IJsselstein and Maarssen
More populated areas include	The larger region, including slightly more remote towns such as Woerden and Amersfoort counts up to 820,000 inhabitants
what dominates the cityscape	Utrecht's cityscape is dominated by the Dom Tower, the tallest belfry in the Netherlands and originally part of the Cathedral of Saint Martin
What is being debated in Utrecht	An ongoing debate is over whether any building in or near the centre of town should surpass the Dom Tower in height (112 m)
What is the name of the stadium	the Nieuw Galgenwaard stadium (2007)
What is a landmark in the city	the old centre and the canal structure in the inner city
What does the inner city look like	The inner city has largely retained its Medieval structure, and the moat ringing the old town is largely intact
What surrounds the mid-evil inner city	Surrounding the medieval core there is a ring of late 19th- and early 20th-century neighbourhoods, with newer neighbourhoods positioned farther out
What part of the city remains open	The eastern part of Utrecht remains fairly open
What is the main railway station	Utrecht Centraal is the main railway station of Utrecht
Does the rail station provide 24 hour service	Utrecht Centraal is a station on the night service, providing 7 days a week an all night service
Are there rail services to Germany	International InterCityExpress (ICE) services to Germany (and further) through Arnhem call at Utrecht Centraal
where to regular local trains provide service	local trains to all areas surrounding Utrecht also depart from Utrecht Centraal; and service several smaller stations
Where is the bus station located	The main local and regional bus station of Utrecht is located adjacent to Utrecht Centraal railway station, at the East and West entrances
renovations are causing what changes	large scale renovation and construction works at the railway station, the station's bus stops are changing frequently
what is qbuzz	Local buses in Utrecht are operated by Qbuzz – its services include a high-frequency service to the Uithof university district
What is one of Europes cleanest	The local bus fleet is one of Europe's cleanest, using only buses compliant with the Euro-VI standard as well as electric buses for inner city transport
What does Utrecht provide for cyclist	Utrecht has an extensive network of cycle paths, making cycling safe and popular. 33% of journeys within the city are by bicycle
What is a barrow bikes use	There are also barrow bikes, for carrying shopping or small children
utrecht built the worlds largest what ?	in 2014 to build the world's largest bicycle parking station, near the Central Railway Station
Is Utrecht connected to the Dutch road system	well-connected to the Dutch road network. Two of the most important major roads serve the city of Utrecht:
What countries do the A12 and A2 connect	A12 and A2 motorways connect Amsterdam, Arnhem, The Hague and Maastricht, as well as Belgium and Germany
What does traffic elevate	increasing traffic and the ancient city plan, traffic congestion is a common phenomenon in and around Utrecht, causing elevated levels of air pollutants
What does Utrecht's economy  depend on	The economy of Utrecht depends for a large part on the several large institutions located in the city
what is centered in Utrecht	It is the centre of the Dutch railroad network and the location of the head office of Nederlandse Spoorwegen
What bank is head quartered in Utrecht	Rabobank, a large bank, has its headquarters in Utrecht.
What is the name of the large shopping center	Hoog Catharijne
how are the shopping center corridors treated	The corridors are treated as public places like streets, and the route between the station and the city centre is open all night
What is being recreated	Parts of the city's network of canals, which were filled to create the shopping center and central station area, will be recreated
what is located on the west side of the rail station	The Jaarbeurs, one of the largest convention centres in the Netherlands, is located at the west side of the central railway station
What is the largest University in the city	The most prominent of these is Utrecht University (est. 1636), the largest university of the Netherlands with 30,449 students
what is shanghai jiaotong rated	According to Shanghai Jiaotong University's university ranking in 2014 it is the 57th best university in the world
What smaller university is in Utrecht	Utrecht also houses the much smaller University of Humanistic Studies, which houses about 400 students.
Cultural life in Utrecht is second to	Utrecht city has an active cultural life, and in the Netherlands is second only to Amsterdam
What music festival does Utrecht host	Utrecht is host to the international Early Music Festival (Festival Oude Muziek, for music before 1800) and the Netherlands Film Festival
What is the name of the music hall	The city has an important classical music hall Vredenburg
Where are music students educated	Young musicians are educated in the conservatory, a department of the Utrecht School of the Arts
Where are young artist trained	Training of artists is done at the Utrecht School of the Arts
Is street art legal	Although street art is illegal in Utrecht
What is considered landmark Architecture	1924 Rietveld Schröder House, which is listed on UNESCO's world heritage sites
What does the city host on Sundays	To promote culture Utrecht city organizes cultural Sundays
What happens on Cultural Sunday	thematic Sunday several organisations create a program, which is open to everyone without, or with a very much reduced, admission fee
What does the city subsidise	an organisation for amateur education in arts aimed at all inhabitants (Utrechts Centrum voor de Kunsten
What type of coupon does the city provide the poor	The city council provides coupons for discounts to inhabitants who receive welfare to be used with many of the initiatives.
What football team is Utrecht home to	Utrecht is home to the premier league (professional) football club FC Utrecht
What Utrecht waterways host to	Utrecht's waterways are used by several rowing clubs
What is kampong	Kampong, the largest (amateur) sportsclub in the Netherlands (4,500 members)
What sports does Kampong support	Kampong features fieldhockey, soccer, cricket, tennis, squash and jeu de boules.
What is John von Neumann's nationality?	Hungarian
When was John von Neumann born?	December 28, 1903
When did John von Neumann die?	February 8, 1957
What was John von Neumann's major contribution to economics?	game theory
What computing structure is named after John von Neumann?	Von Neumann architecture
What was the birth date of John Von Neumann?	December 28, 1903
When did John Von Neuman die?	February 8, 1957
What were the occupations that Von Neuman held?	pure and applied mathematician, physicist, inventor, computer scientist, and polymath
What were Von Neuman's contributions to the field of computing?	Von Neumann architecture, linear programming, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing
How many papers did Von Neumann publish?	150
What is the name of Von Neumann's last work?	The Computer and the Brain
What high profile controversial project was Von Neumann a prinipal of?	Manhattan Project
Of his published works, what topics were they covering?	60 in pure mathematics, 20 in physics, and 60 in applied mathematics
Von Neumann's study of what preceded the discovery of DNA?	mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication
What part of his work did Von Neumann consider to be his most important?	quantum mechanics
Where was quantum mechanics developed?	Göttingen
What work did Von Nemann do in Berlin in 1930 and Princeton 1935 - 39?	operator theory
What was the topic of Von Neumann's work at Princeton in 1931 - 32?	ergodic theorem
With whom did Von Neumann work on the Manhattan Project?	J. Robert Oppenheimer and Edward Teller
Post World War II, in what role did Von Neumann work?	General Advisory Committee of the United States Atomic Energy Commission
For what organizations was Von Neumann a consultant after World War II?	United States Air Force, the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
What keys steps did Von Neumann work out that contributed to weapons of war?	key steps in the nuclear physics involved in thermonuclear reactions and the hydrogen bomb
Where was Von Neumann born?	Budapest
Did Von Neumann have any siblings?	two younger brothers
What occupation did Von Neumann father hold?	banker
When did Von Neuman's father move from Pecs to Budapest?	end of the 1880s
What was Von Neumann's mother's name?	Kann Margit
In what year was Von Neumann's father elevated to nobility?	1913
What Emperor elevated Von Neumann's father to nobility?	Emperor Franz Joseph
What town did Von Neumann's family become associated when elevated to nobility?	Marghita
What was Von Neumann's given name as member of Austro-Hungarian nobility?	Margittai Neumann János
At what age did schooling begin in Hungary?	ten
Who taught children before they began school in Hungary?	governesses
What languages were Von Neumann and his siblings taught?	English, French, German and Italian
At what age was Von Neumann familiar with calculus?	8
What did Von Neumann enter in 1911?	Lutheran Fasori Evangelikus Gimnázium
In what room did children get education in Hungary?	gymnasium
What collective name was given to the generation of scholars produced by the Hungarian school system?	Martians
In what year did Wigner win Nobel Prize?	1963
At what age did Von Neumann begin to study advance calculus?	15
Who did Von Neumann begin his studies of advanced calculus under?	Gábor Szegő
By 19 how many papers had Von Neumann published?	two major mathematical papers
Von Neumann's modern definition of ordinal numbers superseded whose definition?	Georg Cantor
What prize did Von Neuman win at the conclusion of his gymansium formal education?	Eötvös Prize, a national prize for mathematics
What career path was decided upon for Von Neuman?	chemical engineer
At what university was it arranged for Von Neumann to enter a chemistry program?	University of Berlin
Where did Von Neumann study as a PHD candidate?	Pázmány Péter University in Budapest
What was the topic of Von Neuman's thesis?	axiomatization of Cantor's set theory
Where did Von Neumann begin to lecture in 1928?	University of Berlin
By the end of 1927 how many papers had Von Neuman written?	twelve major papers in mathematics
How many papers had Von Neumann written by 1929?	thirty-two papers
What better offer came for Von Neumann in 1930?	Princeton University
When did Von Neumann get married?	New Year's Day in 1930
What was Von Neumann's wife's name?	Mariette Kövesi
Before marriage what faith did Von Neumann join?	he was baptized a Catholic.
What was Von Neumann's child's name?	Marina
When did Von Neumann get married for a second time?	October 1938
In what year was Von Neumann offered a lifetime professorship?	1933
In what year did Von Neumann's mother and siblings join him in U.S?	1939
In what year did Von Neumann become a naturalized citizen of US?	1937
Why was Neuman rejected from joining US Army?	age
What type of "off color" humor did Von Neumann especially enjoy?	limericks
What complaints did Von Neumann's neighbor's have?	regularly playing extremely loud German march music
What famous neighbor did Von Neumann have that may have been distracted by the music Von Neumann played?	Albert Einstein,
What mathematician was Von Nemann's closest friend?	Stanislaw Ulam
What topics of conversation would Ulam and Von Neumann typically share?	gossiping and giggling, swapping Jewish jokes, and drifting in and out of mathematical talk
What would Ulam use to cheer up Von Neumann in the hospital?	a new collection of jokes
What caused a setback in naive set theory at the beginning of 20th century?	Russell's paradox
Who resolved the problem of adequate axiomatization of set theory?	Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel
What 2 techniques did Von Neumann use to exclude sets in his doctoral thesis in 1925?	the axiom of foundation and the notion of class.
What is the method to demonstrate that no contradictions were created by the addition of axiom of foundation?	method of inner models
Zermelo and Fraenkel's axiom of foundation established that every set be constructed how?	from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps
What excluded a set from belonging to itself in set theory?	if one set belongs to another then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession
What is a proper class?	a class which does not belong to other classes
Under what approach does an axiom impede a set of all sets which do not belong to themselves?	Zermelo–Fraenkel
Under Von Neumann's approach can a class of all sets that do not belong to themselves be constructed?	class of all sets which do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a proper class and not a set.
In 1930 who gave a strongly negative answer to Von Neuman's approach to the axiomatic system of theory of sets?	Kurt Gödel
What was the central theme of Godel's announcement that the axiomatic system was not complete?	they cannot prove every truth which is expressible in their language
Where was Godel's statement about axiomatic system made in 1930?	Congress of Königsberg
How long did it take von Neumann to figure a response to theory of incompleteness?	less than a month
What was the consequence of the theory of incompleteness?	usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency
Upon revising the theory of incompleteness, what was the name of the new Godel theory?	second incompleteness theorem
What field did Von Neuman establish?	continuous geometry.
What is the distinction of continuous geometry?	instead of the dimension of a subspace being in a discrete set 0, 1, ..., n, it can be an element of the unit interval
What was the first example of continuous geometry?	projections of the hyperfinite type II factor
In what way did von Neumann make spectacular contributions to measure theory?	In a series of famous papers
What concept was relevant to the solvability of the problem of measure?	algebraic concept of solvability of a group is relevant
According to von Neumann what is the most important part of the problem of measure?	change of group that makes a difference, not the change of space
What is often considered more important than the results of von Neumann's papers?	methods of argument he employed
In 1938 what was von Neumann awarded?	Bôcher Memorial Prize
What did von Neumann use the Haar theorem to solve in a 1936 paper?	Hilbert's fifth problem in the case of compact groups
What is von Neumann algebra?	algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator
What does the von Neumann bicommutant theorem show?	the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as an algebra of symmetries.
When was direct integral introduced by von Neumann?	1949
What was introduced in von Neumann algebras?	study of rings of operators
What did von Neumann work on in 1937 - 39?	lattice theory
What properties determine dimension in lattice theory?	conserved by perspective mappings ("perspectivities") and ordered by inclusion
Who wrote that "John von Neumann's brilliant mind blazed over lattice theory like a meteor?"	Garrett Birkhoff
What type of axioms were used by von Neumann in his lattice work?	novel axioms
How long was von Neumann's lattice theory paper?	140 pages
In what room did von Neumann often write at home?	living room writing-table
Who established the framework for quantum mechanics?	Von Neumann
What paper did von Neumann produce in 1932?	Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
What von Neumann work preceded the axiomatiztion of quatum mechanics?	axiomatization of set theory
What are the physics of quantum mechanics?	mathematics of Hilbert spaces and linear operators acting on them
What is the uncertainty principle?	determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa
The physics of quantum mechanics included special cases for what work?	formulations of both Heisenberg and Schrödinger
Von Neumann's abstract treatment allowed him to work on what foundational issue?	determinism versus non-determinism
What was John Bell's argument?	proof contained a conceptual error and was therefore invalid
What did Jeffrey Bub argue in 2010?	Bell had misconstrued von Neumann's proof
Did von Neumann rule hidden variable theories?	von Neumann did not claim that his proof completely ruled out hidden variable theories
What results came from von Neumann's deep analysis of the measurement problem?	physical universe could be made subject to the universal wave function
What "outside of calculation" variable could initiate collapse in von Neumann's conclusion?	consciousness of the experimenter
Were von Neumann's conclusions of collapse of entire universe cause accepted widely?	Von Neumann–Wigner interpretation never gained acceptance amongst the majority of physicists
With whom did von Neuman work on a paper in 1936 that introduce quantum logic?	Garrett Birkhoff
What concept was created for quatum logic?	propositional calculus
What is the difference of logic in quantum theory?	laws of distribution of classical logic,  and , are not valid for quantum theory
What year was game theory established?	1928
What discipline is game theory derived from?	mathematical discipline.
what are the possible strategies in minimax theory?	a pair of strategies for both players that allows each to minimize his maximum losses
What must a player consider when determining every possible strategy?	all the possible responses of his adversary.
What is the difference of quantum disjunction from classic?	can be true even when both of the disjuncts are false
What is frequently the case in quantum mechanics when a pair of alternatives are semantically determinate?	each of its members are necessarily indeterminate
How can quantum disjuction be illustrated?	illustrated by a simple example
What is optimal strategy?	minimize the maximum loss for each player
What von Neumann work was published in 1944?	Theory of Games and Economic Behavior
Who was co-author with von Neman on the Theory of Games and Economic Behavior?	Oskar Morgenstern
How did von Neumann raise the level of economics?	several stunning publications
What did von Neumann prove with his model of expanding economy?	uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem
What did von Neumann consider for his model of expanding economy?	matrix pencil  A − λB with nonnegative matrices A and B
In von Neumann's model what does p represent?	p represents the prices of the goods
In von Neumann's model what does q represent?	q represents the "intensity" at which the production process would run
What is the rate of qrowth equal to?	rate of growth equals the interest rate
Was the economic model successful?	proving that the growth rate equals the interest rate were remarkable achievements, even for von Neumann
What were von Neumann's model an example of?	viewed as a special case of linear programming
What was the significance of von Neumann's model of expanding economy?	unique in having made significant contributions to economic theory itself.
What ideas were utilized in von Neumann's ecocomic model?	fixed-point theorems, linear inequalities, complementary slackness, and saddlepoint duality
When did von Neumann's interest in economics begin?	When lecturing at Berlin in 1928 and 1929
What economist did von Neumann get to know that spurred the interest in economics?	Nicholas Kaldor
In who's book did von Neuman find errors in the author's equations?	Léon Walras
What was the new method of linear programming that von Neumann suggested?	homogeneous linear system of Gordan
What did von Neuman's method use?	pivoting algorithm between simplices
What was von Neumann's method known to be the first of?	algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming.
When did von NEumann establish mean square ratio?	1941
How has mean square ratio been applied?	Durbin–Watson statistic
what does null hypothesis test against?	alternative that they follow a stationary first order autoregression
The algorithm defining artificial viscosity is a fundamental contribution to what area?	numerical hydrodynamics
What did the math of artificial viscosity do?	smoothed the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics
What was the problem of computers solving fluid dynamics?	they tried to put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves)
What principal contribution did von Neumann make to atomic bomb?	concept and design of the explosive lenses needed to compress the plutonium core
Did von Nemann think that the atomic bomb design was not workable?	he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development
What additional ideas did von Neumann contribute to Atomic bomb?	more powerful shaped charges and less fissionable material to greatly increase the speed of "assembly"
what change was made when shortage of uranium 235 was apparent?	implosive lens project was greatly expanded
What was the tolerance limit for implosion "edge effect"?	not depart by more than 5% from spherical symmetry
Who constructed Trinity bomb?	George Kistiakowsky
In what year was Trinity bomb completed?	1945
What other people worked with von Neumann on target selection?	four other scientists and various military personnel
What role did von Neuman play in the selection of targets?	oversaw computations
What was von Neumann's first choice for target city?	Kyoto
Who dismissed von Neuamann's primary target city?	Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.
On what day was the first atomic blast?	July 16, 1945
Where did the first atomic blast test take place?	Alamogordo Army Airfield,
What was the power of the first atomic blast?	between 20 and 22 kilotons
With whom did von Neumann collaborate for further development of the hydrogen bomb?	Klaus Fuchs
What improvement did von Neumann see in the nuclear weaponry?	using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate nuclear fusion
What country was afforded access to design of improved nuclear weapon through espionage?	Soviet Union
In 1950 von Neumann became a consultant for what organization?	Weapons Systems Evaluation Group
What military organization did von NEumann also consult with for military aspect of nuclear weapons?	Armed Forces Special Weapons Project
What committee did von Neumann serve on within the Atomic Energy Commission?	General Advisory Committee
In what year did von Neumann become commissioner of the AEC?	1955
What were compact hydrogen bombs useful for?	Intercontinental ballistic missile delivery
What was the concern with longer range ICBM with Hbomb?	relative inaccuracy of the missile
Von Neumann testified at whose hearing about loyalty and help?	Oppenheimer
What was the purpose of top secret ICBM committee?	decide on the feasibility of building an ICBM large enough to carry a thermonuclear weapon
What argument did von Neumann make about ICBMs?	while the technical obstacles were sizable, they could be overcome in time
In what year did SM-65 Atlas pass its first fully functional test?	1959
What was MAD?	mutual assured destruction
What was the goal of MAD?	quickly develop ICBMs and the compact hydrogen bombs that they could deliver to the USSR
What were Russians opinions of future weaponry?	Russians believed that bombers would soon be vulnerable, and they shared von Neumann's view that an H-bomb in an ICBM was the ne plus ultra of weapons
What was the concern of a missile gap?	keeping up with the Soviets
Why did von Neumann join government work?	felt that, if freedom and civilization were to survive, it would have to be because the US would triumph over totalitarianism
How did von Neumaan describe his political ideology?	violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm
What was the project that von Neumann first participated in government?	Manhattan Project
Who was the inventor of the merge-sort algorithm?	Von Neumann
With whom did von Neumann work on the philosophy of artificial intelligence?	Alan Turing
What does a merge sort algorithm do?	the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged
Where were the computations for hydrogen bomb worked out?	von Neumann's digital computers
What was the Monte Carlo method?	allowed solutions to complicated problems to be approximated using random numbers
Due to slow use of random numbers what was developed?	pseudorandom numbers
What nullified patent claims of EDVAC designers?	von Neumann wrote an incomplete First Draft of a Report
What was the significance of EDVAC?	architecture is to this day the basis of modern computer design,
Where was ENIAC located?	University of Pennsylvania
What was the speed difference with new ENIAC?	new ENIAC ran at one-sixth the speed
What were advantages for programming new ENIAC?	programs could be developed and debugged in days rather than the weeks
After the design of IAS, who built the computer?	RCA Research Laboratory
When was stochastic computing introduced?	1953
How long before stochastic computing could be implemented?	advances in computing of the 1960s.
When did von NEumann develop first self reproducing computer program?	1949
What is another name for the first self reproducing computer program?	computer virus
On what computer was the first numerical weather forecast produced?	ENIAC
In what year did von Neumann publish the paper Numerical Integration of the Barotropic Vorticity Equation	1950
How much colder was world in last glacial age?	6 °F (3.3 °C) colder
How quickly was von Neumann able to complete math in his head?	stunned other mathematicians
Were other mathematicians amazed by von Neumann?	Paul Halmos states that "von Neumann's speed was awe-inspiring."
Did von Neumann enjoy thinking?	Neumann actually enjoyed thinking, maybe even to the exclusion of everything else.
How did Lothar Wolfgang Nordheim describe von Neumann?	"fastest mind I ever met",
What did Jacob Bronowski think of von Neumann?	He was the cleverest man I ever knew, without exception. He was a genius.
What did Lecturer Polya think about von Nuemann?	Johnny was the only student I was ever afraid of.
What did Herman Goldstone write about von NEumann?	One of his remarkable abilities was his power of absolute recall.
Could von Neumann recall written text much later?	he immediately began to recite the first chapter and continued until asked to stop after about ten or fifteen minutes.
What did Ulam think of von Nuemann's cognitive ability?	von Neumann's way of thinking might not be visual, but more of an aural one.
What did Nobel Laureate Hans Bethe think of von NEumann's ability?	I have sometimes wondered whether a brain like von Neumann's does not indicate a species superior to that of man
What did James Glimm have to say about von Nuemann?	he is regarded as one of the giants of modern mathematics
What description did Peter Lax use for von Neumann?	most scintillating intellect of this century
In what year was von Neumann diagnosed with cancer?	1955
From when his mother was diagnosed with cancer, how long did she live?	died within two weeks
How long did von Neumann survive with cancer?	eighteen months
Who administered the last sacrament to von Neumann?	Father Strittmatter
Did the last sacrament ease von Neumann?	did not receive much peace or comfort from it, as he still remained terrified of death
Was there conflict of faith and beliefs at the end of von NEumann's life?	he suddenly turned Catholic—it doesn't agree with anything whatsoever in his attitude, outlook and thinking when he was healthy
What did Oskar Morgenstern feel about von Neumann's beliefs?	always believed him to be "completely agnostic."
The agreement between the Nazis and the Soviets split what countries up?	Romania, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and Finland
Who invaded Poland after the Nazi’s?	Soviet
Which countries were taken over by the Soviets?	Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and parts of Romania
Who broke the agreement with the invasion of Bukovina?	Stalin
Salla is located in what country?	Finland
The regions of Białystok, Galicia and Przemyśl were returned to what country after world war II?	Polish state
What regions remained part of the Soviet Union?	(Karelia, Petsamo), Estonia (Ingrian area and Petseri County) and Latvia (Abrene) remained part of the Russian Federation
After World War II, what regions remain part of Ukraine?	Northern Bukovina, Southern Bessarabia and Hertza
Lenin acknowledged the independence of which countries?	Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland.
What agreement gave Germany many regions of Russia in the first world war?	Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
When did the russian civil war take place?	1917–22
Who was to blame for communism and capitalism?	ethnic Jews
What reduced Germany’s need for Soviet goods?	Treaty of Versailles
Which political group created problems between the Soviet and German governments?	Nazi Party
What countries prevented the Soviets from joining the Munich Conference?	UK and France
Who was the English politician who appeased Germany with the take over of Czechoslovakia	Chamberlain
The soviets suspected that Nazi-Soviet conflicts would result in what?	put an end to both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany
During conflict, what would prevent transport of materials?	British blockade
Between german and the soviet union which country needed military machinery?	military machinery
Who believed they needed a supply line from the Soviet Union to sustain another war?	Germany
Why did the Soviet government fear the governments of France and Britain?	capitalist encirclements
Why did western power believe that the soviet government wouldn’t partake in another world war?	Great Purge
What country was at war with Japan in China prior to World War II?	Soviet Union
Who was afraid of a pact between Germany and the Soviet governments?	France
Who predicted soviet aggression in the Baltic region?	Britain
What month did the Tripartite discussions begin between Britain, USSR and France?	mid-June
Which country is blamed for the Tripartite discussion to stagnate and fail?	the Soviets
Which Soviet Foreign Minister lost his job because of his favorable attitude towards the west?	Maxim Litvinov
Which two countries positioned themselves to broker a deal returning to a pre-1930’s treaty with each other?	Soviet and German
Which two countries positioned themselves to broker an new trade agreement?	Germany and the Soviet Union
In what city did the tripartite military talks occur during the month of August?	Moscow
Why did Poland deny the proposal of the Soviet Union protecting them from a German Attack?	once the Red Army entered their territories, it might never leave.
Who did not want their country protected by the Soviet military?	Poland
What was the German-Soviet dividing line in regards to annexing Poland?	Vistula river
How many days after the German-Soviet agreement were the Tripartite discussions ceased?	2
What other countries did the Soviet government agree to annex through the agreement with Germany?	Latvia, Estonia, Finland, and Bessarabia
Which Foreign Minister would agree to meet with Stalin on to sign a secret agreement?	Ribbentrop
How long was the secret agreement between Germany and the Soviets?	10-year
Part of the secret agreement between the Germans and the Soviets included a neutral diplomatic approach when?	either went to war against a third power
What country held the city Vilnius prior to the inter-war period?	Lithuania
What country would reclaim the city of Vilnius?	Lithuania
What rivers would the soviet union claim as their own during the invasion of poland?	Pisa, Narev, Vistula and San rivers
Who would claim Lithuania under their political umbrella?	German
Bessarabia eventually became under the control of which country?	Soviet Union
Which diplomat leaked information about the secret agreements?	Hans von Herwarth
Which ally of Germany was most surprised by the signing of the agreement?	Japan
How long had the tripartite discussions been taking place?	place for months
Who downplayed the contrast and recent past history between German and the Soviets?	Molotov
How long did the anti-Nazi propaganda machine run before the pact-signing?	a decade
A war with the USSR was considered certain according to whom?	Hitler
What was the response of  Kliment Voroshilov in regards to further conversations with Britain and France?	no useful purpose
Who should accept the annexation of Poland?	Britain
By accepting the deal with the USSR, Hitler admitted that it prevented what?	facing a two front war
How did the Russians communicate to the Germans in regards to bombing civilians trying to flee cities?	signals broadcast by the Soviet radio
What day did German invade Poland?	1 September
How long did the Germans massacre Polish and Jewish civilians?	month
Why did Soviets create fake elections in Poland?	legitimization of Soviet annexation of eastern Poland
Where did the Nazi and Russian leaders meet to discuss what to do with Poland?	Brest-Litovsk
Where were cooperative military parades held?	Lvov and Brest-Litovsk
After amending the joint agreement, who received the larger portion of Lithuania?	Germany
What was the amended joint agreement called?	German–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation
How long after the annexation of Kresy was the amendment made?	Eleven days
The Soviets took over and setup a fake government in what country?	Finnish Democratic Republic
How long did the Finnish military last during the invasion by the soviets?	over three months
Although officially, the number of soviets wounded during the invasion of finland was around 200,000, who said the real numbers may have been closer to a million?	Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev
How many Finnish people lost their homes?	422,000
Who invaded the countries of Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia?	Soviet NKVD
What region of Lithuania was to be turned over to the Nazis?	Scheschupe area
Of the three countries invaded, which lost the least amount of people through deportation or loss of life?	Latvia
How did these countries become part of the USSR?	Elections were held with single pro-Soviet candidates
How many days after France sued for peace did the Romanians meet the requests of the USSR?	6
What month did France sue for peace?	June
How many days did it take for the Romanians give into the Soviets requests?	Two days
Who were the “intelligentia?”	Polish nobles, teachers, social workers, priests, judges and political activists
How long did liquidation occur?	fall of 1939 till spring of 1940
 How many intelligentia were killed during operation AB-Akiton?	16,000 members
How many Jews were forced to live within the Warsaw Ghetto?	380,000
How many Jews died in the Warsa Ghetto?	43,000
Which group of people were considered inferior?	Poles and other Slavs
How many Polish people were used in labor camps?	Between 1 and 2.5 million Polish citizens
How many people are believed to have died in Auschwitz?	1.1 million people
How much did the transfer of the Lithuanian Strip cost the Soviet Union?	7.5 million dollars (31.5 million Reichsmark)
How long did germans have to relocate from the baltic states after the amendment of secret protocols?	two and a half months
How long did the Russians have to relocate from the german occupied regions?	two and a half months
How long did the amendment extend the trade agreements?	until August 1, 1942
Who was part of Hollywood Ten?	Herbert Biberman
Who was the leader of the American communist party?	Earl Browder
Who protested the involvement of Britain and France in a war with Germany?	Western Communists
The western communists new rhetoric was that the war was?	the war was unjust and imperialist
The western communists claimed the war was what?	the war was unjust and imperialist
French communists voted for what?	war credits
Where did Maurice Thorez go after deserting the Army?	fled to Russia
Who wanted war with the Soviet Union?	English–French war bloc
Who publicly wanted peace with Soviet Union	German government
The British army was considered to be what by Walter Ulbricbht?	the most reactionary force in the world
Who refused a German-Soviet peace plan?	Britain and France
Why was the west creating a war?	to maintain the Versailles system.
Who provides rhetoric points for the Soviet propaganda?	Molotov
What was the title of Molotov’s report called?	On the Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union
According to Molotov, what was the goal of the west?	extermination of Hitlerism
Under what guise does the west perform their international policing?	defending democracy
How much more expansive was the newest trade agreement?	was over four times larger
What was the trade route between german and the soviet union?	occupied Polish territories
Where were the soybeans coming from?	Manchuria
 What famous ship was the soviet union getting the plans for?	the battleship Bismarck
How many new airplanes were the soviets getting in this agreement?	thirty
What did the Germans use to avoid British blockades?	a submarine base
Where was the sub base located?	northern Soviet Union near Murmansk
Which oceans did the sub base provide access to?	both the Atlantic and the Pacific
Who wanted to know the moment an anti-german bloc was to form?	Ribbentrop
Why did the Germans distrust the soviet agenda?	Stalin's invasions were a severe irritant
What caused distrust between the German and Soviet governments?	Stalin's invasions were a severe irritant to Berlin
Who stopped the trade because of a disagreement involving Romania?	Soviet Union
What regions were redrawn in effort to improve relations between Germany and the Soviets?	Hungarian and Romanian borders
Who started refining Romanian oil?	Germany
What countries agreed to a tripartisan agreement?	Germany entered a Tripartite Pact with Japan and Italy
Which Foreign Minister proposed that the Soviets should join this agreement of axis powers?	Ribbentrop
Who would the axis powers oppose in the new agreement?	Britain and the USA
Who was planning an invasion of the Soviet Union?	Hitler
Who did the Soviet Union agree to remain neutral with when they signed a treaty on the 13th of April?	Japan
Why did Stalin sign the pact?	reinforce a public affection for Germany
Where did the German attack on Soviet forces occur?	Soviet positions in eastern Poland
How many Soviet military members died within the first six months of the war between the two countries?	4.3 million casualties
How many Soviet prisoners did german take within the first six months of war between the two countries?	three million Soviet prisoners
How long did it take to capture regions of the world that were once occupied by soviets once the initial attack occurred?	matter of weeks
How many pages of secret documents were microfilmed?	9,800 pages
What did Wendell B. Blancke investigate at the end of the war?	Exploitation German Archives
Near the end of the war, where the did some of the german command flee to?	Thuringia
Why did Karl von Loesch bury the microfilm?	personal insurance for his future well-being
Where was Karl von Löesch transferred to after he turned over the documents?	the American zone
Who printed the secret German-Soviet treaty in Britain?	the Manchester Guardian
Which world leader favored the publication of Nazi-Soviet Relations to be printed?	President Truman
Where was the Foreign Ministers conference held?	London
Who put the Nazi-Soviet Relations publication together?	Raymond J. Sontag and James S. Beddie
What was the description of the Soviet government in the world press in regards to the treaty and subsequent breaking of the treaty by germany?	flat-footed
What year was Joseph Stalin’s version of the pact published?	1948
What was the Soviet response to the Nazi-Soviet Relations publication	Falsifiers of History
How long did Stalins version of what happened between the Germans and the Soviets last?	until the Soviet Union's dissolution
Who created an investigation into whether or not the Soviet-German Pact happened?	Mikhail Gorbachev, Alexander Nikolaevich Yakovlev
Which states have argued that the Soviet-German Pact was invalid from the inception?	Both successor-states of the pact parties
Which government agency received the news that the Soviet-German Pact had existed?	Congress of People's Deputies of the Soviet Union
Who was ordered to remove the Jews from the Ministry?	Molotov
Who gave the order to remove the Jews from the Ministry?	Stalin
Who believed that the firing of Litvinov allowed the Soviets to quicker negotiations with Germany?	Derek Watson
Who believed that the hiring of Molotov would result in a better deal with the western countries?	Geoffrey Roberts
Edward Carr believes that in a war between Germany and the Soviet Union, who else would have been participating?	the Western Powers would already be involved
Who believes that the Soviet Unions was afraid of Germany?	Historian Werner Maser
The pact according to Edward Carr’s view was to provide what between Germany and the Soviet Union?	a line of defense against
Who was skeptical of Stalin’s policies?	Viktor Suvorov
What is the claim the pact promoted, purported by the The Black Book of Communism?	a "conspiracy to conduct war of aggression."
Who doesn’t believe that Joseph Stalin had plans to invade Germany?	David Glantz
What was a capacitor originally known as?	a condenser
How many electrical conductors, or plates, do all capacitors contain at a minimum?	two electrical conductors
What is the name of the insulator in all capacitors that can store energy by becoming polarized?	a dielectric
In what form does a capacitor store energy?	the form of an electrostatic field
Where is the energy stored by a capacitor located?	between its plates
When does an electric field develop across the dielectric?	When there is a potential difference across the conductors
Under what condition can a displacement current flow in a capacitor?	if a time-varying voltage is applied across the leads
What is an example of when there exists a potential difference across the conductors?	when a capacitor is attached across a battery
What happens to the current when a battery has been attached to a capacitor for an adequate amount of time?	no current can flow through the capacitor
How do charges accumulate on each plate of a capacitor after an electric field has developed across the dielectric?	positive charge +Q to collect on one plate and negative charge −Q to collect on the other
Who first discovered the basic properties of capacitors?	Ewald Georg von Kleist
When were the basic properties of capacitors first discovered?	In October 1745
In the original experiment in which the properties of capacitors were discovered, what component acted as the dielectric?	a hand-held glass jar
Besides the scientist's hand, what other component of the experiment in which the basic properties of capacitors were discovered acted as the second conductor?	the water acted as conductors
What was the name of the Dutch physicist who invented the Leyden Jar?	Pieter van Musschenbroek
Who was the first person to connect several Leyden jars in parallel?	Daniel Gralath
Where did Benjamin Franklin believe the charge was stored in Leyden jars?	stored on the glass
Who coined the term "battery"?	Benjamin Franklin
How many nanofarads did the earliest unit of capacitance equate to?	1.11 nanofarads
Why was a gap left at the mouth of Leyden jars?	to prevent arcing between the foils
Besides porcelain, paper and mica, what other non conductive material was used as an insulator?	glass
For what use were non conductive materials used in the first capacitors?	as the dielectric
What was layered between strips of metal in order to create paper capacitors?	strip of impregnated paper
When were paper capacitors first manufactured?	in 1876
What other use did paper capacitors serve in the telecommunications industry?	as decoupling capacitors
Who invented the first electrolytic capacitor?	Charles Pollak
In what sort of electrolyte does the oxide layer on an aluminum anode remain stable?	a neutral or alkaline electrolyte
In what year was the patent filed for an electric liquid capacitor?	In 1896
What sort of capacitors were created by Bell Labs in the 1950's?	Solid electrolyte tantalum capacitors
Why did Bell labs create their new type of capacitor?	to complement their newly invented transistor
What are electric double-layer capacitors called today?	Supercapacitors
When were low voltage electrolytic capacitors with porous carbon electrodes invented?	In 1957
Who invented low voltage electrolytic capacitors with porous carbon electrodes?	H. Becker
In what part of the capacitor did Becker believe the charge was being stored?	in the carbon pores
In what component of electrolytic capacitors did Becker believe was similar to the porous carbon electrodes?	the pores of the etched foils
What type of area is between the two conductors in a capacitor?	a non-conductive region
What is the name given to the area between two conductors in a capacitor?	the dielectric
What net electric charge are capacitors assumed to have?	no net electric charge
What type of charges do conductors hold on their facing surfaces?	equal and opposite charges
What region within a capacitor develops an electric field?	the dielectric
What is the definition of the current I(t) through any component in an electric circuit?	the rate of flow of a charge Q(t) passing through it
For each electron that departs the positive plate, how many electrons build up on the negative plate?	one electron accumulates on the negative plate
To what is the charge on the electrodes of a capacitor equal to?	the integral of the current
To what is the charge on the electrodes of a capacitor proportional to?	proportional to the voltage
When calculating the integral to determine the charge on the electrodes of a capacitor, what does the constant of integration that must be added represent?	the initial voltage V(t0)
In an ideal model of a capacitor, what is the value that describes the permittivity of the dielectric?	permittivity ε
What equation describes the charge density for an ideal model of a capacitor?	±ρ = ±Q/A
In an ideal model of a capacitor, what must be assumed about the size of the plates?	much greater than their separation d
Close to the middle of the capacitor, what equation describes the magnitude of the electric field?	E = ρ/ε
What does the line integral of the electric field between the plates of a capacitor represent?	The voltage
What is a function of the amount of dielectric, the strength of dielectric and its permittivity?	The maximum energy
If the plate area and separation distance are altered while keeping the amount of dielectric the same, what effect is had on the maximum energy of the capacitor?	no change of the maximum amount of energy
In a realistic model of a capacitor, where else besides between the dielectric between the conductors might an electric field be found?	fringing fields outside the dielectric
When an electric field exists between the sides of the plates as well as in within the dielectric, what effect is had on the effective capacitance of the capacitor?	will increase the effective capacitance
When the ratios of plate length and width to separation distance are large, what size is the parasitic capacitance?	negligibly small
What characteristic can leakage current and parasitic effects be assumed to have in the equation for a realistic capacitor?	can be assumed to be linear
What sort of components can be added to the equivalent circuit of a capacitor in order to deal with leakage current and parasitic effects?	virtual components
Upon dealing with leakage current and parasitic effects in a realistic model of a capacitor, what sort of methods can then be applied?	The usual methods of network analysis
What sort of analysis cannot be used in cases of voltage breakdown in modelling a capacitor?	normal (i.e., linear) network analysis cannot be used
What causes the assumption of constant capacitance to fail even if the effect is linear in nature?	temperature dependence
What order is the breakdown field strength for air dielectric capacitors of?	of the order 2 to 5 MV/m
Of what order is the breakdown field strength for mica dielectric capacitors?	100 to 300 MV/m
In what way is the dielectric used in order to cause the absolute breakdown voltage of capacitors to be limited?	The dielectric is used in very thin layers
What is one factor that critically affects the breakdown voltage of the capacitor?	the geometry of the capacitor conductive parts
What is the difference in the physical attributes of the dielectric used in high voltage capacitors compared to low voltage capacitors?	the dielectric must be thicker
What name is given to the AC component of an applied source having either constant or alternating frequency?	Ripple current
What is one cause of dielectric losses in a capacitor?	changing field strength
What is another cause of dielectric losses in a capacitor?	current flow across the slightly resistive supply lines or the electrolyte
What is the name given to the amount of internal series resistance needed to add to an ideal capacitor model in order to represent the heat generated by dielectric losses?	equivalent series resistance (ESR)
What is one type of capacitor that has a specified rating value for maximum ripple current?	aluminum electrolytic capacitors
What value of some capacitors decreases with age?	The capacitance
What causes the decrease of capacitance in ceramic capacitors as they age?	degradation of the dielectric
What is one of the most important aging factors in capacitors?	The type of dielectric
What is another important factor which governs how a capacitor ages?	ambient operating and storage temperatures
At what point can the aging effect of a capacitor be reversed if the component is heated beyond?	the Curie point
What is the effect called when capacitors absorb sound waves?	microphonic effect
What value of a capacitor is varied when vibration moves the conducting plates?	the capacitance
What sort of current is induced when the capacitance of a capacitor is altered?	AC current
In what type of applications is piezeoelectricity especially problematic?	audio applications
What is it called when a changing electric field existing between the conductive plates of a capacitor physically moves them?	the reverse microphonic effect
What is one type of circuit in which voltage and current reversal are affected by damping?	DC circuits
What is another type of circuit in which voltage and current reversal are affected by damping?	pulsed circuits
Under what condition does voltage reversal occur in RLC circuits?	under-damped
What is formed between the inductance and the capacitance when the current and the voltage switch direction?	a harmonic oscillator
When a system is over-damped, what does it typically not experience?	a voltage reversal
What percentage of voltage reversal does an AC circuit experience?	100% voltage reversal
What does voltage reversal create in the dielectric of a capacitor?	excess electric fields
What percentage of voltage reversal will an under damped DC circuit experience?	less than 100%
What does excess electric field present in the dielectric lead to?	heating of both the dielectric and the conductors
When designing a capacitor, what is an important rating to consider?	Reversal ratings
After discharging and disconnecting a capacitor, what causes it to develop a voltage?	hysteresis in the dielectric
What does the process of dielectric absorption in a capacitor depend on?	time-dependent
What level of dielectric absorption would a tantalum electrolytic capacitor display?	very high absorption
What level of dielectric absorption would a Teflon capacitor exhibit?	very small levels of absorption
What amount of energy must a capacitor contain in order to be generally considered dangerous?	over 10 joules of energy
With what value is a resistor in parallel with a capacitor equal to?	Leakage
What can cause excessive leakage in a capacitor?	Constant exposure to heat
What sort of capacitors are used to carry a varying signal from the conductive plate of one tube to the grid circuit of the next stage?	interstage coupling capacitors
What type of capacitor can cause signal distortion in the downstream tube?	A leaky capacitor
If the grid circuit voltage is increased beyond its regular bias setting, what can happen to the conductive plates in power amplifiers?	cause the plates to glow red
What do many capacitors contain that raises the capacitance?	a dielectric spacer
What sort of dielectric is used in low capacitance devices?	a vacuum
What sort of capacitors have traditionally been used in radio tuning circuits?	Variable capacitors
How did the capacitor traditionally used in radio tuning circuits change over time?	use polymer foil dielectric between the moving and stationary plates
What did the later designs of capacitors used in radio tuning circuits no longer have?	no significant air space
What benefit is offered by solid state paper capacitors?	relatively high voltage performance
What type of capacitor has mostly replaced solid state paper capacitors?	plastic film capacitors
What sort of circuit are plastic capacitors especially useful for?	timer circuits
What is one type of reliable capacitor that is resistant to temperature and voltage changes?	Glass
What is another type of reliable capacitor that is resistant to temperature and voltage changes?	mica capacitors
What is one type of metal which the conducting plates in electrolytic capacitors are commonly made of?	aluminum
What type of dielectric layer is used in electrolytic capacitors?	an oxide dielectric layer
What happens to the conductivity of the electrolyte at low temperatures?	drops at low temperatures
How can electrolytic capacitors be safely used after having been stored unused for a long time?	by gradually applying the operating voltage
Why might the method gradually applying the operating voltage not be suitable to protect electrolytic capacitors in modern devices?	these produce full output voltage even with reduced input
What is the main feature of a supercapacitor?	Supercapacitors store large amounts of energy
What is one type of material with which a supercapacitor may be constructed?	carbon nanotubes
As of 2010, what is the highest capacitance a supercapacitor has achieved?	up to 5 kF
What type of capacitor is commonly used in electric motor circuits?	Alternating current capacitors
How many times the maximum AC voltage are AC capacitors designed to withstand?	at least five times the maximum AC voltage
Under what condition might the polarization of the dielectric be unable to follow the voltage?	driven with a time-varying voltage that changes rapidly
What type of dipoles which add to the dielectric constant cannot move instantly if a rapidly changing time varying voltage is driving the capacitor?	the internal microscopic dipoles
What is it called when a dielectric constant changes with frequency?	dielectric dispersion
What regulates dielectric dispersion?	dielectric relaxation processes
What is an example of a dielectric relaxation process?	Debye relaxation
How is the complex impedance with dielectric represented mathematically?	Z(ω)
How is the complex capacitance without dielectric represented mathematically?	C0
Why is the value of C0 unattainable in reality?	even the quantum vacuum is predicted to exhibit nonideal behavior
Under what condition is the approximation C0 sufficiently accurate for calculation purposes?	in terrestrial vacuum
How is the complex capacitance mathematically represented with the dielectric present?	Ccmplx(ω)
What order of magnitude of capacitance is suitable for capacitors comprised of ceramic disks with metallic coatings?	microfarads and less
How are larger value capacitors often constructed?	multiple stacks of plates and disks
What do larger value capacitors often use as the dielectric medium?	impregnated paper or plastic – these are rolled up to save space
Why are the plates and dielectrics often staggered in larger value capacitors?	To reduce the series resistance and inductance
How are the conductive plates often made for larger value capacitors?	metal film layer deposited on the surface of a dielectric film
What is one type of configuration in which a capacitor may have its connecting leads organized?	axially
What is another type of configuration in which a capacitor may have its connecting leads arranged?	radially
Which type of configuration is often manufactured with the leads parallel to the body of the capacitor?	Radial
How are the leads of an axially configured capacitor arranged?	on a common axis
How could radial leads be more correctly described?	as tandem
Since when have inexpensive ceramic disc capacitors existed?	the 1930s
Since when have surface mount packages for capacitors been commonly in use?	the 1980s
What do surface mount packages lack that allows their use on the surface of printed circuit boards?	connecting leads
What is one benefit of using surface mount components?	simplify automated assembly
What is one difficulty when using surface mount components?	manual handling is made difficult due to their small size
What do mechanically controlled variable capacitors enable to be modified?	the plate spacing
How do cheap variable capacitors vary the separation distance between layers of a plastic and aluminum?	with a screw
Of what type of diodes are varactors or varicaps comprised?	reverse-biased semiconductor diodes
What varies as a function of voltage in varactors?	depletion region
What is an application of varactors?	phase-locked loops
How do larger capacitors present their electrical characteristics?	display the actual capacitance together with the unit (for example, 220 μF)
What does the abbreviated electrical characteristics of smaller capacitors consist of?	three numeric digits and a letter
What part of the electrical characteristics of smaller capacitors do the digits of the abbreviated notation represent ?	the digits indicate the capacitance
What does the letter of the abbreviated notation for the electrical characteristics of smaller capacitors represent?	the letter indicates the tolerance
In what SI unit is the capacitance reported on smaller capacitors?	in pF
Why are capacitors connected in parallel with the power circuits of many devices and large systems?	to provide a "clean" power supply for signal or control circuits
How do the capacitors connected in parallel act with currents from the power supply?	as a local reserve for the DC power source
What is one value a stiffening capacitor accounts for when used in for car audio purposes?	the inductance
What is another value a stiffening capacitor accounts for when used in for car audio purposes?	resistance
What do parallel capacitors do to fluctuating current in order to deliver "clean" power for control circuits?	conceal current fluctuations
In what scenario are capacitors used for power factor correction?	In electric power distribution
How are capacitors used for for power factor correction prepared?	as three capacitors connected as a three phase load
In what what unit is the capacitance reported for capacitors used in power factor correction?	reactive power in volt-amperes reactive (var)
What is the reason for using capacitors in power factor correction?	to counteract inductive loading
How are power factor correction capacitors sometimes installed?	at a load center within a building
What happens to the current when an inductive circuit is opened?	the current through the inductance collapses quickly
What happens to the voltage when an inductive circuit is opened?	a large voltage across the open circuit of the switch
What type of capacitor is used to make a path to bypass the contact points?	A snubber capacitor
What is a typical system in which a snubber capacitor is found?	contact breaker ignition systems
What type of capacitor absorbs radio frequency interference?	a filter capacitor
What is the main winding on a squirrel cage motor capable of withstanding?	a rotational motion on the rotor
What sort of capacitors are used on the second winding of a squirrel cage motor?	series non-polarized starting capacitor
What does the capacitor on the second winding of a squirrel cage motor do?	introduce a lead in the sinusoidal current
What does the centrifugal switch do the capacitor when the rotor achieves operating speed?	disconnects the capacitor
Where is the start capacitor commonly mounted?	to the side of the motor housing
How much energy could a capacitor in a disposable camera contain?	over 15 joules of energy
To what voltage could a capacitor from a disposable camera be charged to?	over 300 volts
What device can be used to discharge large voltage capacitors?	a Brinkley stick
How are the terminals of high voltage capacitors stored?	with the terminals shorted
What type of charge could a capacitor pick up a transient charge from?	from static charges
What could cause the failure of a capacitor?	when subjected to voltages or currents beyond their rating
What can happen to capacitors used in high current applications?	overheat
What can happen to capacitors used in high energy capacitor banks?	violently explode
What type of capacitors can generate soft x-rays?	High voltage vacuum capacitors
What is one way to help minimize capacitor dangers?	preventive maintenance
What are natural and social sciences a subcategory of?	The history of science
What is the history of arts and humanities called?	the history of scholarship
What kind of phenomena does science study?	real world
Intellectual history and social history are used in what?	Historiography of science
Who coined the word "scientist"?	William Whewell
When was the word "scientist" created?	19th century
What are people who study nature called?	natural philosophers
Ibn al-Haytham and Roger Bacon were scientists in which time period?	the Middle Ages
When was the beginning of modern science considered to be?	the scientific revolution
What replaced false beliefs?	true theories
Who depicts the history of science in a wider matrix?	Thomas Kuhn
What time period did the history of science begin to take a progressive narrative?	the 18th century
Thomas Kuhn used conceptual systems and what other term to define the history of science?	competing paradigms
The advancement of agriculture made what possible?	a surplus of food
Having a surplus of food allowed farmers and hunter-gatherers to spend less time working on what?	food production
Before agriculture advancements, what were farmers having to do?	work towards bare survival
What advancement aided in spreading knowledge across generations?	The development of writing
Who was able to support the people who were adding to the written knowledge of nature?	community
Which civilization advanced in astronomy, mathematics, and medicine?	Ancient Egypt
What did Egyptians use to better organize their farmland?	geometry
What theory did the Egyptians use to build rectilinear structures?	The 3-4-5 right triangle
What research was Egypt known for?	alchemy
What is the name of the earliest medical document?	The Edwin Smith papyrus
Where did the Mesopotamian people originate from?	Sumer
How far back do the Mesopotamian people go?	3500 BC
What did the Mesopotamian use to record data about the world around them?	numerical data
What was the earliest recording of Pythagoras' law?	18th century BC
Which tablet had Pythagorean triplets on it?	Plimpton 322
Who wrote on the clay tablets in Babylonian astronomy?	scribes
Where are Mesopotamian astronomical periods still used?	in Western calendars
Who was Kidinnu?	a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician
Who believes that the Hellenistic world relies on Babylonian astronomy?	A. Aaboe
Where can Kidinnu's solar year be found in use?	today's calendars
Which era was marked by investigating the universe?	Classical Antiquity
What type of science are making a calendar and finding cures for diseases a part of?	natural philosophy
What is an example of skilled professionals?	physicians
What is an example of religious devotee?	temple healers
What would the first scientists have been considered?	natural philosophers
What are early Greek philosophers known as?	pre-Socratics
What question were Greek philosophers trying to answer?	How did the ordered cosmos in which we live come to be?
Who was named "the father of science"?	Thales
Which religious deity did Thales undermine with his scientific theories?	Poseidon
Who was the first person to determine that the Earth is round?	Samos
Plato and Aristotle are known for systematically discussing what?	natural philosophy
What discussion technique are Plato and Aristotle responsible for?	deductive reasoning
What year was the Platonic Academy founded?	387 BC
Aristotle introduced what theory?	empiricism
How many species of animals were classified by Aristotle?	540
Anatomy, zoology, geography, and studies like them are considered what?	factual knowledge
What era utilized Greek theories?	the Hellenistic age
What scientific theory was created by the Greeks?	the Socratic method
Who employed logic, geometry, and natural sciences?	the Ancient Greeks
Greek thought is predominately applying mathematics and what other method?	deliberate empirical research
Who created the sun-centered model of the solar system?	Aristarchus of Samos
Who was able to determine the circumference of the Earth?	Eratosthenes
Who made the first catalog of stars?	Hipparchus
When was the Antikythera mechanism used?	150-100 BC
What was used to determine the position of planets within the solar system?	the Antikythera mechanism
Who wrote the book Elements?	Euclid
What was contained within the book Elements?	the foundations of mathematical rigor
Who was able to determine the the area under a parabola?	Archimedes
What method did Archimedes employ to determine the area under a parabola?	exhaustion
Which mathematical figure did Archimedes approximate?	Pi
What classification guide did Theophrastus create?	the first taxonomy
In what year did Pliny the Elder publish the largest encyclopedia?	77 AD
What did Pliny the Elder observe about diamonds?	the octahedral shape
Who do engravers use diamond dust for?	to cut and polish other gems
What characteristic was Pliny the Elder the first to recognize about amber?	was a fossilized resin
The Indus Valley Civilization was the first to have traces of what?	mathematical knowledge
What proportional size were the bricks that the civilization used?	4:2:1
What characteristic determined the proportions of the bricks?	stability
What was the name of the ruler that they created?	the Mohenjo-daro ruler
How long were the units in inches of the Mohenjo-daro ruler?	1.32 inches
When did Aryabhata live?	476-550
What were the trigonometric functions that Aryabhata discovered?	sine, versine, cosine and inverse sine
What theory did Brahmagupta suggest in 628 AD?	gravity was a force of attraction
What did Brahmagupta use the number zero for?	a placeholder and a decimal digit
What language did the work of Brahmagupta and Aryabhata have to be translated from?	Arabic
Which text was the first to have concepts of astronomy in it?	the Vedas
Who wrote the first 12 chapters of the Siddhanta Shiromani?	Bhāskara
In what time period was the Siddhanta Shiromani written?	12th century
The second section of the Siddhanta Shiromani has how many chapters?	13
What topic does the second part of the Siddhanta Shiromani contain?	the nature of the sphere
Where are the Neolithic graveyards?	Pakistan
What do the findings in the graveyards show evidence of?	proto-dentistry
What kind of medicine was practiced in India before 2500 BC?	Ayurveda
What is the name of the text that has information regarding Ayurveda?	Suśrutasamhitā of Suśruta
What information is in the Susrutasamhita of Susruta?	surgical procedures
What method did early Chinese mathematicians use to calculate?	a positional decimal system on counting boards
One rod in the second box from the right is what number?	10
When did negative numbers and decimals start being used?	1st century BC
What text includes Horner's method?	The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art
What advanced mathematical methods did the Tang dynasty have?	Cubic equations
What observations in astronomy did China record?	sunspots
What kind of predictions were made during the 12th century?	eclipses
Who made predictions in 1601?	Jesuit Matteo Ricci
What year did Chinese astronomers start to observe comets?	635
How many records of sunspots are there?	112
What was invented in 132 CE?	a seismometer
What occurrence is measured by a seismometer?	an earthquake
What is the Chinese name for a seismometer?	Houfeng didong yi
What did the Chinese caused earthquakes?	enormous compression of trapped air
What was Luoyang renamed to?	Gansu
Who discovered the idea of true north?	Shen Kuo
When was Shen Kuo alive?	1031–1095
What are drydocks used for?	to repair boats
What did silt and marine fossils teach Shen Kuo?	geomorphology
What did Shen Kuo study to discover climate change?	petrified bamboo
Who was the Needham Research Institute named after?	Joseph Needham
What type of bridge originated in China?	suspension
What type of map originated in China?	raised-relief
What type of fan originated in China?	rotary
What type of globe did Zhang Heng invent?	water-powered celestial
What was a consequence of the Roman Empire being divided?	the Western Roman Empire lost contact with much of its past
Where was support found for Greek philosophy?	Arab Empire
What time period was marked by the spreading of Islam?	the 7th and 8th centuries
How long did the Islamic Golden Age last?	until the 13th century
What language did Muslim philosophers speak?	Arabic
What method did Muslim scientists use more than the Greeks?	experiment
What book did Ibn al-Haytham write?	Book of Optics
What law did the Persians know of?	The law of refraction of light
What was Ibn al-Haytham's nickname?	the father of optics
What theory did Ibn al-Haytham have proof for?	the intromission theory of light
What was Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi's profession?	mathematician
Where does the word "algebra" come from?	al-jabr
Where did Arabic numerals originate?	India
What did Muslim mathematicians add to Arabic numerals?	decimal point notation
What area of science did Al-Razi contribute to?	chemistry and medicine
Whose work did Al-Battani improve?	Hipparchus
What does He Megale Syntaxis mean?	The great treatise
Which measurement did Al-Battani improve upon?	the Earth's axis
The geocentric model is similar to what other model?	Copernican heliocentric model
Who was most influential in Islamic philosophy?	Ibn Sina
What method did Ibn Sina introduce?	clinical trials
What does Kitab al-shifa mean?	Book of Healing
The Kitab al-shifa and The Canon of Medicine are considered what?	standard medicinal texts
What characteristic did Ibn Sina find out about infectious diseases?	contagious
When were medieval universities created?	the 12th century
Who sponsored the Toledo School of Translators?	Raymond of Toledo
At the Toledo School of Translators, what language was Arabic text translated into?	Latin
Which translator learned Arabic to be able to study the Arabic texts directly?	Michael Scotus
What language did the important scientific works get translated into for universities and monasteries?	Latin
Who favored empirical methods?	Bacon
Who favored mathematics?	Grosseteste
Who wrote the Catholic Church's Condemnation of 1277?	Pierre Duhem
What era was important for scientific advancements?	the Middle Ages
Who pioneered parsimony?	William of Ockham
What theory is based off of projectiles' motion?	impetus
What theory did impetus pave the way for?	inertia
What did the Oxford Calculators measure?	the kinematics of motion
What year did the Black Death occur?	1348
What caused ancient texts to be rediscovered by Byzantine scholars?	the Fall of Constantinople in 1453
The invention of printing improved which society?	European
Printed word enabled what?	a faster propagation of new ideas
What type of mathematics aided in developing European science?	Algebra
The focus on learning in the 12th century is referred to as what?	Scholasticism
What began at the same time Scholasticism ended?	the Black Death
Which era came after Scholasticism?	Italian Renaissance
What was the focus of the Northern Renaissance?	chemistry and the biological sciences
Which scientist was known for working on human cadavers?	Vesalius
What was the Scientific Revolution?	a period of major scientific advancements
What year is considered to be the beginning of the Scientific Revolution?	1543
What book by Andreas Vesalius was published in 1543?	De humani corporis fabrica (On the Workings of the Human Body)
What was the focus of De Revolutionibus by Nicolaus Copernicus?	the Earth moved around the Sun
What book was printed by Isaac Newton in 1687?	Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica
The Age of Reason made way for which movement?	Age of Enlightenment
What event is considered to be the start of political modernity?	the French Revolution of 1789
What book did Denis Diderot write?	Encyclopédie
Which movement took place during the 19th century?	The Romantic Movement
What theory did Darwin introduce?	theory of evolution
Which physics subject was affected by The Romantic Movement?	electromagnetism
What caused Romanticism to end?	Positivism
What year did Positivism end?	1880
Which movement is considered to be a dividing line between ancient thought and classical physics?	The scientific revolution
Who made the heliocentric model popular?	Nicolaus Copernicus
Johannes Kepler created a model of what?	planetary motion
What did Johannes Kepler's model suggest about the planets?	the planets follow elliptical orbits
What was Galileo's nickname?	Father of Modern Physics
What work was printed by Isaac Newton in 1687?	the Principia Mathematica
How many theories were included within the Principia Mathematica?	two
What concept did the Law of Gravitation deal with?	the fundamental force of gravity
What are Maxwell's equations about?	electromagnetism
What science subject explains anomalous results?	quantum theories
What year did Einstein discover the theory of general relativity?	1915
Quantum theories became which subject in 1925?	quantum mechanics
Which scientist noticed the relationship between the speed and distance of galaxies?	Edwin Hubble
Edwin Hubble's discovery about galaxies allowed for which theory by Georges Lemaitre?	the Big Bang theory
Who discovered nuclear fission?	Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann
Who edited the first paper about nuclear fission?	Niels Bohr and John A. Wheeler
What event was going on during the creation of the atomic bomb?	World War II
The atomic bomb was a part of which movement?	Big Science
What is the problem with general relativity and quantum mechanics?	inconsistent with each other
When did modern chemistry come into existence?	the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries
Who decided that chemistry and alchemy were different?	Robert Boyle
What book was written by Robert Boyle in 1661?	The Sceptical Chymist
What was Antoine Lavoisier's nickname?	Father of Modern Chemistry
Which theory did the law of conservation of mass disagree with?	phlogiston theory
What scientific act is Friedrich Wohler known for?	The synthesis of urea
What scientific field did Wohler discover?	organic chemistry
Late 19th century is marked by what event?	the exploitation of the Earth's petrochemicals
Mixing organic chemistry with living organisms created what early form of biochemistry?	physiological chemistry
Who wrote The Nature of the Chemical Bond?	Linus Pauling
What was the work of Theophrastus on rocks called?	Peri lithōn
When were Theophrastus' ideas about fossils proven false?	the Scientific Revolution
When did Shen Kua live?	1031–1095
What science did Shen Kua observe?	land formation
What happened to geology during the Scientific Revolution?	individual theorists made important contributions
What did Robert Hooke study?	earthquakes
What theory did Nicholas Steno discover?	the theory of superposition
What book did Thomas Burnet right in 1681?	Sacred Theory of the Earth
What text did Burnet base his work off of?	the Bible
How old did biblical scholars think the Earth was?	6,000 years
Jean-Etienne Guettard and NIcolas Desmarest went to France and recorded what?	the first geological maps
In the 18th century, what changed geology drastically?	comprehensive classification systems for rocks and minerals
What are used to create geological maps?	index fossils
What geological theory was applied to the Paris Basin?	layers of rock could be dated by the fossils they contained
What changed about the way geology was implemented during the 19th century?	shifted from description and classification to attempts to understand how the surface of the Earth had changed
The idea of an ice-age that completely covered a continent was suggested by whom?	Louis Agassiz
What group did Andrew Crombie Ramsay belong to?	fluvialists
What did Ramsay believe about river valleys?	were formed, over millions of years by the rivers that flow through them
What happened after radioactivity was realized?	radiometric dating methods were developed
What was Ignac Fulop Semmelweis' profession?	physician
How did Semmelweis reduce puerperal fever?	requiring physicians to wash their hands
What came after the realization that physicians should was their hands before childbirth?	the germ theory of disease
What did Joseph Lister prove?	antisepsis
Who did Joseph Lister base his work off of?	Louis Pasteur
Which scientist championed the idea of evolution?	Charles Darwin
What was the name of the book that Darwin wrote about evolution?	On the Origin of Species
What was the reception of Darwin's ideas about evolution?	both opposition and support from different parts of society
Who rediscovered the laws of inheritance?	Moravian monk Gregor Mendel
What was the major break through for the study of genetics?	the basic structure of DNA
The discipline of ecology is a combination of what two subjects?	Darwinian evolution and Humboldtian biogeography
What did the work of Louis Pasteur and Ferdinand Cohn focus on?	the cycle of life concept
Who came up with the word "ecology"?	Ernst Haeckel
When was the Gaia hypothesis discovered?	in the 1960s
What movement occurred during the 1970s?	Deep Ecology
What larger group does political science belong to?	social sciences
Where did the ideas of political science begin?	prehistory
In history, where could you find someone studying politics?	in almost every geographic area
Where did studying politics originate?	Ancient Greece
What did Plato study?	political systems
What method did Plato use to understand political systems?	philosophy
What did Aristotle add to Plato's work?	historical empirical evidence
Who are Kautilya and Vishnugupta usually grouped with?	Chāṇakya
What did the Arthasastra say a king must use?	brutal measures
When was Chanakya alive?	350–-283 BCE
What allowed political studies to spread?	the fall of the Western Roman Empire
What new idea caused politics to cover a larger spectrum?	monotheism
Where did politics touch in the Middle Ages?	churches and courts
Who wrote The City of God?	Augustine of Hippo
What did The City of God change?	the borders between what was religious and what was political
What new subject surface at the end of the 18th century?	Historical linguistics
Who realized that languages like Sanskrit, Persian, and Greek share the same foundation?	Sir William Jones
What did Sir William Jones do to document his work?	catalog all languages of the world
What did Noam Chomsky add to the study of linguistics?	the development of generative linguistics
What method did Chomsky use to develop generative linguistics?	a mathematical model of language
Who wrote An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations?	Adam Smith
What did Adam Smith's work cover?	The basis for classical economics
What idea did Adam Smith disagree with?	mercantilism
What idea did Adam Smith propose?	an "invisible hand"
Who is Marxian economics named after?	Karl Marx
What did John Maynard Keynes want to separate?	microeconomics and macroeconomics
What concept did Milton Friedman propose after World War II?	monetarism
How did monaterism aim to control the economy?	using the supply and demand of money
In the 1970s, what did monaterism turn into?	supply-side economics
How did supply-side economics try to increase the amount of money in the market?	reducing taxes
When was Wealth of Nations written?	1776
How present was Smith's invisible hand intended to be?	frequently
What happens in a market when there is competition?	lower prices
What is the most important part of "Wealth"?	the division of labour
What was the beginning of psychology classified as?	a scientific enterprise
What year is most commonly referred to as the beginning of psychology?	1879
Who has the first lab completely dedicated to psychology?	Wilhelm Wundt
What did Hermann Ebbinghaus study?	memory studies
What was Ivan Pavlov known for?	classical conditioning
What is the group that human psychology belongs to?	cognitive science
What is investigated in cognitive science?	the mind
What inventions advanced the study of cognitive science?	PET scans and CAT scans
What new technology could be created as a result of studying cognitive science?	artificial intelligence
What was Ibn Khaldun's profession?	scientific systematic sociologist
When did modern sociology surface?	early 19th century
What is the main goal of sociology?	understanding the cohesion of social groups
How did Max Weber view rationalization?	he believed would trap individuals in an "iron cage"
Who was the major proponent of American sociology?	Talcott Parsons
What did Parsons believe made a functional society?	structural integration
What was the problem with the views of Parsons?	inequalities present in the status quo
What idea from Karl Marx was used to combat the problems with structural integration?	conflict theory
What is the main belief of conflict theory?	different groups compete for control over resources
What science is based on linguistics, mathematics, and engineering?	Computer science
How has computer science helped science as a whole?	by facilitating large-scale archiving of scientific data
What is the differing characteristic of contemporary computer science?	emphasising mathematical 'theory'
What text is the foundation of the study of the history of science?	History of the Inductive Sciences
Who wrote a more professional version of History of the Inductive Sciences?	George Sarton's
What was the history of science during the 20th century?	the history of great men and great ideas
How could Sarton's ideas be described?	Whiggish
Who studied the history of science?	interested scientists and physicians
What is the large question that the history of science answers?	what science is
What did sociology in science explain?	the ways in which scientists work
What was the most popular method in the 1960s regarding science studies?	to emphasize the "human component" of scientific knowledge
What did Humboldtian science aim to do?	combining scientific field work with the age of Romanticism sensitivity, ethics and aesthetic ideals
Who was the model for Humboldtian science?	Alexander von Humboldt
What idea did positivism provide?	the only valid knowledge is scientific
Where did the social aspect of science originate?	Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions in 1962
What idea did social science add to science as a whole?	positivism did not explain the actual interactions and strategies of the human participants in science
How did Kuhn view the history of science?	competing paradigms or conceptual systems
What did Scientific Knowledge and its Social Problems describe the scientific community as?	a social construct
What was the era called when scientists were rejecting the notion of objectivity of science?	The Science wars
What was positivism called after it was revived?	scientism
What did scientism aim to do?	settling enduring metaphysical and moral controversies
How many people speak Czech?	10 million
Which two languages strongly influenced Czech?	Latin and German
In which country is Czech the official language?	Czech Republic
Which language is closest to Czech?	Slovak
What name was the Czech language formerly known as?	Bohemian
What was Czech formerly known as?	Bohemian
What languages strongly influenced Czech?	Latin and German
Over how many million people speak Czech?	10
What vocabulary associated with higher classed culture have been adopted over the years?	loanwords
What is the official language of the Czech republic?	Czech
When did the Soviet Union occupy Czechoslovakia?	1968
What language forms a dialect continuum with Czech?	Slovak
Name three Serbo-Croatian languages that have made a point of establishing their own unique linguistic identities.	Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian
Why have many Slavic languages sought to separate themselves from Russian influence?	widespread public resentment against the former Soviet Union
What deliberate action has been done to some languages in the name of nationalism?	highlighting of minor linguistic differences
What language family is Czech?	Slavic
Why did many Slavic languages distance themselves from Russian influences?	resentment against the former Soviet Union
When did the Soviet Union occupy Czechoslovakia?	1968
What language does Czech form a dialect continuum with?	Slovak
How much do the lexicons of Czech and Slovak differ, according to on study?	by 80 percent
What was the high percentage of differing lexicons found to derive from?	differing orthographies and slight inconsistencies in morphological formation
When is Slovak morphology more regular than Czech?	when changing from the nominative to the locative case
The most differences between Czech and Slovak can be found in colloquial vocabulary as well as what?	some scientific terminology
What does Slovak have slightly more of than Czech?	borrowed words
Who called themselves "Czechoslavs"?	a group of 19th-century scholars
Why did the Czechoslavs consider Czech and Slovak to be a single language?	The similarities
When was the first Czechoslovak Republic?	1918–1938
What was standard written Slovak partially modeled on?	literary Czech
When was the Prague Spring?	1968
When did a tribe of Slavs arrive in Central Europe?	sixth century AD
Who was the hero who led the Slavs to their new home, according to legend?	Čech
What did the ninth century bring?	state of Great Moravia
Whose influence was Rastislav eager to reduce, when he invited  Michael III to send missionaries?	East Francia
What alphabet did the missionaries bring to the West Slavs?	Glagolitic
How did Old Czech's use of cases differ from modern usage?	did not yet have a vocative case or an animacy distinction
What other language did Old Czech's declension patterns resemble?	Lithuanian
How many cases did Old Czech have?	six
How long was the precursor to Czech classified as Old Czech?	through the sixteenth century
By the thirteenth century, what had the Czech language separated from?	other Slavic tongues
What type of orthography did Old Czech lack?	standard
Why aren't some sound clusters used in modern Czech?	no longer exist
How did old Czech allow some complex consonant clusters to be pronounced?	all at once
What type of phenomenon is Havlik's law?	phonological
Which "yer"s were vocalized as vowels?	every odd-numbered
What was Czech civilization called back in the day?	Bohemia
What Holy Roman Emperor expedited the growth of Bohemia in the 14th century?	Charles IV
When was Charles University founded in Prague?	1348
Who contributed heavily to the effort to standardize Czech orthography?	Jan Hus
What did Jan Hus advocate for among the Czech commoners?	widespread literacy
How many years as Czech continued to evolve and gain in regional importance?	hundreds
When was the Kralice Bible published?	late sixteenth century
What did the publication of the Kralice Bible spawn?	widespread nationalism
In what war were the Czechs defeated at the Battle of White Mountain?	Thirty Years' War
What language became dominant in Bohemia after the Czech's defeat?	German
When do linguists agree modern Czech originated?	the eighteenth century
What had Czech developed by the 18th century?	literary tradition
Journals from the 18th century have no substantial differences from what?	modern standard Czech
How much difficulty do contemporary Czechs have in understanding material from the 18th century?	little
What did the Czech language abandon which survives in Slovak?	a distinction between phonemic /l/ and /ʎ/
What did the Czechs as a people gain during the mid-18th century?	widespread national pride
What inspired the Czech's national pride?	Age of Enlightenment a half-century earlier
What did Czech historians emphasize about their countrymen?	accomplishments
What did Czech philologists advocate?	the return of the language to high culture
What is the period during the mid-eighteenth century also remembered as?	Czech National Revival
What was the professions of Joseph Dobrovský?	linguist and historian
What didn't Dobrovský think Czech had a chance of returning as?	a major language
What year did Joseph Dobrovský release a German-language grammar of Old Czech?	1809
What did Josef Jungmann advocate for?	a Czech linguistic revival
Who disagree about whether the revivalists were motivated by nationalism or if they considered contemporary spoken Czech unsuitable for formal use?	Modern scholars
What is the official language of the Czech republic?	Czech
How long has the Czech Republic been a member of the European Union?	since 2004
What distinction does Czech have in Slovakia?	foreign language most often used
Who collected data on language knowledge in Europe for the 2012 European Day of Languages?	Jonathan van Parys
Of the five countries with the greatest use of Czech, which country had the lowest percent of use?	Germany
Czechs immigrated from Europe to the U.S. primary from 1848 to when?	1914
What kind of language is Czech in U.S. schools?	a Less Commonly Taught Language
What states have large communities of Czech Americans?	Texas, Nebraska and Wisconsin
What is the most commonly spoken non-English language at homes nationwide in the U.S.?	Spanish
How many Americans spoke Czech as their first language as of 2009?	70,500
How many regional dialects does Czech have?	several
Where are dialects of Czech commonly found?	rural areas
What is dialect use associated with and thus stigmatized because of?	lower class
What kind of scholarly interest has Czech received?	considerable
What Czech dialect is gaining ground in journalism and the mass media?	Common
What are the dialects spoken in Moravia and Silesia known as?	Moravian
Where could citizens register "Bohemian-Moravian-Slovak' as being their spoken language?	the Austro-Hungarian Empire
Which of the Czech dialects is the only one distinguished in the nationwide surveys by the Czech Statistical Office?	Moravian
How many Czechs spoke Moravian as their first language as of 2011?	62,908
How many Czechs spoke both Moravian and standard Czech as first languages in 2011?	45,561
How many basic vowel phonemes does Czech contain?	ten
Where are three additional vowel phonemes found in Czech?	loanwords
What are vowel sounds never reduced to when unstressed?	schwa sounds
What is stress unrelated to in Czech?	vowel length
What a few exceptions where is the primary word stress in Czech?	first syllable
In Czech, what are loanwords from other languages associated with?	high culture
What word roots in the 19th century were rejected in favor of words with more common Slavic roots?	Greek and Latin
How does one say the word "music" in Czech?	hudba
What Czech word did the English "robot" derive from?	robota
What is the meaning of the Czech word "robota"?	labor
Czech's word order is flexible because it uses what to convey word function in a sentence?	grammatical case
In Czech an intransitive sentence may consist of only what?	a verb
What is encoded about a subject in verbs in Czech?	information
What is a hard to pronounce and remember term meaning primarily auxiliary verbs and pronouns?	Enclitics
Where must enclitics appear in a sentence?	second syntactic slot
What is the sentence structure of Czech syntax?	subject–verb–object
Because word order is flexible in Czech, what does it tend to actually be used for?	topicalization and focus
What kind of passive construction does Czech have?	periphrastic
What happens to the subject and object to produce a passive voice in Czech?	inverted
What case is the grammatical object of a verb?	accusative
How many grammatical cases can nouns and adjectives be declined into in Czech?	seven
When are nouns in Czech inflected?	to indicate their use in a sentence
How does Czech mark subject nouns?	with nominative case
What nouns does Czech use the accusative case to mark?	object
What must an adjective's case agree with in Czech?	the noun it describes
How many genders does Czech distinguish?	three
What categories is the masculine gender in Czech divided into?	animate and inanimate
What do Czech adjectives agree with in the nouns they modify?	gender and animacy
What does gender also affect in Czech?	past-tense verb endings
What is the main effect of gender in Czech?	difference in noun and adjective declension
What are inflected for number in Czech?	Nouns
What are the cardinal numbers one through four in Czech allowed to take?	any case
What case are numbers over five in?	genitive
When is the genitive case used?	when the entire expression is in nominative or accusative case
What is Czech's handling of cardinal numbers typical of?	a Slavic language
What do Slavic languages tend to do to their verbs?	marks
What describes the state of the action of the verb at the time specified by its tense?	Aspect
What two grammatical aspects can verbs in Czech have?	perfective and imperfective
In perfective verbs, what state is the action the verb describes in?	completed
In which verbs in Czech is the action the verb describes still ongoing?	imperfective
How many ways can a verb in an aspect pair differ?	two ways
What does a perfective verb have added in prefix pairs?	an added prefix
What is added to the ending in suffix pairs?	different infinitive ending
What can imperfective verb undergo to make other imperfective verbs?	further morphology
What type of action can second level morphed imperfective verbs denote?	repeated or regular action
What verb form is found in Czech dictionaries?	infinitive
How many grammatical moods do Czech verbs have?	three
What are the grammatical moods of Czech verbs?	indicative, imperative and conditional
What mood adds specific endings for each of three person or number categories?	imperative
Which Czech verb mood indicates possible events?	conditional
What language has one of the most phonemic orthographies of all European languages?	Czech
How many graphemes does Czech have?	thirty-one
What have some of Czech's characters been used for by phonologists to denote?	corresponding sounds in other languages
What character in Czech only exists in loanwords?	ó
In Czech, what type of words do the characters "q", "w" and "x" exclusively appear in?	foreign
What do Czech typographical features not associated with phonetics tend to resemble?	those of most Latin European languages
In Czech, what is done to proper nouns, honorifics, and the first letters of quotations?	capitalized
What is typical in Czech as other Latin European languages?	punctuation
What language does Czech share its handling of ordinal format with?	German
What word is capitalized in proper noun phrases in Czech?	only the first
What does Digimon stand for?	Digital Monsters
What forms of entertainment does the Digimon franchise include?	virtual pet toys, anime, manga, video games, films and a trading card game
What is the Digital World in which the Digimon creatures live?	a parallel universe that originated from Earth's various communication networks
What are the people who raise Digimon called?	"Digidestined" or "Tamers"
What are the Digimon villians main goals?	trying to destroy the fabric of the Digital world
When did Digimon first appear?	1997
Name the original Digimon anime.	Digimon Adventure
Name the Digimon video game that was released in 1999.	Digimon World
Name two types of toys the original Digimon bore a close resemblence to.	Tamagotchi or nano Giga Pet toys
When was the Digimon series created?	1997
What influenced the look of the Digimons?	Tamagotchi or nano Giga Pet toys
In what year was the Digimon video game released?	1999
What kind of toy were the original Digimon?	virtual pet toy
What kind of creatures where the early digimon patterned after?	dinosaurs
What properties of american comics were the later generations of digimon trying to capture?	stronger and "cool."
Who was the designer responsible for the westernization of Digimon character design?	Kenji Watanabe
What was the name of the original Digimon character?	Tyrannomon
What was the screen size of the Digimon toy?	16 by 16 pixels
What animals were the digimon based off of?	dinosaurs
Who was the designer of the Digimon card game?	Kenji Watanabe
How did Watanabe get his influence?	American comics
How do digimon evolve?	Digimental
How are digimon born?	Digimon hatch from types of eggs which are called Digi-Eggs
What is the process of aging called for digimon?	Digivolution
What effect does digivolution have on digimon?	changes their appearance and increases their powers
Are digimon all mindless monsters?	Some Digimon act feral. Most, however, are capable of intelligence and human speech
What were the eggs called that the Digimon were hatched from?	Digi-Eggs
What is the second type of Digi-Eggs called?	Digimental
What is the process called of how Digi-Eggs age?	Digivolution
What items were used to help the Digimon evolve?	Digivices
Are there any circumstances under which a digimon cannot be reborn?	if a Digimon's data is completely destroyed, they will die
What typically happens when digimon are killed?	Any Digimon that receives a fatal wound will dissolve into infinitesimal bits of data
What are digimon made of?	reconfigurable data
How is a digimon reborn?	The data then recomposes itself as a Digi-Egg, which will hatch when rubbed gently
When was the digimon life cycle first described?	The first Digimon anime
What was introduced during the first Digimon anime?	Digimon life cycle
What happened to a digimon that receives a fatal wound?	dissolve into infinitesimal bits of data
What happens to a digimon after it dissolves?	goes through its life cycle again
What happens if a Digimons data is completely destroyed?	they will die
What companies were responsible for the creation and subsequent release of the original digimon?	planned by WiZ and released by Bandai
What made digimon different from similar digital pets?	being more difficult and being able to fight other Digimon v-pets
What year was the second generation of digimon released?	1997
Who was the main market for the original digimon?	mainly for boys
What was involved in the original digimon virtual pet gameplay?	Every owner would start with a Baby Digimon, train it, evolve it, take care of it, and then have battles with other Digimon owners
What did the Digimon pets originally start out as?	Digital Monsters
When was the Digimon released by WiZ?	June 26, 1997
In what month was the second generation of the Digital Monsters Released?	December
What year was the third edition released?	1998
What is the world in which the digimon live?	a manifestation of Earth's communication network
What happens to a digimon after they evolve?	the Digimon change appearance and become much stronger, often changing in personality as well
Who accompanies the digimon as they work to save their world?	a group of mostly pre-teens
Are the children who accompany the digimon always the same?	The group of children who come in contact with the Digital World changes from series to series
What is the world of the digimon called?	DigiWorld
Where are Digimon the inhabitants of?	DigiWorld
What group of kids are in charge of the Digimons?	mostly pre-teens
What is the process called when Digimon get stronger?	Digivolve
How many series have aired since 2011?	six series
What is the name of the second Digimon series?	Digimon Adventure 02
When was the movie Digital Monster X-Evolution released?	January 3, 2005
When did Digimon Xros Wars begin airing?	2010
When did the first digimon series begin airing in japan?	March 7, 1999 in Japan
When did Digimon begin airing in America?	August 14, 1999
What was the premise of Digimon?	travel to the Digital World
How many people are in the original Digimon?	seven original characters
When did the second series of Digimon air?	April 2, 2000
What age are the original DigiDestined now that they are in High School?	fourteen
Who is the new evil force that has been enslaving people?	Digimon Kaiser
What did Ken do in order to atone for his mistakes?	joins the DigiDestined
When did the third Digimon series begin?	April 1, 2001
What can tamers do in order to give their partners advantages?	slide game cards through their "Digivices
What is the act called of giving partners advantages in Digimon?	Digi-Modify
When did the fourth series of Digimon begin?	April 7, 2002
What was the main focus surrounding the fourth series?	Spirit Evolution
What did the characters use to transform themselves into special Digimons?	D-Tectors
After the characters transformed into special Digimons, what were they called?	Legendary Warriors
How long did Digimon stay off the air before returning?	three-year hiatus
What year did the fifth  series start?	April 2, 2006
What was the main focus of the 5th season?	D.A.T.S. ("Digital Accident Tactics Squad")
What age group did the season target with its darker theme?	ages 16 to 21
What was the original target age for the Digimon series?	children aged 6 to 10
How long after the 5th season did the next one start?	Three and a quarter years
When did the sixth season of Digimon begin airing?	July 6, 2010
Who is the main character in the sixth Digimon series?	Mikey Kudō
Who did the Fusion fighters find themselves in battle with?	Blue Flare
When did the English dub for the sixth season start airing?	September 7, 2013
When was the sequel announcement for the third arc?	August 17, 2011
What was the original run of the third arc of Digimon?	October 2, 2011 to March 25, 2012
Who was the main character in the third arc series?	Tagiru Akashi and his partner Gumdramon
What is the dimension called between the human world and digital world?	DigiQuartz
How long after Digimon Fusion was a new series announced?	30 months
When was the 15th year anniversary held for Digimon?	August 2014
Rather than a TV series, What kind of series would the Digimon become?	6-part theatrical film series
Where are you able to watch the new series when it is released?	Crunchyroll and Hulu
How soon after did another series start after the Digimon Adventure 02?	three years
Whats the name of the group that defeats Cody and Ken?	Alphamon
What happened for the first time to the DigiDestined in the film series?	the Mega level
How many Digimon movies have been released in Japan?	nine Digimon movies
How many movies were directly connected to the anime series?	seven
What year was Digimon: The movie released in the US/Canada?	October 6, 2000
What magazine were given their own original stories of Digimon?	UK comics
What series did the UK magazine storyline follow?	Adventure 02
What happened to the magazines after their run of Digimon?	both magazines were cancelled
What did the Digimon series end up having lots of during the series?	video games
What were the first two North American games released?	Digimon World, Digimon World 2
Name one of the genres from any of the Digimon video games?	strategy
In what year did Bandai post information about a reboot on his website?	2011
What year is the video game Digimon Story: Cyber Sleuth set to be released?	2015
When was the Nintendo 3DS Digimon World Re:Digitize released?	2013
How long does it take glaciers to form?	many years, often centuries
Do glaciers form on land, in the sea, or a combination of both?	only on land
Which types of ice form on a body of water's surface?	sea ice and lake ice
What causes glaciers to deform and flow?	stresses induced by their weight
What are some distinguishing glacial features?	crevasses, seracs
How much glacial ice is found surrounding the poles?	99%
Glaciers are found in mountain ranges on every continent except for which outlier?	Australia
How much of Earth's land surface do glaciers cover?	about 10 percent
What is the average thickness of an Antartican glacier?	2,100 m (7,000 ft)
What percent of Antartica's land is covered by glaciers?	98 percent
Do Earth's lakes or glaciers hold the most freshwater?	glaciers
What causes glaciers to release meltwater?	warmer summer temperatures
In which area are summer temperatures not high enough to release meltwater from glaciers?	Antarctic environments
Under what circumstances would humans require water from a glacier?	when other sources may be scant
At what dimensions are glaciers called ice sheets or continental glaciers?	50,000 km2 (19,000 sq mi)
How many extant ice sheets exist?	two
How much would global sea levels rise if Greenland and Antartica's glaciers were to melt?	70 m (230 ft)
What is the term for ice that protrude's from a glacier's surface?	nunataks
Narrow, fast-moving pathways on an ice sheet are called what?	ice streams
What are glaciers called that end in the sea?	Tidewater glaciers
Most glaciers from Greenland, Antarctica, and Southeast Alaska are of which type?	Tidewater glaciers
Are tidewater glaciers more or less affected by climate change than other glaciers?	much less
Do tidewater glaciers calve above or below sea level?	above
How are icebergs formed?	As the ice reaches the sea, pieces break off, or calve
From where is the temperature of a glacier measured?	base alone
Which type of glacier is above or at freezing at it's interface and is able to slide?	warm-based glacier
What temperature makes a glacier polythermal?	partly cold-based and partly warm-based
What temperature determines a polar glacier?	always below freezing point from the surface to its base
What temperature characteristic determines a temperate glacier?	melting point throughout the year, from its surface to its base
Under what circumstances do glaciers form?	where the accumulation of snow and ice exceeds ablation
What is a cirque?	The area in which a glacier forms
What shape is a cirque, generally?	armchair-shaped
How much ice and snow is minimally necessary to begin to slide on steep glaciers?	15 m (50 ft)
What characteristics determine glacial zones?	surface snowpack and melt conditions
Which glacial zone area reports a net-loss in glacial mass?	ablation zone
What is the name of the line seperating the ablation zone from the accumulation zone?	equilibrium line
How much glacial surface area is typically considered accumulation zone?	60–70%
Why are the tops of glaciers rigid?	they are under low pressure
Which zone is the top of the glaciers?	fracture zone
Why are glacial crevices formed?	differences in glacier velocity
What are seracs?	isolated peaks in the ice
Most crevices are no deeper than what measure?	46 m (150 ft)
Which crevasses form on the edge of the glacier?	Marginal crevasses
Why do marginal crevasses form on the edge of a glacier?	reduction in speed caused by friction of the valley walls
What do bergschrunds resemble?	crevasses
How are bergschrunds different than crevasses?	singular features at a glacier's margins
Where do transverse crevasses form?	where steeper slopes cause a glacier to accelerate
In what area of Greenland can glaciers move 20-30m per day?	Jakobshavn Isbræ
Increasing slope, thickness, snowfall, longitudinal confinement, basal temperature, and meltwater production result in increased what?	Velocity
How far do glaciers generally move per day?	1 m (3 ft)
Why are some glaciers stagnant in Alaska?	trees can establish themselves on surface sediment deposits
What is a glacial surge?	periods of very rapid advancement
What failure causes surges?	failure of the underlying bedrock
At what rate have glaciers travelled during surges?	90 m (300 ft) per day
How far does a glacier have to move to cause glacial earthquakes?	one km per year
How high can the seismic magnitude be of a glacial earthquake?	6.1
Are Greenland's glacial earthquakes increasing or decreasing as time goes on?	increasing
During which months do glacial earthquakes peak in Greenland?	July, August and September
In what year were twice as many glacial earthquakes seen than in any other year in Greenland?	2005
What are ogives?	alternating wave crests and valleys that appear as dark and light bands of ice on glacier surfaces
What does the width of one dark and one light band measure?	annual movement of the glacier
How are ogives formed?	when ice from an icefall is severely broken up, increasing ablation surface area during summer
Under what conditions are ogives called wave or band ogives?	consist only of undulations or color bands
How many countries contain glaciers?	fifty
Which continent contains glaciers?	every continent
Which mountain ranges contain glaciers?	Andes, the Himalayas, the Rocky Mountains, the Caucasus, and the Alps
Where are glaciers in Africa located?	Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, on Mount Kenya and in the Rwenzori Mountains
Which sub-antarctic islands have glaciers?	Marion, Heard, Grande Terre (Kerguelen) and Bouvet
Do glaciers require permanent snow or only temporary coverage?	permanent snow cover
Between which north latitudes are glaciers not found?	20° to 27° north
Between which latitudes to mountains tend to have permanent snow?	19˚N and 19˚S
Why do mountains between 19N and 19S tend to have snow?	precipitation is higher
Which areas in Antartica are considered polar deserts?	Banks Island, and the McMurdo Dry Valleys
Why can't glaciers form in polar deserts?	they receive little snowfall
Does cold or warm air facilitate the transport of water vapor?	warm air
What cause glacial stiations?	large boulders that carve long scratches in the bedrock
What can scientists deduct from the direction of the striations?	direction of the glacier's movement
What are chatter marks?	lines of crescent-shape depressions in the rock underlying a glacier
How are chatter marks formed?	abrasion when boulders in the glacier are repeatedly caught and released
When are glacial moraines visible?	after the glacier has retreated
How are glacial moraines formed?	deposition of material from a glacier
Where are lateral moraines found?	sides of the glacier
How are medial moraines formed?	when two different glaciers merge and the lateral moraines of each coalesce to form a moraine in the middle of the combined glacier
What are ground moraines also called?	glacial drift
What shape do mountain valleys have pre-glacation?	characteristic "V" shape
What gives mountain vallys their characteristic "V" shape before glacation?	eroding water
How is a fjord formed?	a glacial valley runs into a large body of water
What shape do glacial valleys have after being widened by glacation?	"U"-shaped
On which side is a cirque opened?	the side that descends into the valley
Where does ice start accululating in a glacier?	Cirques
What is a narrow ridge formed by two cirques eroding back to back called?	arête
What are extremely steep cirques called?	horns
How many sides are closed in a typical cirque?	three sides
What is another name for roche moutonnee?	"sheepback" rock
What are roche moutonnee?	elongated, rounded, and asymmetrical bedrock knobs that can be produced by glacier erosion
How large are roche moutonnee?	less than a meter to several hundred meters long
What shape do roche moutonnee have on their "up" side?	gentle slope
What shape do roche moutonnee have on their "down" side?	steep to vertical face
Where is post-glacial rebound occuring most?	Scandinavia and the Great Lakes region of North America.
What has the ability to depress the crust of the Earth into the mantle?	Large masses, such as ice sheets or glaciers
With what speed does post-glacial rebound occur?	very slowly
How much of a glacier's thickness is usually involved during crust depression into the mantle?	a third of the ice sheet or glacier's thickness
What is considered the minimal energy increment of a hypothetical oscillator?	value E
In what year was the value E associated by Einstein with quantum theories of energy?	1905
Who discovered an association between the value E and quantum energy?	Einstein
What did the light quantum behave the same as in laboratory experiments?	neutral particle
What type of charge did a particle have that behaved similarly to light quantum energy?	neutral
What is energy abbreviated to in science?	E
What is frequency also known as in science?	f
What term describes a small amount of element?	quantum
What did the light quantum, in some ways, behave as?	an electrically neutral particle
What was later termed the photon?	The light quantum
When did Max Planck first recognize the value of the Planck constant?	1900
Which scientist associated the Planck constant with a quantum five years after Planck's recognition?	Einstein
Instead of an electromagnetic wave, what did the light quantum behave as in some regards?	an electrically neutral particle
What is the simple name given to the light quantum today?	the photon
What does classical statistics mechanics not define the value of?	h
What is required to exist in classical statistics mechanics?	h
After Planck's findings, what was determined could not take on an arbitrary value?	physical action
What is the "quantum of action" called?	the Planck constant
What does the Planck Constant refer to?	quantum of action
Classical statistical mechanics requires the existence of what?	h
What was realized after Planck's discovery?	that physical action cannot take on an arbitrary value
What is the Planck constant formerly known as?	quantum of action
Regarding atoms, what does the Planck constant imply?	that only certain energy levels are allowed
Regarding atoms, what are values in between certain energy levels considered by the Planck constant?	forbidden
Following Planck's discovery, what was realized about values of physical action?	physical action cannot take on an arbitrary value
The Planck constant initially was given what name?	the "quantum of action"
How is the proportional nature of the Planck constant explained?	Classical physics cannot explain this fact
For certain cases of light or atoms, what does the quantum of action yield?	only certain energy levels are allowed, and values in between are forbidden.
What are common things like furniture and stationary objects actually made of?	particles
Which light wavelength is the human eye most sensitive to?	555 nanometres
What color of light is the human eye most sensitive to?	green
What does the smallness of the Planck constant show?	the fact that everyday objects and systems are made of a large number of particles
At about what wavelength of light are human eyes most sensitive?	555 nanometres
What frequency does green light with a wavelength of 555 nanmetres have?	7014540000000000000♠540 THz
How is the energy from one mole of photos computed?	by multiplying the photon energy by the Avogadro constant
How much energy does a green light of wavelength 555 nm contain?	7005216000000000000♠216 kJ/mol
What is the wavelength of light to which human eyes are most sensitive?	555 nanometres
What is the frequency of the light to which the human eye is most sensitive?	7014540000000000000♠540 THz
What is the energy of a photon?	6981358000000000000♠3.58×10−19 J
How much energy is contained in the light to which human eyes are most sensitive?	7005216000000000000♠216 kJ/mol
What type of radiation was Planck studying in the late 19th century?	black-body
How many years prior to Planck's study had the scientific community first discussed black body radiation?	forty
What scientist first studied black body radiation?	Kirchhoff
What is required for the electromagnetic field to come to thermal equilibrium?	hot atoms
What does a hot object in equilibrium absorb as much as it emits?	light
What was Planck studying in the last part of the nineteenth century?	the problem of black-body radiation
Who posed the problem of black-body radiation?	Kirchhoff
Cooler objects glow less than objects that are what?	hotter
What does a black object do to any of the light that hits it?	it absorbs all the light
What is maximized as a result of a black object absorbing all the light that hits it?	thermal light emission
Planck studied what problem posed originally by Kirchhoff?	black-body radiation
If an object is black, what is known about its thermal light emission?	its thermal light emission is maximized.
What is known about the light absorption of a hot object in equilibrium with light?	absorbs just as much light as it emits
Electromagnetic fields obey what laws?	laws of motion
What do scientists assume black body radiation is?	thermal
What kind of prediction does the assumption that black body radiation is thermal lead to?	accurate
What type of changes in the light a hot object emits as the object's temperature changes?	colour
What law describes the changes in light emitted by a hot object?	Stefan–Boltzmann law
What assumption that black-body radiation is what leads to an accurate prediction?	thermal
What does the Stefan-Boltzmann law state?	the total amount of emitted energy goes up with the temperature according to a definite rule
What about a hot object changes with the temperature?	the colour of the light
What color is hotter than "red hot"?	white hot
What did Wilhelm Wien discover?	the mathematical relationship between the peaks of the curves at different temperatures
What rule predicts that emitted energy increases with temperature?	the Stefan–Boltzmann law
What characteristic of the light emitted by a hot object changes with temperature?	the colour of the light given off
Who discovered the mathematical relationship between peaks and curves of light at different temperatures?	Wilhelm Wien
The rule that adjust the curve at different temperatures is known as what?	Wien's displacement law
Wien's spectrum model could not predict accurate at what end of the spectrum?	at low frequencies (long wavelength)
Before Planck, it was assumed that the energy of a body could take on what value?	any
The Rayleigh-Jeans law makes close predictions for what amount of values?	a narrow range
What does Planck's law correctly predict?	blackbody emissions
In making Planck's law, what was in both the numerator and denominator of the formula that was used?	h
Planck's work disproved what assumption?	that the energy of a body could take on any value whatsoever
What rule predicted narrow range of energy values at lower temperatures?	The Rayleigh–Jeans
Planck's law involved what necessary mathematical step to correctly predict blackbody emission?	multiply the classical expression by a complex factor that involves h in both the numerator and the denominator
Changing values of n, the Boltzmann constant, or other variables resulted in learning what about Planck's law?	Making an equation out of Planck's law that would reproduce the Rayleigh–Jeans law could not be done
The disparity between Planck's law and the Rayleigh-Jeans law led to what conclusion?	the picture given by classical physics is not duplicated by a range of results in the quantum picture
Einstein and what other two individuals revisited the black-body problem in 1905?	Rayleigh and Jeans
Who came up with the term, "ultraviolet catastrophe"?	Paul Ehrenfest
When did Paul Ehrenfest come up with the name "ultraviolet catastrophe"?	1911
When was the first Solvay Conference held?	1911
Who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918?	Max Planck
What did Rayleigh & Jeans and Einstein prove independently in 1905?	classical electromagnetism could never account for the observed spectrum
What name did Paul Ehrenfest give to the proofs from Einstein and Rayleigh & Jeans?	the "ultraviolet catastrophe"
When was the first Solvay Conference held?	1911
What was the topic of the first Solvay Conference?	"the theory of radiation and quanta"
In what year did Planck receive the Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of energy quanta?	1918
Who first observed the photoelectric effect?	Alexandre Edmond Becquerel
When was the photoelectric effect first observed?	1839
Who published the first thorough investigation of the photoelectric effect?	Heinrich Hertz
Who received the Nobel Prize in 1921 for his work on the photoelectric effect?	Einstein
What did Einstein with the 1921 Nobel Prize for?	his work on the photo-electric effect
What is the photoelectric effect?	the emission of electrons (called "photoelectrons") from a surface when light is shone on it
Who first observed the photoelectric effect?	Alexandre Edmond Becquerel
Einstein's paper on the photoelectric effect earned him the Nobel Prize in what year?	1921
Einstein's photoelectric effect work was rewards as opposed to his work on what other topic?	relativity
Before Einstein, electromagnetic radiation was considered to behave as what?	a wave
What terms describe different types of radiation?	"frequency" and "wavelength"
What other types of wave besides light has its own intensity?	sound
What is the energy transferred by a wave in a given time called?	intensity
Prior to Einstein's work, light behavior was modeled as what?	a wave
What is the name for the amount of energy transfered by a wave in a given time?	intensity
What portion of the photoelectric effect was in disagreement with the believed description of light behavior?	the energy account
What does it mean for a light source to be more intense than another?	gives out more energy per unit time and per unit space
What is emitted as a result of the photoelectric effect?	photoelectrons
What does the kinetic energy of a photoelectron depend on?	the frequency
What happens if the photoelectron's frequency is too low?	no photoelectrons are emitted at all
What is the term used when photoelectrons act virtually at the same time?	multiphoton effect
What type of energy due photoelectrons emitted due to the photoelectric effect have?	kinetic
What factor of the initial light source does the energy of the photoelectrons depend on?	frequency
When the photon energy is less than the work function of the material the light is shone upon, how many photoelectrons are emitted?	no photoelectrons are emitted at all
If the photoelectric effect is occuring, increasing the intensity of the light source causes what?	more photoelectrons to be emitted with the same kinetic energy
Who introduced the first quantized model of the atom?	Niels Bohr
When was the first quantized model of the atom introduced?	1913
Why was the first quantized model of the atom introduced?	to overcome a major shortcoming of Rutherford's classical model
In classical electrodynamics, a charge moving in a circle should do what?	radiate electromagnetic radiation
Who modeled the atom in 1913, challenging Rutherford's model?	Niels Bohr
What was predicted to happen to a nucleus-orbiting electron under Rutherford's model?	the radiation would cause it to lose energy and spiral down into the nucleus
What statement did Bohr make about the electron of an atom, citing Planck's work?	an electron in a Bohr atom could only have certain defined energies
Who introduced the reduced Planck constant?	Bohr
What is the reduced Planck constant also known as?	the quantity
Who helped to give the correct quantization rules for electrons in 1925?	Heisenberg
Who helped to give the correct quantization rules for electrons in 1926?	Schrödinger
According to Heisenberg and Schrödinger, the reduced Planck constant remains what?	the fundamental quantum of angular momentum
Bohr introduced what value as the quantum of angular momentum?	the reduced Planck constant
What incorrect belief did Bohr hold about the reduced Planck constant?	Bohr thought that this was the angular momentum of each electron in an atom
What scientist used matrix mechanics to bring electron behavior in line with the Bohr model?	Heisenberg
When was the Schrödinger wave equation proposed?	1926
 What measurable value obeys a similar rule of angular momentum?	time vs. energy
What forces measurement attempts to choose between trade-offs, in quanta?	either-or nature of uncertainty
What form do measurement attempt trade-offs for quanta take the form of?	either-or (as in Fourier analysis)
How is uncertainly measured in this experience?	the standard deviation of the measured value from its expected value
What type of analysis fits the either-or nature of the uncertainty?	Fourier analysis
What example is given as another paired relationship of uncertainly related to standard deviation?	time vs. energy
What is the unit of magentic properties of the electron?	Bohr magneton
What is the unit of magentic properties of atomic nuclei?	nuclear magneton
The Bohr magneton is the magnetic moment of an electron under what restriction?	behaved as a spinning charge according to classical electrodynamics
What three terms define the Bohr magneton value?	the reduced Planck constant, the elementary charge and the electron mass
How was the Planck constant calculated in the early 20th century?	the Planck constant could be determined by examining the spectrum of a black-body radiator or the kinetic energy of photoelectrons
The value quoted here for the Planck constant is based on a measurement in what year?	2007
Where was this measurement made?	the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
What method was was used to obtain the measurement?	watt-balance measurement
One other measure involved the molar volume of what element?	silicon
What is a main practical difficulty in determining n?	the two most accurate methods, the watt balance and the X-ray crystal density method, do not appear to agree with one another
Why does this difficulty occur?	it is (or they are) not as precise as is currently believed
Which method is at fault or the discrepancy?	there is no indication which method is at fault
Other than the X-ray crystal density method, other methods rely on what two effects?	the Josephson effect and the quantum Hall effect
Why does relying on these effects create concern?	If these theories are slightly inaccurate
Using Planck constant values from these effects would lead to what logical issue?	a circular argument
What is the saving grace of relying on these theories?	there are other statistical ways of testing the theories, and the theories have yet to be refuted.
What is a watt balance?	an instrument for comparing two powers, one of which is measured in SI watts and the other of which is measured in conventional electrical units
What value does RK represent?	the von Klitzing constant which appears in the quantum Hall effect
If the effects are valid, for RK = n/e2, what is the measurement of KJ2RK equal to?	the Planck constant
The gyromagnetic ratio is the constant proportion between the magentic field and what?	the frequency ν of nuclear magnetic resonance
How does the water molecule impact the effect of magnetic fields on protons?	The protons are said to be "shielded" from the applied magnetic field by the electrons in the water molecule
What three factors impact the gyromagnetic ratio?	related to the shielded proton magnetic moment μ′p, the spin number I (I = 1⁄2 for protons) and the reduced Planck constant.
The gyromagnetic ratio is often difficult to determine due to difficulty accurately determining the value of what?	the applied magnetic field B
How many methods of measuring the gyromagnetic ratio are there?	there are two methods of measuring the value
How do conversion factors compare in "low-field" and "high-field" methods of measuring the gyromagnetic ratio?	the conversion factors are different in the two cases
Which method is of interest in determining the Planck constant?	Only the high-field value Γ′p-90(hi) is of interest in determining the Planck constant
Why is the measurement of electric current an issue in the estimate of the gyromagnetic ratio?	electric current: this is invariably measured in conventional amperes rather than in SI amperes
What is the Faraday constant?	the charge of one mole of electrons
How is the Faraday constant determined?	by careful electrolysis experiments, measuring the amount of silver dissolved from an electrode in a given time and for a given electric current.
How does the Faraday constant relate to the Planck constant?	Substituting the definitions of NA and e, and converting from conventional electrical units to SI units, gives the relation to the Planck constant.
How is the Farday constant value quickly calculated?	the Avogadro constant NA multiplied by the elementary charge e
What is the primary method for determining the Avogadro constant?	The X-ray crystal density method
The Avogadro constant is determined to be the ratio between what two factors in the X-ray crystal density method?	the volume of the unit cell of a crystal, measured by X-ray crystallography, and the molar volume of the substance
What element is used typically to establish Avogadro's constant?	Crystals of silicon
How is unit cell volume calculated?	from the spacing between two crystal planes referred to as d220
Calculating molar volume requires knowledge of what two factors?	the density of the crystal and the atomic weight of the silicon used
What measurement is deemed most important to redefine in terms of physical constants?	the kilogram
What is the shape of the object that establishes the base unit of the kilogram?	cylinder
What alloy is the base unit of the kilogram made from?	platinum–iridium
Where is the base unit for the kilogram kept?	in a vault just outside Paris
Where would the decision to change the definition of the kilogram have occured at the earliest?	the General Conference on Weights and Measures in 2011
Was the Planck constant the only option for redefining the kilogram?	The Planck constant is a leading contender to form the basis of the new definition, although not the only one
The mass of a resting body with what energy would be equal to a kilogram?	7050135639273999999♠135639274×1042 Hz
A kilogram could be definined as having a Planck constant of what value?	6966662606895999999♠6.62606896×10−34 J⋅s
What is the largest cable company in the world by revenue?	Comcast Corporation
What merged companies are the largest pay TV entity in the world?	AT&T-DirecTV
Comcast is also the largest media company in the United States in what broadband area?	Internet service provider
In what areas of the US does Comcast operate?	40 states and the District of Columbia
Where is Comcast company headquarters?	Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
What are some of the cable TV networks owned by Comcast?	E! Entertainment Television, the Golf Channel, and NBCSN
What two national over-the-air broadcast entities are owned by Comcast?	NBC and Telemundo
Comcast owns what movie studio?	Universal Pictures
What company did Comcast propose a merger with?	Time Warner Cable
What date did Comcast drop their proposed merger agreement with Time Warner?	April 24, 2015
What is the largest criticism leveled by consumers against Comcast	customer satisfaction
It has been alleged that Comcast's internet service has done what to customers?	has violated net neutrality practices
What monopolistic practice draws criticism of Comcast?	a lack of competition in the vast majority of Comcast's service area
What dubious distinction has Comcast earned twice from The Consumerist?	"The Worst Company in America"
How does Comcast's customer service stack up against its competition?	often ranks among the lowest in the cable industry
Who is the current head of Comcast?	Brian L. Roberts
Who co-founded Comcast?	Ralph Roberts
In what year was Roberts ranked as the country's highest-paid executive?	2010
What was Roberts' yearly salary in that year?	about $31 million
What is Roberts power on the Comcast board?	"undilutable 33% voting power over the company"
Besides customer problems, what other area is Comcast often criticized over?	employee relations
What online media outlet ran an investigative series on Comcast in 2014?	The Verge
How many Comcast employees were interviewed for that investigative report?	150
What online publication ran a feature from a Comcast employee in 2014 that received attention?	Cracked
What was this 2014 article anonymously penned by a Comcast Employee called?	"Five Nightmares You Live While Working For America's Worst Company,"
What is Comcast's stance on organized labor?	anti-union
A 2004 labor dispute in what city highlighted Comcast's anti-labor stance?	Beaverton, Oregon
What was one anti-union thing that workers in Beaverton were required to do?	attend anti-union meetings
What creative union aired grievances against Comcast in 2011?	Writers Guild of America
In what internal publication was Comcast's union stance formally enumerated?	one of the company's training manuals
What magazine listed Comcast as one of its top places to work?	CableFAX
What is Comcast's affiliated entity in Philadelphia?	Comcast-Spectacor
What newspaper named Comcast it's top place to work?	The Boston Globe
In what year did this newspaper confer this honor on Comcast?	2009
On what aspect did Black Enterprise Magazine name Comcast a top 15 employer?	workforce diversity
What was Comcast's share value in 1999?	$8.19
What was Comcast's share value in 2009?	$15
Comcast's revenues in 2009 were how much?	$36 billion
What was Comcast's profit margin in 2009?	8.4%
What caused a 2012 spike in Comcast profits?	increase in high-speed internet customers
What was Comcast's lobbying budget in 2013?	$18.8 million
Where did this lobbying budget place the company among all entities in the country?	seventh largest
What is the name of the industry association that represents all cable companies in Washington?	The National Cable & Telecommunications Association
What is the name of Comcast's affiliated political action committee?	Comcast Corporation and NBCUniversal Political Action Committee
How much did this PAC raise for candidates in US elections from 2011 through 2012?	$3.7 million
When did Ralph Roberts get into the cable TV business?	1963
Who were Roberts' business partners in this purchase?	Daniel Aaron and Julian A. Brodsky
What company did this partnership purchase?	American Cable Systems
What city did American Cable Systems do business in?	Tupelo, Mississippi
How many customers did ACS have when Roberts and his partners purchased it?	12,000
How many paying customers did Comcast have in 1994?	3.5 million
Comcast's customer base in 1994 was good enough for what national ranking among its competition?	third largest
What sports network was Comcast a founding investor of?	The Golf Channel
In what year did Comcast take over a majority interest in QVC?	1994
What company did Comcast sell its interest in QVC to in 2004?	Liberty Media
What was Comcast's telecommunication business prior to 1999?	Comcast Cellular
What company did Comcast sell their telecommunications company to?	SBC Communications
How much was ComCast Cellular sold for in 1999?	$400 million
What internet commerce company did Comcast invest in?	VeriSign
MediaOne merged with what telecommunications company?	AT&T Corporation
When did Comcast acquire the cable assets of AT&T Broadband?	2001
What did Comcast pay for this subsidiary?	$44.5 billion
What was the original name of AT&T Broadband and Comcast going to be?	AT&T Comcast
When Comcast purchased AT&T Broadband, how many customers did they service?	22 million
Comcast's advertising and commercial production branch was called what?	Comcast Spotlight
What media conglomerate did Comcast try to buy in 2004?	The Walt Disney Company
How much money did Comcast offer for this company?	$54 billion
What month in 2004 did Comcast drop it's bid for this company?	April
Comcast dropped their bid to focus on acquiring what sports network?	ESPN
Besides offering money, what else did Comcast include in their proposal to buy Disney?	taking on $12 billion of Disney's debt
Comcast joined with what media company to acquire a movie studio in 2005?	Sony Pictures Entertainment
What movie studios did Comcast and their partner buy?	MGM and its affiliate studio, United Artists
What Pennsylvania cable provider did Comcast buy controlling interest in during 2005?	Susquehanna Communications
When did Comcast formally announce its purchase of this cable provider?	October 31, 2005
How much did Comcast pay for this cable tv provider?	$775 million cash
What was the name of the interface front-end introduced by Comcast in 2007?	a dashboard called SmartZone
What company designed this interface?	Hewlett-Packard
Smartzone used what company's antivirus protection?	Trend Micro
The contacts and address book for Smartzone was called what?	Comcast Plaxo software
When was Smartzone rolled out to customers?	September 2008
What bankrupt company did Comcast partner with another broadband provider to acquire in 2005?	Adelphia Cable
Who was Comcast's partner in the deal for Adelphia?	Time Warner Cable
What was the price to take over Adelphia?	$17.6 billion
What government organization investigated details of this acquisition?	the U.S. Federal Communications Commission
When was this deal finalized?	second quarter of 2006
What media conglomerate did Comcast begin preliminary talks to buy in 2009?	NBCUniversal
What was NBC's parent company in 2009?	General Electric
What ownership stake did Ccomcast get in this deal?	51%
What company was forced to sell its interest in NBCUniversal as part of the purchase deal?	Vivendi
What other cable company was reputed to have an interest in NBCUniversal?	Time Warner
On what date was Comcast's purchase of controlling interest in NBCUniversal reported?	December 3, 2009
What did Comcast pay for their stake in NBC?	$6.5 billion in cash and $7.3 billion in programming
How did the FCC vote approval of the Comcast-NBC deal?	4 to 1
On what date was the sale finally completed?	January 28, 2011
On what date did Comcast buy out the remaining stake of General Electric in NBC?	March 19, 2013
What publication originally reported a potential deal between Comcast and Time Warner?	the Los Angeles Times
What was the value of the deal reported to be at the time?	$45.2 billion
When did Comcast hope to complete its deal for Time Warner?	by the end of 2014
Who was the head of the FCC at the time of Comcast's proposed purchase of Time Warner Cable?	Tom Wheeler
What two organizations had Wheeler headed prior to joining the FCC?	National Cable & Telecommunications Association, and as largest wireless lobby, CTIA – The Wireless Association
What group sought to investigate the purchase on anti-trust grounds?	United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division
What Senate group held hearings on the purchase?	US Senate Judiciary Committee
Who was the general counsel of the FCC in 2015?	Jonathan Sallet
Disney and Comcast joined forces to allow Comcast to air what sports networks?	ESPNU and ESPN3
What network was proposed by Comcast and the US Olympic Committee?	The U.S. Olympic Network
What city hosted the 2010 Winter Olympics?	Vancouver
What happened to the U.S. Olympic Network?	The U.S. Olympic Committee and Comcast have ended the plans
What is the name of Comcast's channel available to subscribers in east coast markets?	Comcast Network
What is the name of Comcast's subscriber channel in Colorado?	Comcast Entertainment Television
In what year did Comcast Entertainment take over operation of Colorado's Emergency Alert System?	2006
What New York area sports channel did Comcast help found in 2006	SportsNet New York
What baseball team was Comcast's partner in their New York sports network?	New York Mets
Who was the founder of Philadelphia sports corporation Spectator?	Ed Snider
Comcast's purchase of Spectator gave them what sports teams in Philadelphia?	the Philadelphia Flyers NHL hockey team, the Philadelphia 76ers National Basketball Association basketball team
What was the original name of NBCSN?	Outdoor Life Network
Comcast bought naming rights for what college's basketball arena?	the University of Maryland
What was the second name NBCSN was known as?	Versus
What organization rated Comcast's customer service the worst in the country in 2004 and 2007?	American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI)
Comcast's customer service was rated worse than what government organization?	the Internal Revenue Service
When did the ACSI begin doing customer satisfaction surveys?	2001
When Comcast's customer service rating fell 7%, what happened to its revenues?	increased by 12%
What prime factor did the ACSI use to explain this anomaly?	most cable companies have little competition at the local level
What organization gave Comcast an "F" rating in 2010?	Corporate Library
In issuing the grade, the Corporate Library found that a third of Comcast's board was how old?	over 70 years of age
How much did Comcast pay for flights of its company jet in 2010?	$40 million
What conflict did Corporate Library note with Comcast's Board?	several of the directors either worked for the company or had business ties to it
What name was listed on Comcast customer Ricardo Brown's invoice in January, 2015?	"Asshole Brown"
What consumer advocate took over the Brown's case?	Christopher Elliott
What was the amount of disputed money that Comcast eventually returned to the Browns?	$60
Comcast eventually refunded how much service time to the Browns?	two years
Comcast also told the Browns they would do what to correct the situation with the name change?	promise to track down and fire the responsible employee
What bacterium causes tuberculosis infection?	Mycobacterium tuberculosis
What primary body part is affected by tuberculosis?	lungs
Roughly, what percentage of latent tuberculosis infections result in active tuberculosis?	10%
Along with cough, weight loss, and night sweats, what's the fourth classic symptom of the disease?	fever
What name has been used to refer to tuberculosis because of associated weight loss?	consumption
How much of the entire population of the planet is estimated to be carrying tuberculosis?	One-third
How many cases of tuberculosis were active over the course of 2014?	9.6 million
In 2014, how many people died from TB?	1.5 million
Does the majority of fatalities from TB occur in developing countries or industrialized nations?	developing countries
Has TB infection increased or decreased worldwide since the start of the 21st century?	decreased
Which lobes of the lungs are more often affected by TB?	upper lung lobes
What symptom will result if TB infection causes a Rasmussen's aneurysm?	massive bleeding
What percentage of tuberculosis infections don't ever manifest in symptoms of the disease?	25%
If TB becomes chronic, what lasting effect might it have on the lung's upper lobes?	scarring
Approximately what percentage of active TB cases affect the lungs?	90%
What's the medical term for TB when it spreads from the lungs to other parts of the body?	extrapulmonary tuberculosis
At least what percentage of HIV-positive patients who contract TB will experience extrapulmonary infection?	50%
What's the other name for "disseminated tuberculosis"?	miliary tuberculosis
Along with people with diminished immune function, like HIV patients, what group of people is more likely to develop extrapulmonary TB?	young children
If TB infection spreads to the central nervous system, what is it called?	tuberculous meningitis
The uniqueness of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is due to its high level of what type of molecule?	lipid
Is the division rate of the TB bacterium fast or slow relative to other bacteria?	slow
In nature, what "helper" does the MTB bacterium require to grow?	a host organism
How long is the period between division of MTB cells?	16 to 20 hours
How much time does it take most bacteria to divide?	less than an hour
What's another word for "sputum"?	phlegm
One of the two standard acid-fast staining techniques is the Kinyoun stain; what's the other?	Ziehl–Neelsen stain
What color will acid-fast bacilli become when stained?	bright red
What's the term for bacillus that can be exposed to acidic solutions without losing their stains?	acid-fast
If a scientist didn't want to use an acid-fast staining technique, what type of microscopy could they use instead?	fluorescence
Which mycobacterium that causes TB can often be found in unpasteurized milk?	M. bovis
Which one of the tuberculosis mycobacteria is associated with the Horn of Africa?	M. canetti
Which of the four TB-causing bacteria do scientists think might be more common than we know?	M. microti
What bacterium has the name of the country it affects most in its name?	M. africanum
If you're around someone with active TB, what's the chance you'll contract it expressed as a percentage?	22%
Left untreated, about how many people could contract tuberculosis from an active TB patient in a year?	10–15
About how long will a TB patient receiving effective treatment stay contagious?	two weeks
If you contracted tuberculosis today, what's the estimated gestation period before you could spread the infection to others?	three to four weeks
What term is interchangeable with "active" when talking about tuberculosis infection?	overt
What specific part of the lungs marks the start of tuberculosis infection?	pulmonary alveoli
What's the process by which macrophages try to get rid of the TB bacterium?	phagocytosis
What do you get when you combine a lysosome and a phagosome?	a phagolysosome
What does the M. tuberculosis bacterium have that protects it from being affected by toxins?	mycolic acid capsule
What vesicle is the temporary holding room for the M. tuberculosis bacterium during phagocytosis?	phagosome
What two-word phrase is used for the main part of the lungs infected by TB?	Ghon focus
If the lungs are infected by TB via bloodstream, what's the type of focus?	Simon focus
In what general area of the lungs is SImon focus usually located?	the top
What is the term that describes a blood-borne infection, like TB when it travels through the blood to the kidneys or brain?	hematogenous
Four areas of the body are usually safe from TB infection, including skeletal muscles, heart, and thyroid; what's the fourth?	pancreas
What specific type of disease is TB?	granulomatous inflammatory
What type of cells gather around infected macrophages in a person infected with TB?	lymphocytes
What type of cell forms when macrophages clump together trying to kill off the TB infection?	multinucleated
What natural defensive response is hindered by cells in granulomas that can't send antigen to lymphocytes?	immune response
What's the technical term for abnormal cell death?	necrosis
What process replaces tissue damaged by TB?	scarring
What material can sometimes be expelled by coughing if the cavities it's stored in connect to bronchi?	caseous necrotic material
What type of bacteria-attacking medicine will treat tuberculosis?	antibiotics
Are the bacteria in caseous necrotic material living or dead?	living
Is active TB difficult or easy to diagnose by patients' symptoms alone?	difficult
If a patient has some symptoms associated with TB, after what time period should tuberculosis be diagnostically considered?	two weeks
What part of the body would be X-rayed to check for TB?	chest
What sign of TB infection would a lab be looking for in a sputum culture?	acid-fast bacilli
Along with interferon-y release essays, what other tests aren't useful in TB diagnosis in developing countries?	tuberculin skin tests
What result might someone who has received a TB vaccination get from the Mantoux test?	false-positive
What liquid would you need from a patient to perform IGRAs?	blood
In combination with skin tests, are IGRAs associated with an increase or decrease in sensitivity?	increase
Which test has fewer false positives: IGRAs or the Mantoux skin test?	IGRAs
What does "IGRAs" stand for?	Interferon gamma release assays
For about how long does full immunity from the TB vaccine last?	ten years
What percentage of kids in the whole world get the BCG vaccine?	90%
Is TB common or uncommon in the United States?	uncommon
In addition to the U.S. and Canada, what European country sees very few tuberculosis infections?	the United Kingdom
What segment of the population gets the TB vaccine in countries like Canada with a very low incidence of infection?	high risk
What group heads up the Global Plan to Stop Tuberculosis?	Stop TB Partnership
In what year did the WHO say tuberculosis was a "global health emergency"?	1993
How many lives did the Stop TB Partnership vow to save in the nine years between its start and 2015?	14 million
Drug-resistant TB is one of the barriers to success of the Stop TB Partnership's initiative; what's the other other?	HIV-associated tuberculosis
What organization created a system to classify various types of TB?	American Thoracic Society
What part of the mycobacterial cell makes tuberculosis more difficult to treat?	wall
Isoniazid is one of the two most popular drugs for TB treatment; what's the other one?	rifampicin
What complication does the use of combinations of antibiotics for active TB prevent?	antibiotic resistance
What's the three-word name for the method where a health care worker watches their patient take their medication?	Directly observed therapy
What organization recommends directly observed therapy to make sure people take their antibiotics correctly?	WHO
If a person has TB that's resistant to rifampicin and isoniazid, which type of the disease do they have?	MDR-TB
What's the minimum number of second-line medication classes your TB would have to resist to make it count as "extensively drug-resistant"?	three
In what country was the first case of totally drug-resistant tuberculosis?	Italy
What's the only antibiotic that might be effective against totally drug-resistant TB?	Bedaquiline
Cases of totally drug-resistant TB have been found in what country in addition to Italy and India?	Iran
As immunosuppression goes up in tuberculosis cases, what risk rises with it?	reactivation
What disease has a similar relationship as TB does between reactivation and immunosuppression?	HIV
If you'd been diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1995, how great a chance would you have faced of dying from it?	8%
In what year did the risk of dying from TB reach half what it was in 1995?	2008
New studies have found that half of reactivation cases of tuberculosis might actually be due to what other "re-" word?	reinfection
At any given time, about how much of all the people in the world has M. tuberculosis?	one-third
Approximately how many active TB cases were there in 2012?	8.6 million
How many patients were diagnosed with tuberculosis in 2010?	8.8 million
About how many people died in 2010 carrying both HIV and TB?	0.35 million
What percentage of the world's total population gets infected with tuberculosis every year?	1%
What infectious disease causes more deaths than tuberculosis?	HIV/AIDS
When did new cases of TB infection start going down?	2002
What country has had the most success reducing the TB mortality rate?	China
In what decade did some strains of drug-resistant TB start showing up?	1980s
How much did China reduce its rate of death from TB in the 20 years leading up to 2010?	80%
Out of every 100,000 people in Swaziland in 2007, how many were infected with tuberculosis?	1,200
What country had a record-setting 2 million new cases of TB in 2007?	India
What people in Australia and Canada have a much higher risk of TB infection than other residents?	aboriginal
What indigenous people in the U.S. are five times more likely to die from TB?	Native Americans
What percentage of TB cases in America are diagnosed in minority groups?	84%
What animal was found with 17,000-year-old damage from tuberculosis?	bison
What does MTBC stand for?	M. tuberculosis complex
During what time period do some scientist believe the first human could have contracted TB from an ancestor they shared with animals?	Neolithic Revolution
In which U.S. state was the oldest definitive evidence of TB found?	Wyoming
Who discovered M. tuberculosis?	Robert Koch
What year was Koch awarded a Nobel Prize?	1905
Koch's conviction that human and bovine strains of TB were unrelated meant more people were exposed by drinking what?	milk
What did Koch call the ineffective treatment for TB he came up with in 1890?	tuberculin
What event is celebrated on March 24th to recognize the test for latent TB?	World Tuberculosis Day
What was tuberculosis called in 19th-century England?	consumption
How many deaths out of every six in France during 1918 were attributed to tuberculosis?	one
In what decade was TB's communicability finally realized?	1880s
What did Britain try to get people to stop doing to reduce the spread of TB in public?	spitting
What were the "treatment" facilities for poor people with TB in the early 1900s called?	sanatoria
When did the incidence of TB in Europe reach its highest point?	1800s
When tuberculosis was at its worst in Europe, what percentage of deaths was TB-related?	25%
What British health organization made tuberculosis its top priority at its start?	Medical Research Council
What year was the Medical Research Council created?	1913
About how much had the death rate from TB been reduced in Europe by the midpoint of the 20th century?	90%
What member of leadership at the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria called TB a "pandemic"?	Mark Dybul
What country covers treatment for tuberculosis for its citizens?	Brazil
What organization said some countries might be spending as much as $150 billion each year on TB?	World Bank
What population segment in China struggles to get follow-up care for TB infection?	rural migrants
What do some people think we need more of to prevent for-profit providers of TB treatment from over-prescribing?	regulations
What groups might help tuberculosis patients share with and support each other?	TB clubs
Education about TB seems to decrease the stigma of the disease and lead to what other positive effect?	increasing treatment adherence
What do some people say is even worse than the effects of tuberculosis itself?	the stigma
What group of people can add to the TB stigma by treating patients as troublesome or unwanted?	healthcare providers
As recently as what year were there no studies on how TB mortality is connected to stigma?	2010
What vaccine are researchers trying to improve on?	BCG
What phase of clinical trials have some new vaccine options reached?	I and II
What does one option propose adding to the existing BCG vaccine?	subunit vaccine
What's the name of the subunit vaccine being studied in South Africa?	MVA85A
What genetically modified virus was used to develop MVA85A?	vaccinia
What organization did the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation donate $280 million to?	Aeras Global TB Vaccine Foundation
Policymakers believe tax incentives, market commitments, and what third incentive will speed up vaccine development?	prizes
What group with the initials SATVI is researching TB vaccines?	South African Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative
What nonprofit tuberculosis research foundation has a verb in its name?	Stop TB Partnership
What drug in the running to treat multi drug resistant TB has already gotten FDA approval?	Bedaquiline
What year did the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approve bedaquiline?	2012
Despite FDA approval, how much more likely to die are patients who take bedaquiline in addition to the standard TB regimen?	five times
Opposition to the use of bedaquiline think what providers were influenced by a connection with the drug company?	physicians
What type of publication has put out articles questioning bedaquiline's safety?	medical journal
Outside of employment, what is the other main issue that affirmative action focuses on?	education
Affirmative action attempts to ask institutions to grant extra consideration to what group of people outside of Native Americans and women?	racial minorities
Studies showed that discrimination in both business sectors and education resulted in advantages for what group of people?	whites and males
Affirmative action does not only attempt to remove disadvantages, but also to ensure what about the number of people in a field?	are more representative of the populations they serve
What is another example aside from racial quotes of affirmative action for collegiate admissions?	gender quotas
Having quotas regarding admissions or employment has been criticized and said to be what kind of discrimination?	reverse
What case determined that some implementation of affirmative action was unconstitutional?	Gratz v. Bollinger
In which time period did discrimination policies originate from?	Reconstruction Era
What do critics of affirmative action believe should be the main factor in hiring?	achievement
When did the Reconstruction Era end?	1877
Who proposed that land be divided and split up among families of color?	General William Tecumseh Sherman
What was the policy of dividing land among families of color referred to as?	Forty acres and a mule
Which part of the constitution was the basis for policies that were developed during the Civil Rights Movement?	Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment
Who was the first person to utilize the term "affirmative action"?	President John F. Kennedy
In which document did the term "affirmative action" first appear?	National Labor Relations Act
Who was the author of the National Labor Relations Act?	Senator Robert F. Wagner
Who did employers routinely blacklist of fire?	employees associated with unions
Who was able to review complaints about possible worker discrimination?	National Labor Relations Board
Which group of people did the Wagner Act fail to protect?	minorities
Who was the true backer of the cause of affirmative action?	Harold L. Ickes
What position of power did Harold L. Ickes hold?	Interior Secretary
The first introduction of a quota system mandated that contractors had to do what?	employ a fixed percentage of Black workers
Which piece of legislation prevented any discrimination in the defense industry and government?	Executive Order 8802
What does the FEPC stand for?	Fair Employment Practices Committee
What group was established in response to Executive Order 9808?	President's Committee on Civil Rights
What was the Executive Order 9808 issued in response to?	Sergeant Isaac Woodard incident
In which year were the "To Secure These Rights" findings published?	1947
What was the committee especially disturbed by as indicated in their report?	the state of race relations
Who in the generation following the "To Secure These Rights" findings sign legislation for affirmative action into law?	Lyndon B. Johnson
The "To Secure These Rights" findings wanted desegregation of which institution?	Armed Forces
Which risk associated with serving was specifically highlighted by the findings?	death
What did the findings say occurred to an individual when he enters the armed services?	surrenders some of the rights and privileges
Discrimination that prevented minorities from serving their country to the best of their abilities was seen as what?	a humiliating badge of inferiority
Who was the first President to address the NAACP?	Truman
How many people were present at the speech that Truman made?	10,000
Where did Truman's historic speech take place?	Lincoln Memorial
During the speech, Truman made the statement that each man should be guaranteed what?	equality of opportunity
Who's authority did Truman want to increase throughout the states?	federal
What day did Truman mandate the end of discrimination in the federal government?	July 26
How many executive orders were issued to help prevent discrimination?	two
What was the name given to Executive Order 9980?	Regulations Governing for Employment Practices within the Federal Establishment
Which position was formulated as a result of Executive Order 9980?	Fair Employment Officer
What name was given to Executive Order 9981?	Establishing the President's Committee on Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Services
Which year was Eisenhower elected President?	1952
Who did Eisenhower believe should be allowed to decide the nature of discrimination laws?	the states
What was established in 1953?	Government Contract Committee
What was the main purpose of the Government Contract Committee?	conducted surveys of the racial composition of federal employees and tax-supported contractors
Who was the chairman of the newly established committee?	Vice President Richard Nixon
Who criticized President Eisenhower during the 1960 presidential election?	John F. Kennedy
What was John F. Kennedy's criticism of the President based on?	not ending discrimination in federally supported housing
Which order was issued soon after Kennedy took office?	Executive Order 10925
What does PCEEO stand for?	President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity
What was the immediate penalty for a federal contractor for not obeying the executive order?	contract cancellation
When did President Kennedy issue Executive Order 11114?	June 1963
What was the main aim of Executive Order 11114?	elimination of discrimination in employment
What was anyone who received federal funding of any sort required to do under the Executive Order?	comply to the government's policies on affirmative action
Which Executive Order first contained the phrase "affirmative action"?	Executive Order 10925
Who co - authored the executive order?	Hobart Taylor Jr.
Who chaired the committee created by Executive Order 10925?	Vice President Johnson
What was the alternative phrase to "affirmative action" that was being considered?	positive action
What was the main reason that "affirmative action" was chosen over "positive action"?	alliterative quality
Who had issues with JFK's proposal?	NAACP
Who filed complaints quickly after the Executive Order was implemented?	NAACP labor secretary Herbert Hill
Which company was targeted by the NAACP for not having fair practices?	Lockheed Aircraft Corporation
Who did Lockheed sign an agreement with to seek out more minority workers?	Vice President Johnson
Which laws did the corporations in the South associate with in order to ignore the federal recommendations?	Jim Crow
Which piece of legislation quickly followed President Kennedy's assassination?	Civil Rights Act
Outside of the private business regulations, what was the other aim of the Civil Rights Act?	integrate public facilities
Which other Executive Order did the Civil Right's Act work closely with?	11114
What was the purpose of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act?	to end discrimination in all firms with 25 or more employees
What was the goal of the Equal Employment Opportunity C omission?	ending discrimination in the nation's workplace
Which section of the legislation was considered the most controversial?	Title VII
What did critics claim that Title VII advocate?	a de facto quota system
Which Senator fought back against the criticism of Title VII?	Hubert Humphrey
Who was one of the key members that Humphrey managed to convince to support the bill?	Everett Dirksen
What position of importance other than Senator did Everett Dirksen hold?	Senate Minority Leader
Who followed in Johnson's footsteps in terms of ensuring equal opportunity?	his successor Nixon
Which piece of legislation was begun in 1969?	Philadelphia Order
Which industry of jobs did the legislation target?	construction
Aside from the construction industry, which other group was one of the main offenders against equal opportunity laws?	craft unions
Who held the position of Assistant Secretary of Labor?	Arthur Fletcher
In terms of advancement, what happened to the progression of affirmative action after the Nixon administration?	became less prevalent
What was one of the primary reasons that the issue of affirmative action lost its momentum?	there were other areas that needed focus
Which administration allowed affirmative action to take a backseat to other issues?	Ford
What kind of classification was subject to strict scrutiny?	racial
What was the only situation in which a racial classification could be considered acceptable?	necessary to promote a compelling governmental interest
Who later confirmed that racial classifications were only to be upheld if they were necessary?	U.S. Supreme Court
What is an example case that can help display where upholding a racial classification is beneficial?	Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co.
Which case concerning White and Hispanic firefighters was heard by the Supreme Court in 2009?	Ricci v. DeStefano
Where was the issue of White and Hispanic firefighters heard in the case based out of?	New Haven, Connecticut
How many whites were given the possibility of immediate promotion as a result of taking the controversial test?	17
What percentage of those people taking the test were African American?	23
What was the final vote count for the Supreme Court over the issue?	5-4
Which President declared that discrimination is contrary to the Constitutional principles of the United States?	Kennedy
Which piece of legislation did President Kennedy use to claim that discrimination was a violation of the Constitution?	Executive Order 10925
What were the affected industries in terms of regulation as a result of Executive Order 10925?	Federal Government and on government contracts
Other than being race and gender based, what did believers in affirmative action also feel that the system discriminated against?	class
Which organization believed in the class based argument?	African American Policy Forum
What group of people did the AAPF claim affirmative action created?	African American middle class
What does the AAPF believe the foundation for the class based argument is?	non-poor minorities do not experience racial and gender based discrimination
What does the AAPF believe the goal of affirmative action should be?	to address race-based obstacles that block the path to success
What major event preceded the growth of the divide in education between White and Black Americans?	end of World War II
What was considered to be a major cause of the increase in educational gap?	Dwight D. Eisenhower's GI Bill
What did returning black veterans not receive?	loans at the same rate as whites
How many servicemen and women were educated as a result of the GI Bill?	Nearly 8 million
What opportunities were few for black veterans?	higher educational
Who conducted a study about the origins of "Latinos"?	Dr. Paul Brest
How much of the Latino population did Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans and Cuban Americans make up in 1991?	80%
In relation to other major ethnic groups, what is the education level of Latinos?	least well educated
What was the percentage increase of the high school completion rate for African Americans between 1975 and 1990?	12%
How many of the total bachelor degrees awarded in 1990 went to Latinos?	3.1%
Which groups can be categorized as Native Americans?	people who lived in North America before European settlement
When did the Native Americans lose their land?	During the U.S. government's westward expansion
Where were Native Americans forced to live after they lost their land?	reservations
How much land did the Native Americans own in 1934?	52 million acres
In relation to whites, what was the poverty rate for Native Americans in 1990?	more than triple
What form of discrimination did early Asian immigrants experience?	not having the ability to become naturalized citizens
What law type did Asian immigrants struggle with?	school segregation
Which piece of legislature marked the start of discrimination against Asians?	Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882
Which bill was passed in an attempt to limit or prevent Asian immigration?	Immigration Act of 1924
According to studies, what are Asians perceived to be lacking?	communication skills and personality
What is one of the issues with affirmative action?	inherently unequal
How do people who are in favor of affirmative action view it?	an effort towards inclusion rather than a discriminatory practice
What does affirmative action supposedly aim to do?	overcome prejudicial treatment through inclusion
What do proponents of affirmative action believe is the best way to combat exclusionary practices?	make special efforts at inclusion
Which President made their stance on affirmative action clear in 1995?	Bill Clinton
How long after his inauguration was Bill Clinton's speech?	two and a half years
Which speech did Bill Clinton's speech draw parallels to?	President Lyndon B. Johnson's "Freedom is not Enough"
What did President Clinton claim would not be enough to give everyone in American equality?	just outlawing discrimination
What was President Clinton's response to the claim that affirmative action was hurting the white middle class.	the policy was not the source of their problems
Where was the National Conference of State Legislatures held in 2014?	Washington D.C.
What did proponents of affirmative action claim some of the effects of policies that support affirmative action had done?	help to open doors for historically excluded groups in workplace settings and higher education
What has the concept of workplace diversity caused employers to do?	actively seek to promote an inclusive workplace
Having a diverse workplace allows for employers to do what?	draw in talent and ideas from all segments of the population
Which organization claims that private sector employers believe having a diverse workplace is beneficial?	U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
What does AAUP stand for?	American Association of University Professors
What were the effects of affirmative action on universities according to the study done by the AAUP?	positive effects on the educational outcomes and experiences of college students
What did a study claim about the beliefs of faculty members on increased diversity?	helps students to reach the essential goals of a college education
Who supposedly suffers no detrimental effects from classroom diversity?	Caucasian students
In which year did the AAUP release their study?	2000
Who claims that artificially raising minority students into schools has a negative effect on them?	Richard Sander
What was a negative effect of affirmative action according to Richard Sander?	high dropout rates
Where do half of the black college students rank in terms of their performance relative to the rest of their class?	bottom 20 percent
What is the failure rate for black law school graduates compared to whites for the bar exam?	four times
Which idea is the controversy of affirmative action primarily based upon?	class inequality
Other than African Americans, who do detractors of affirmative action claim benefit most from affirmative action?	Hispanic Americans
At who's expense other than Asian Americans are upper-class African Americans and Hispanic Americans supposedly benefiting?	lower-class European Americans
What do some people believe should be the basis for affirmative action instead of race based legislation?	class-based affirmative action
Who primarily makes up America's poor group?	people of color
Where were the Italian American professors employed that asked to be added as an affirmative action category?	City University of New York
Which year did the Italian American Professors make their request?	1976
What category of race do Italian Americans normally fall under?	white
What was the title of the book written by Thomas Sowell?	Affirmative Action Around the World: An Empirical Study
Why would Italian Americans want to get themselves designated as members of a preferred group?	to take advantage of group preference policies
What book did Frederick Lynch author?	Invisible Victims: White Males and the Crisis of Affirmative Action
What did white males feel was happening to them as a result of affirmative action?	reverse discrimination
What moral position does Shelby Steele hold?	against affirmative action
What does Shelby Steele believe that the true concept of affirmative action is?	enforcing equal opportunity
Which book did Terry Eastland write?	From Ending Affirmative Action: The Case for Colorblind Justice
What did Eastland believe the founders of affirmative action did not consider?	how the benefits of affirmative action would go to those who did not need it
Outside of promoting diversity, was does Eastland believe the other reason to be in favor of affirmative action is?	remedying past discrimination
Why does Sowell believe that there is little to no incentive for the preferred minority groups to perform at their best?	because doing so is unnecessary
What argument does Sowell make in his claim that non - preferred minorities have less incentive to perform at their best?	because it can prove futile
What is a definition of reverse discrimination?	a policy or practice in which members of a majority are discriminated against in favor of a historically disadvantaged group or minority
What do some commentators claim the irony of policies resulting from affirmative action is?	these policies are just another form of discrimination
Who is an example of someone that states that affirmative action is another form of discrimination?	Ward Connerly
What does the opposition of affirmative action believe should be the main key in determining acceptance in employment or education?	merit
An argument against affirmative action is that it encourages what?	mediocrity and incompetence
What is a typical argument in favor of affirmative action?	compensation argument
In the compensation argument, who should supposedly have to make up for past discrimination against blacks?	society today should compensate for the injuries
Which argument is being made by those who oppose affirmative action in relation to the compensation argument?	preferential treatment for this same trait is illogical
In terms of whites, what is an argument that is used to try and refute the benefits of affirmative action as it relates to the compensation argument?	whites today who innocently benefited from past injustices should not be punished for something they had no control over
According to opposition believers, who should be punished for discrimination?	people who willingly and knowingly benefited from discriminatory practices
Other than failing to achieve its goal, what else do opponents to affirmative action claim it has?	undesirable side-effects
Other than benefiting more privileged people within minority groups, what is another argument against affirmative action?	may increase racial tension
When was there a vote regarding affirmative action in Michigan?	2006
How many Michigan voters elected to ban affirmative action for university admissions?	60%
Which court case featured an unprecedented and controversial decision?	Grutter v. Bollinger
Where are racial preferences highlighted the most in the United States?	admission to universities and other forms of higher education
What is another term for kids who get preferential treatment due to their parents attending the same university?	legacy admissions
Which case that went to the Supreme Court resulted in a decision regarding public universities and affirmative action?	Bakke v. Regents
What are public universities not allowed to do?	set specific numerical targets based on race for admissions or employment
Instead of being allowed to set numerical targets, what did the Court rule that universities are allowed to do?	"goals" and "timetables" for diversity could be set
What does the racial preferences debate indicate about universities and colleges?	competing notions of the mission of colleges
What claim did Ronald Dworkin make about the expectations that a college application should not have?	a right to expect that a university will design its admissions policies in a way that prizes any particular set of qualities
What does Ronald Dworkin believe admission should represent?	a way to advance the mission as each university defines it
When can affirmative action be judged to be acceptable in terms of admissions?	If diversity is a goal of the university and their racial preferences do not discriminate
What did the ruling in Hopwood v Texas set a precedent for in terms of admission policies?	banning any use of race in school admissions
What did the law passed by the State of Texas guarantee?	entry to any state university if a student finished in the top 10% of their graduating class
Other than Texas and Florida, which other state replaced racial quotas?	California
What is one example of what racial quotas were replaced with?	class rank
After the state passed the top 10% rule, what happened to minority enrollment?	returned minority enrollment to pre-1996 levels
What was going on at Harvard University during the 2003 - 04 academic year?	a panel discussion
What did two prominent black professors point out at the panel discussion?	an unintended effect of affirmative action policies at Harvard
What portion of black Harvard undergraduates came from families in which all four grandparents were born into the African American community?	a third
What did the African American students at Harvard that could trace their lineage back multiple generations begin calling themselves?	the descendants
Other than the reasons for the under representation of African Americans, what else is still up for debate?	possible remedies
To which university does Richard H. Sander belong?	UCLA
In which publication did Sander publish an article questioning racial preferences in law schools?	Stanford Law Review
What did Sander's study show in terms of black law students rankings?	half of all black law students rank near the bottom of their class after the first year of law school
How much does the article estimate the black lawyer population would potentially grow if affirmative action was ended?	eight percent
Which legislative work prohibited the use of racial preferences for admissions in the state of California?	Proposition 209
What area of study did professor Mark Long have a degree in?	economics
In which year did Long publish his study?	2007
How were rebounds of minority enrollment explained in Long's report?	increasing minority enrollment in high schools
Who would supposedly be the beneficiaries of a class-based style affirmative action?	white students
What percentage of the black population thought affirmative action should be abolished?	14
With which organization did Li file a civil rights complaint?	Office for Civil Rights
Which university was Li alleging racial discrimination against?	Princeton University
Who was the Dean of Admissions at Princeton University at the time of the complaint?	Janet Rapelye
What did Princeton claim the real reasons for the rejection of Li's application was?	many others had far better qualifications
Even though Li did not get accepted, what was done instead of a straight rejection?	placement on the waitlist
Which University had a lawsuit filed against it?	University of Texas
What did the plaintiffs claim the university had for an admissions policy?	race-conscious policy
What did the admissions policy of the University of Texas supposedly violate?	their civil and constitutional rights
Who concluded that the University maintained a "holistic" approach to affirmative action?	US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
When will the Supreme Court likely hear the case for the second time?	June 2016
On which date were lawsuits filed against Harvard and Chapel Hill?	November 17, 2014
Who filed the lawsuits against the Universities?	Students for Fair Admissions
Other than Asian students, who else was allegedly being discriminated against?	white
What is the Students for Fair Admissions an offshoot of?	Project on Fair Representation
What are the Universities waiting for before proceeding with the lawsuit?	until the U.S. Supreme Court provides clarification of relevant law
How many Asian organizations were involved in filing the federal complaints?	more than 60
Who did the organizations file the complaints with?	Education and Justice Departments
Who was the target of the filing?	Harvard University
What grade average do some students have that are being rejected?	top-one-percent grade point averages
Why was the lawsuit eventually dismissed?	the Students for Fair Admissions lawsuit makes similar allegations
Who is the competition open too?	any eligible club
How many clubs competed in 20011-12?	763 clubs
How many rounds in the tournament?	12
How many games are needed to win?	six to fourteen
What league can compete?	Premier League and Football League
What rounds are the qualifiers?	first six rounds
How many teams in the first round?	92 professional teams.
What league enters in the third round?	Premier League and Championship clubs
In the modern era, has any non-league team reached the quarter finals??	never reached the quarter finals
Has a level 2 club reached the finals ever?	Level 2 have never reached the final.
What do winners receive?	the FA Cup trophy
How many FA cup designs have there been?	two
How many FA cups have there been?	five actual cups
When was the latest design intoduced?	2014 replica of the second design, introduced in 1911
When was the laws of the Game of Asscociation Football published?	1863
Who was the FA secretary in 1871?	C. W. Alcock
When did the inaugural  FA cup tournament take place?	November 1871
Who won the first and second cups?	Wanderers were crowned the winners
When was the modern cup established?	modern cup was beginning to be established by the 1888–89 season,
Was competition suspended due to the first world war?	competition was suspended due to the First World War
what year did competition resume after world war 1?	1919–20.
When did Wembly stadium open?	1922–23
What was Webly stadium called at that time?	Empire Stadium
When did the competition celebrate its centennial?	didn't celebrate its centenary year until 1980–81
Is the competition open to anyone?	The competition is open to any club down to Level 10 of the English football league system
Is there anyone automatically eligible?	. All clubs in the top four levels (the Premier League and the three divisions of the Football League) are automatically eligible
Who else can play?	Clubs in the next six levels (non-league football) are also eligible provided they have played in either the FA Cup, FA Trophy or FA Vase competitions
Can new clubs play too?	Newly formed clubs, such as F.C. United of Manchester in 2005–06 and also 2006–07, may not therefore play in the FA Cup in their first season.
Do I need a stadium to compete?	All clubs entering the competition must also have a suitable stadium.
Does anyone ever miss a tournament?	It is very rare for top clubs to miss the competition
What clubs have missed the competition?	Manchester United did not enter the 1999–2000 FA Cup,
Why did they miss that competition?	The club claimed that they did not want to devalue the FA Cup by fielding a weaker side.
How did people feel about Manchester's decision?	drew considerable criticism as this weakened the tournament's prestige
Did the club later regret their choice?	Sir Alex Ferguson later admitted his regret regarding their handling of the situation.
May Welsh clubs enter the competition?	Welsh sides that play in English leagues are eligible,
Has a Welsh team ever won a competition?	Cardiff City (the only non-English team to win the tournament, in 1927)
Have any other countries ever competed?	other teams from Wales, Ireland and Scotland also took part in the competition,
Why can't those countries compete?	barred from entering by the Scottish Football Association.
Has any other  country been allowed to enter the competition since?	Channel Island club entered the competition when Guernsey F.C. competed for the first time.
Has the number of entrants stayed the same?	The number of entrants has increased greatly in recent years
How many clubs entered in 2004-05?	660 clubs entered the competition
How many clubs entered in 2005-06?	674
How many clubs entered in 2006-07?	687
How many clubs entered in 2007-08?	731
When is the final?	May
When do clubs above 9 enter?	clubs above Level 9 and 10 enter the competition at later stages
Is there seeding?	There is no seeding,
What happens in the event of a tie?	fixtures ending in a tie are replayed once only
What are the first 6 rounds?	The first six rounds are qualifiers
When does the final take place?	The final is normally held the Saturday after the Premier League season finishes in May.
Was there a time this was not the case?	in recent times when this pattern was not followed were 1999–2000
Why was that?	most rounds were played a few weeks earlier than normal as an experiment
Did that ever happen again?	2010–11 and 2012–13
What happened during those years?	the FA Cup Final was played before the Premier League season had finished, to allow Wembley Stadium to be ready for the UEFA Champions League final
Do clubs replay each other?	Until the 1990s further replays would be played until one team was victorious.
What is the most games played a team to reach the final?	12 games over six rounds, which remains the most games played by a team to reach a final
When are replays played?	. Replays were traditionally played three or four days after the original game, but from 1991–92 they were staged at least 10 days later on police advice.
When was the first penalty kick?	penalty shoot-outs being introduced, the first of which came on 26 November 1991
What clubs were playing during the first penalty?	Rotherham United eliminated Scunthorpe United.
What is the cup called now?	Cup Winners' Cup
Does the loser of the cup gain anything?	the losing FA Cup finalist was given the Europa League place
Did that used to have a different name?	formerly named the UEFA Cup; until 1998
what about the FA Cup winner?	FA Cup winners enter the Europa League at the group stage.
Do the FA Cup winners qualify for anything?	The FA Cup winners qualify for the following season's UEFA Europa League
Where are the semi finals played?	e semi-finals have been played exclusively at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium
Is there a name for the specific venue?	Kennington Oval was used as the semi-final venue
Where did the semi finals take place before then?	semi-finals were played at high-capacity neutral venues around England
What was the top most used venue?	Villa Park in Birmingham (55 times)
Where was the cup held in 2005?	In 2005, both were held at the Millennium Stadium.
Where is the FA cup held today?	In 2003 the FA took the decision to permanently use the new Wembley for semi-finals
Why is it held at Webly Stadium?	to recoup debts in financing the new stadium.
Do the people of London agree with this action?	the move seen as both unfair to fans of teams located far from London
Has the game ever fail to sell out?	the 2013 fixture between Millwall and Wigan led to the unprecedented step of placing 6,000 tickets on sale to neutral fans after the game failed to sell out.
Do people oppose of using the new Webly Stadium?	86% opposition to Wembley semi-finals.
Where is the final played now?	The final has been played at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium
When did this stadium open?	it opened, in 2007.
Where was the FA cup held while this stadium was built?	between 2001 and 2006 they were hosted at the Millennium Stadium
Where is Millennium Stadium located?	Cardiff in Wales
Was it always held in Millennium Stadium?	Prior to rebuilding, the final was hosted by the original Wembley Stadium
Where do the majority of FA cup finals take place?	predominantly in London, and mainly at the Kennington Oval and then Crystal Palace.
How many times was the FA cup playing in the Oval ?	. It was played 22 times in the Oval
What was the first year the Oval hosted the FA cup?	1872
How many times has Crystal Palce hosted the FA cup?	21
How many replays took place at the Oval?	8 replays
Is the use of artificial turf allowed?	The FA permitted artificial turf (3G) pitches in all rounds of the competition from the 2014–15 edition and beyond.
What is the required quality of the pitch?	the pitch must be of FIFA One Star quality, or Two Star for ties if they involve one of the 92 professional clubs.
How many professional clubs are there?	92
What happens if the pitch is not up to par?	they had to switch their tie to the ground of another eligible entrant with a natural grass pitch.
Where was the first #G surface game played?	first match in the proper rounds to be played on a 3G surface was a televised first round replay at Maidstone United's Gallagher Stadium on 20 November 2015.
How many parts does the trophy come in?	The trophy comes in three parts
What is the  parts of the trophy?	- the cup itself, plus a lid and a base
How many trophy designs have there bee?	There have been two designs of trophy in use
How many physical trophies have been presented?	five physical trophies have been presented
When was the first design changed?	. The FA decided to change the design after the 1909 winners, Manchester United, made their own replica,
Is the cup engraved for the winner?	The name of the winning team is engraved on the silver band around the base
When does the engraving take place?	as soon as the final has finished, in order to be ready in time for the presentation ceremony.
how long does the engraved have from start to finish?	the engraver has just five minutes to perform a task which would take twenty under normal conditions,
Is the trophy decorated?	the trophy wears is decorated with ribbons in the colours of both finalists, with the loser's ribbons being removed at the end of the game.
Where is he cup presentation made?	, the presentation is made at the Royal Box
When did people start presenting the trophy after the game?	The tradition of presenting the trophy immediately after the game did not start until the 1882 final
when was the first trophy presented?	the trophy was not presented to the winners, Wanderers, until a reception held four weeks later
Where was the first trophy presented?	the Pall Mall Restaurant in London
What happens to multiple cup winners?	the trophy was to be permanently presented to any club which won the competition three times,
Did that ever happen?	inaugural winners Wanderers achieved this feat by the 1876 final
How claims to have stolen the FA cup?	80 year old career criminal Henry (Harry) James Burge claimed to have committed the theft
Did he act alone?	He claimed to have carried out the robbery with two other men
How long go did this crime take place?	60 years
What did Burge do with the cup?	the cup had been melted down to make counterfeit half-crown coins
What did they do with those coins?	stolen silver was being used to forge coins which were then laundered through betting shops at a local racecourse
Who was the long-serving president of the FA cup?	Lord Kinnaird
What year did Lord Kinnard die?	Lord Kinnaird. Kinnaird died in 1923,
Was the cup lost during that time?	his family kept it in their possession, out of view, until putting it up for auction in 2005
Where did it sell?	Christie's auction house on 19 May 2005 for £420,000 (£478,400 including auction fees and taxes)
Who won the bid?	David Gold
is the Fa cup sponsered?	Since the start of the 1994–95 season, the FA Cup has been sponsored.
How long does the sponsor remain?	Sponsorship deals run for four years
Can they extend their deal?	one-year extensions may be agreed
Who is the current sponsor?	Emirates airline is the sponsor from 2015 to 2018
What is the competition called now?	The Emirates FA Cup
Do people look forward to Cinderella matches?	where lower ranked teams beat higher placed opposition, known as "giant killings", is much anticipated by the public
What do people think about giant killers?	is considered an integral part of the tradition and prestige of the competition
Does giant killing happen often?	Almost every club in the League Pyramid has a fondly remembered giant-killing act in its history
Does the media showcase giant killers?	. It is considered particularly newsworthy when a top Premier League team suffers an upset defeat, or where the giant-killer is a non-league club
What is a giant killer?	unlikely victories in the earlier rounds of the competition, where lower ranked teams beat higher placed opposition
When was the football league founded?	The Football League was founded in 1888
Who is the only non league giant killer to win a cup?	Tottenham Hotspur is the only non-league "giant-killer" to win the Cup
What year did they win the cup?	1901
Who did they delete for the cup?	Sheffield United
How many clubs where in the football league?	36 clubs in the Football League
Who is the lowest rank to play in the  third round proper?	Chasetown
What level where they?	playing at Level 8 of English football
How many teams competed that year?	731 teams entered that season
What place did Chasetown come in?	final 64
What FA cup season did this take place in?	2007–08 competition
How many clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double?	Seven clubs have won the FA Cup as part of a League and Cup double
Who was the first clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double?	Preston North End (1889)
Who was the latest clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double?	Chelsea (2010)
Has any club won both in a same season?	Arsenal became the first side to win both the FA Cup and the League Cup in the same season
What year did that take place?	1993
Has the final been played by a two clubs outside of the top divisions?	The final has never been contested by two teams from outside the top division
Has the final been won by a club outside of the top divisions?	there have only been eight winners who weren't in the top flight
Who was the first outside club to win?	Notts County
What year did that take place?	1894
How many second tier have made the finals?	only 24 finalists have come from outside English football's top tier
Who used to brodcast the matches on the radio?	the BBC
What was the first Fa cup radio broadcast?	The first FA Cup Final on Radio was in 1926
What clubs competed in the match?	Bolton Wanderers and Manchester City
Wa the game broadcast in both cities?	this was only broadcast in Manchester
So when was the firs national broadcast?	the first national final on BBC Radio was between Arsenal and Cardiff in 1927
Who had FA cup coverage from 1988-1997?	From 1988 to 1997, the BBC and Sky Sports had coverage of the FA Cup
How are the games broadcast now?	, FA Cup matches are shown live by ITV across England and Wales, with UTV broadcasting to Northern Ireland
Does anyone refuse to show them?	STV refusing to show them
Has a woman ever broadcast a match?	Rebecca Lowe became the first woman to host the FA Cup Final in the UK.
What year did rebecca host the match?	for the 2010–11 to 2012–13 season
Who took over the package from Sentana?	ESPN took over the package Setanta
Who show the 2011 final?	The 2011 final was also shown live on Sky 3D in addition to ESPN
Does ESPN still hold the contract?	Following the sale of ESPN's UK and Ireland channels to BT, ESPN's rights package transferred to BT Sport
What year did this take place?	the 2013–14 season
Who took over after ESPN?	BT Sport
When did Stadtrepublik become a part of Alsace?	4 January 1798
What years did Germany hold possession over Lorrain-Alscace?	1871–1918
Which other country had control over Alsace?	France
How many times did Germany and France switched and had control of Alscace?	four times
Which three territories make up the Upper Rhine?	Alsatian, Alemannian, Swabian, Swiss
Who forced Christianity upon the Alsace people?	Clovis' Merovingian
What occurred at the treaty of Verdun?	Oaths of Strasbourg of 842, was formally dissolved in 843
In what year did Lothar past away?	855
What was considered a common practice in during the Holy Roman Empire?	fragmentation and reincorporations among a number of feudal secular and ecclesiastical lordships
Under who's rule did Alsace thrive under?	Hohenstaufen emperors
Was was the name given to the Alsace provincinal court?	Landgericht
What was the name of the route that linked Germany,Switzerland , Netherlands, and England	Paris-Vienna-Orient trade route
Which other two cities also started to grow economically?	Colmar and Hagenau
About when did Alsace lose its prosperity?	14th century
Why did Alsace decline has a prospering territory?	harsh winters, bad harvests, and the Black Death
Which group of people were wrongly blamed for all the disasters that struck the region?	blamed on Jews
What were the jewish people accused of in Alsace?	accused of poisoning the wells with plague
When did the Rhine Rift earthquake occur?	1356,
What were the names of the first two rivers France aggressively went to while expanding eastward?	Rhône and Meuse
The French proposed a marriage between which two people?	Blanche and Albert
What was the name of the period when France was crushed military?	the Hundred Years' War
In what year did the French reach Alsace?	1444
In what year was Upper Alsace sold to the Archduke Sigismund?	1469
Why did Frederick III use a tax and a marriage in Upper Alsace?	to gain back full control of Upper Alsace
When did Mulhouse join the Swiss Confederation?	1515
When did Strasbourg accept Protestantism?	1523
Who was known as a reformer in Strasbourg?	Martin Bucer
What were the names given for the two groups that heavily dominated Alsace during this time?	Catholic and Protestant
When did the Habsburgs  sell the Sundgau territory to France?	1646
How much did France pay for Sundgau?	1.2 million Thalers
In 1685 Edict Fontainebleau by way of the French King ordered what to be done?	the suppression of French Protestantism
In what year did the division of Alsace take place?	1789
Which song was played for the first time in Strasbourg that would later become the French national anthem?	La Marseillaise
Who led the armies of the French Republic in Vendee and Westermann?	Kellermann
Which two countries sought to crush the nascent republic?	Austria and Prussia
What had happened to most of the people who fled Sungau during the war when they were allowed to return home?	lands and homes had been confiscated
What was the name of the poem by Goethe?	Hermann and Dorothea
What was the population of Alsace in 1846?	1,067,000
What were the reasons for people to begin leaving Alsace?	hunger, housing shortages and a lack of work for young people
Between what years did Alatians begin to sail towards the United States?	1820 to 1850
What was the population of Alsace in 1790?	22,500
Jews were banned from cities in Alsace, where were they forced to settle?	in villages
in 1791 Jews were granted what by the French?	full emancipation
Which country was Alsace merged into during  1871-1918	Germany
Which country defeated the French in 1871?	Kingdom of Prussia
The end of the war led to which companies unification?	Germany
Who annexed Alsace to the new German Empire in 1871?	Otto von Bismarck
What did Aslations do to avoid conflict amongst themselves during the first World War?	served as sailors
Who was the mayor that proclaimed independence from the German Empire for  Alsace-Lorraine?	Jacques Peirotes
Who entered Alsace just two weeks after they declared independence?	French
What was the name of the treaty that allowed Germany to ceded the land to France?	Treaty of Versailles
What year was Alsace-Lorraine occupied by Germany?	1940
Approximately how many Alsace and Lorraine men were forced into the German army during World War II?	130,000
Which group of people were released by the Russians to Algiers?	malgré-nous
Which conservative leader in 2007 received the best score during the second round of elections?	Nicolas Sarkozy
Who is the president of the regional counsel?	Philippe Richert
Alsace was one of the few to vote for this measure from France, what was it?	European Constitution in 2005
Which group or religion dominates the Aslatian population?	Roman Catholic
Which other large religion also exist in Alsace due to the once German presence?	Protestant
What is the name of the Union created by France's second largest Protestant church?	UEPAL
What were landowners also known as that had a right to decide which religion was allowed on their property?	local lords
Which groups or religions were greatly accepted in Alsace?	Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Jews and Anabaptists
Which group did Louis XIV tried push out of Alsace?	Amish
What is the name of the historical flag of Alsace?	Rot-un-Wiss
What was the German flag that was similar to the Rot-un-Wiss replaced by?	Union jack-like" flag
What does the "Union jack-like" flag represent?	the union of the two déprtements
Which French city did not recognize the Rot-un-Wiss flag?	Paris
Around when did the Annexation of Alsace occur?	17th century
With education reforms in the 19th century what did this lead to in Alsace?	middle classes began to speak and write French
What is now the German dialects of speech now referred as to?	standard German
Between what time period did the reannexation of Germany occur?	1940–1945
What were French families forced to do during the German reannexation?	names were Germanized.
When did the suspension of German teaching in  schools happen?	1927
What was the name of the Memorandum that allowed German teaching in Alsace schools to become more official?	Circulaire sur la langue et la culture régionales en Alsace
What is the name of the memorandum that past on June 21, 1982?	Circulaire Savary
What did the Circulair Savary introduce?	introduced financial support, over three years, for the teaching of regional languages in schools and universities
Which two dialects were banned from public life?	Alsatian and Standard German
What did the banning of the two dialects  include?	street and city names, official administration, and educational system
Although Aslation is rarely used today, which region still uses their mother language of Aslation?	Sundgau region
What other language besides French and German are part of the Aslation-French dialect of today?	Yiddish
What does the French constitution state for the language in Aslace?	French alone is the official language
How many adult speakers speak Alsatian according the 1999 INSEE survey?	548,000
With Alsatian language on the decline, what is the ration of children using the language regularly today?	one in ten children
In Alsatian, what does Sauerkraut mean?	sour cabbage
What can Sauerkraut be served with?	poultry, pork, sausage or even fish
What is Sauerkraut typically served with in Alsace?	Strasbourg sausage or frankfurters, bacon, smoked pork or smoked Morteau or Montbéliard sausages
What is the meaning of the name Aslatia in English?	a lawless place" or "a place under no jurisdiction
What was the meaning or term used for Aslace that was used by english people in the 20th century?	ramshackle marketplace
Which nationalities still refer it to Alslace "ramshackle marketplace" as of 2007?	English and Australian
What is currently being planed west of Strasbourg?	new dual carriageway
What would the use of a new carriageway do in Alsace?	reduce the buildup of traffic in that area
What is the name the German Highway  that would of been crossed with the French Truck road?	Karlsruhe-Basel Autobahn
The new line is (carriageway) would link which other intersections?	Hœrdt to the north of Strasbourg, with Innenheim in the southwest
What individuals subscribe to a doctrine that baptism should be performed only for professing believers?	Baptists
Soul competency (liberty), salvation through faith alone, Scripture alone as the rule of faith and practice, and the autonomy of the local congregation what examples of what?	tenets of Baptist churches
What two ministerial offices do Baptists recognize?	elders and deacons
Baptist churches are widely considered to be what?	Protestant churches
When was the earliest church labeled "Baptist" traced to?	1609
Where was the earliest church labeled "Baptist" traced to?	Amsterdam
Who was the pastor of the earliest church labeled "Baptist"?	John Smyth
Who believed Christ's atonement only extended to the elect?	Particular Baptists
When did Roger Williams established the first Baptist congregation in the North American colonies?	1638
Who outlined the four main views of Baptist origins?	Bruce Gourley
Baptist origins were viewed as an outgrowth of what?	Anabaptist traditions
What does the perpetuity view assume?	that the Baptist faith and practice has existed since the time of Christ
What does the successionist view assume?	that Baptist churches actually existed in an unbroken chain since the time of Christ.
Modern Baptist churches trace their history to what movement?	English Separatist movement
Adherents to this position consider the influence of Anabaptists upon early Baptists to be what?	minimal
Modern Baptist churches trace their history to the English Separatist movement in the century after the rise of what?	original Protestant denominations
When did the Church of England separate from the Roman Catholic Church?	During the Protestant Reformation
Who separated from the Roman Catholic Church during the Protestant Reformation?	the Church of England
During the Protestant Reformation, the Church of England (Anglicans) separated from who?	the Roman Catholic Church
Puritans are described by Gourley as what?	cousins of the English Separatists
Others decided they must leave the Church because of their dissatisfaction and became known as what?	Separatists
Historians trace the earliest Baptist church back to when?	1609
Historians trace the earliest Baptist church back to where?	Amsterdam
Who was the pastor of the earliest Baptist church?	John Smyth
John Smyth broke his ties with what church?	Church of England
Where did John Smyth go into exile?	Amsterdam
Smyth wrote a tract titled what?	"The Character of the Beast," or "The False Constitution of the Church."
What was his first proposition?	infants are not to be baptized
What was his second proposition?	Antichristians converted are to be admitted into the true Church by baptism
Smyth believed a scriptural church should consist only of regenerate believers who have been what?	baptized on a personal confession of faith
What is paedobaptism?	infant baptism
Who thought their self-baptism was invalid?	Smyth
Smyth applied for membership with who?	the Mennonites
What is an outgrowth of Smyth's movement?	The modern Baptist denomination
What name did Baptists reject?	Anabaptist
Who wrote that Baptists referred to themselves as "the Christians commonly—though falsely—called Anabaptists?"	McBeth
When did John Spilsbury promote the strict practice of immersion?	1638
Who promoted strict immersion baptism?	John Spilsbury
Tom Nettles was a professor at what seminary?	Southern Baptist Theological Seminary
What was Tom Nettles a professor of?	historical theology
Who was thought to be influenced by continental Anabaptists?	early seventeenth-century Baptists
Early seventeenth-century Baptists were thought to be influenced by who?	continental Anabaptists
General Baptists shared similarities with who?	Dutch Waterlander Mennonites
Who are two representative writers?	A.C. Underwood and William R. Estep. Gourley
What were the Dutch Waterlander Mennonites?	one of many Anabaptist groups
Who founded the earliest Baptist church in North America?	Roger Williams and John Clarke
When was the first American Baptist church established?	1639
Where did Roger Williams establish a Baptist church?	Providence, Rhode Island
Where did John Clarke establish a Baptist church?	Newport, Rhode Island
Clarke was what to Williams?	his compatriot and coworker for religious freedom
Missionary work began in what Canadian colony?	Nova Scotia
When did missionary work begin in Canada?	1760s
What was the first Baptist church in Canada?	Horton Baptist Church
Where was the first Baptist church located in Canada?	Wolfville, Nova Scotia
When was the first Canadian Baptist church established?	29 October 1778
When did Baptist congregations split over slavery?	May 1845
Why did American Baptist congregations split?	over slavery and missions
Slaveholders were prevented from being appointed as what?	missionaries
Who prevented slaveholders from being appointed missionaries?	Home Mission Society
Northern congregations formed what organization?	American Baptist Churches USA (ABC-USA)
What is the largest fellowship without control?	Southern Baptist Convention
It has been suggested that a primary Baptist principle is that local Baptist Churches are what?	independent and self-governing
What term is considered somewhat incongrous is a self-governing church?	Baptist denomination
Baptists are defined by what?	doctrine
Baptists have issued what without considering them to be creeds?	confessions of faith
Most Baptists are what in doctrine?	evangelical
Baptists have played a key role in what?	encouraging religious freedom and separation of church and state.
Beliefs about one God; the virgin birth; miracles; atonement for sins through the death, burial, and bodily resurrection of Jesus are examples of what?	Shared doctrines
When was the London Baptist Confession of Faith created?	1689
When was the Philadelphia Baptist Confession created?	1742
When was the New Hampshire Baptist Confession of Faith created?	1833
"Crisis" comes from a Greek word meaning what?	to decide
Who wrote that some controversies reach a crisis level may actually be "positive and highly productive?"	Walter Shurden
What did Shurden claim was never ideal, has often produced positive results?	controversies that have shaped Baptists
What are some controversies that have shaped Baptists?	"missions crisis", the "slavery crisis", the "landmark crisis", and the "modernist crisis"
When did Baptists become embroiled in the controversy over slavery in the United States?	Leading up to the American Civil War
When did Methodist and Baptist preachers oppose slavery and urge manumission?	the First Great Awakening
They worked with slaveholders in the South to urge what?	paternalistic institution
What denomination allowed blacks active roles in the congregation?	The Baptists
What refused to appoint a slaveholder as a missionary?	the Home Mission Society
When did black Baptists began to organize separate churches, associations and mission agencies?	As early as the late 18th century
Who separated from white congregations and associations after the war?	freedmen
Who wanted to be free from white submission?	freedmen
What states setup black conventions?	Alabama, Arkansas, Virginia, North Carolina, and Kentucky
What percentage of all African-Americans identify with Baptist denominations?	45%
Where did Baptist missionaries take an active role in the anti-slavery movement?	the Caribbean
Who was a prominent British Baptist missionary in Jamaica?	William Knibb
Where did William Knibb work toward the emancipation of slaves?	the British West Indies
Knibb also protagonised the creation of what?	Free Villages
What was named after the slave port of Calabar?	Jamaica's Calabar High School
When did the Southern Baptist Convention vote to adopt a resolution renouncing its racist roots?	20 June 1995
How many Baptists registered for the meeting in Atlanta?	More than 20,000
SBC delegates are called what?	messengers
What sought to reset the ecclesiastical separation which had characterized the old Baptist churches?	Southern Baptist Landmarkism
Who was an influential Baptist of the 19th century and the primary leader of this movement?	James Robinson Graves
When did the Southern Baptist International Mission Board forbade its missionaries to receive alien immersions for baptism?	In 2005
The Southern Baptist Convention adhered to what as its official position?	conservative theology
What groups were formed by moderate Southern Baptists?	the Alliance of Baptists in 1987 and the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship in 1991
When was the Alliance of Baptists formed?	1987
When was the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship formed?	1991
Conservative theology was the official position of what?	Southern Baptist Convention
What does child labour deprive children of?	deprives children of their childhood
Are child artists an exception to the laws with regards to child labour?	exceptions include work by child artists
Is work done by Amish children an exception?	work such as those by Amish children
Where is there legislation that prohibits child labour?	Legislation across the world
Is all work done by children considered to be child labour?	These laws do not consider all work by children as child labour
What year did sub-saharan Africa have the highest rates of child labour?	2010
What is the largest employer of child labour?	agriculture
Who are children predominantly employed by?	their parents
Lack of school and this are the primary causes of child labour	Poverty
Was there a period when child labour was essential?	pre-industrial societies
Was there a great need for childhood education in a pre-industrial society?	little need for children to attend school
Who taught the skills needed for the children to work?	competent adults
Were peopel in pre-industrial societies considered to have long or short lifespans?	short life expectancy
On average how many weekly hours did a domestic servant put in?	80
Mid-18th century London had how many domestic servants?	over 120,000
What was the youngest age of a child working in a factory?	four
How many hours did builders work in the winter?	52
Were children able to take on apprenticeships?	Some children undertook work as apprentices to respectable trades
How many families were without a bread winner?	one-third
How many water-powered cotton mills used child labour in 1788 England and Scotland?	143
Was it a low amount or high amount of children that also worked in prostitution?	high number
Where was Charles Dickens employed as a child?	blacking factory
During the Industrial Revolution what was the main driving force behind child labour?	economic hardship
During the 19th century was there any advocates for the working children?	Lord Shaftesbury
In 1833 at what age was the limit to working in a textile industry factory?	children under the age of nine
What year were both adults and children only able to work 10 hours a day?	1847
In the 19th century was there an increase or decreased need to child labour?	child labour began to decline
What year did Britain first inact legislation with regards to child labour?	1803
When were young boys employed in the glass making industries?	early 20th century
Under glass making conditions were the children exposed to any heating elements?	they are exposed to this heat
Were the boys in glass making industry paid by the hour?	paid by the piece
Did the glass industry have a preference for older working boys?	factory owners preferred boys under 16 years of age
Where was photographer Lewis Hine employed?	National Child Labor Committee
What year were over 2 million children employed in the US?	1910
What did children roll in a factory?	cigarettes
What did child do in textile mills in the US?	bobbin doffers
Why would families perfer labour done at the home as opposed to the factory?	because it allowed them to generate income while taking care of household duties.
Early 20th century states began to have a responsiblity to take care of whom?	poor
Children were employed in the home, factories and were else in the 20th century?	mines
What time were home manufactoring activities for children taking place?	year round
Who did the children work beside?	parents
Where were rural children employed?	agriculture
What were the working conditions described as for the children employed at home?	unhealthy and insanitary
In 1946 who was the Director of the United States Department of Labour?	Frieda Miller
Does child labour exist in the 21st century?	Child labour is still common
Where does child labour currently occur the most?	rural areas
How many children in today's world work beside their parents?	Two out of three child
Some child work as guides for whom?	tourists
What country has the highest percentage of child labour?	Africa
In Asia how many millions of children are employed?	114
Right now what percentage of children are employed in the US?	1%
Caribean and where else is there a low population of child workers?	Latin America
Where is present day child labour stats unclear?	China
When did the U.S. produce a list of goods primarily made by child labour in China?	2014
What is the cause of diagreements in child labour numbers for present day?	data sources
Chinese children have been known to make electronics, toys and what else?	garments
According to the Maplecroft Child Labour Index how many countries post risks for child labour?	76
What country is the second on the list for child labour in accordance to the Maplecroft Child Labour Index?	North Korea
What was the Phillipines ranked as?	25th
Was Brazil on the list?	Brazil 54th
What is the main reason for children today to be in the work force?	nothing better to do
Do the poor families put a value on education?	parents wonder if going to school is really worth it.
What community has the most prevalency for child labour?	rural areas
Throughout European history was child labour seen as a positive?	Some view that work is good for the character-building and skill development of children
Are boys or girls more likely in some cultures to be thrown into child labour?	girls
For working parents what is the value of having their children work by their side?	learn and practice that trade from a very early age
Do many cultures place value of the education of a young girl?	education of girls is less valued
Biggeri and Mehrotra studied primarily Asia nations including India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Philippines and what other country?	Thailand
Is child labour a new issue in these Asian countries?	not a new problem
Supply and what else causes child labour to still exist today?	demand
What encourages child labour across the globe?	Macroeconomic
Were young apprentices hired for pay?	without pay
Was child labour common in European colonies?	child labour was common place in the colonies of European
What was the age range of colonial child workers?	5–14
What century did apprenticeships begin to take place?	19th
How many children were employed on colonial plantations?	Millions
Where did the British turn a blind eye to child labour?	Hong Kong
What schools required child labour?	Christian mission schools
Did the child workers receive anything from the christian mission schools?	provided religious education
What did the Canadians do to children that did not wish to work?	stipulated jail terms
Where do African children find their first jobs?	home
What do African children do primarily while working at home?	help their parents run the family farm
How many children in Africa are working in the arigucultural sector?	estimated five million
How many children in Africa pick coffee?	30 percent
How many children work year round in Africa?	estimated 25,000
Where did children from urban areas primarily work?	street vendors, washing cars, helping in construction sites, weaving clothing, and sometimes even working as exotic dancers
Where did children from rural areas work?	farms
When was the United Nations Conventions on the Rights of the Child Act implemented?	1959
What was the most serious aftereffects of child labour?	physical and emotional abuse
What country is still an issue today with regards to child labour?	Africa
What is an issue in Africa with child labour definitions?	unclear definition of adolescence
In Africa what is a cultural acceptance with regards to child labour?	children helping run the family business.
In 1888 what country were child convicts sent to the most?	Australia
What restricted the 1870s Child labour in Australia?	compulsorry schooling
Was child labour rampagnt in Australia?	Child labour was not as excessive in Australia
When did industrailization take off in Australia?	20th century
When was Brazil colonized?	April 22, 1550
Who colonized Brazil?	Pedro Álvares Cabral
Who were the victims of industrial accidents?	Boys and girls
When was child labour first documented in Brazil?	during the time of indigenous societies
How did Armando Dias die?	electric shock
What is the min working age in Brazil?	fourteen
What year was hazardous working conditions limited to children in Brazil?	1998
Is there underage children working in Brazil?	there is still a high number of children and adolescents working under the age of fourteen in Brazil
In the 80's how many children were working illegally in Brazil?	almost nine million
In 1999 how many children were working illegally in Brazil?	2.55 million
What do drug cartels do with child workers?	sell and carry drugs, guns, and other illegal substances
What are the risks of child labour in drug cartels?	physical and psychological implications
Has these dangers caused and increase or decrease in child labour with drug cartels?	an increase
If not forced why did children work?	to help feed and support the family
What was the age of the majority of child workers in Britain?	between the ages of ten and fourteen
Why was this age range important?	they were first helping to provide for their families; while also transitioning to save for their own future families
How were the work oppurtunies for parents during this time period?	poor
What type of support did child give to their families by working?	financially
What type of factories saw an increased need for child labour?	cotton textiles
Was there an increase or decrease in the field of agriculture?	large numbers of children working in the field of agriculture
What became an issue for the working child?	illiteracy
Was illiteracy a factor in changing the minds of parents of child labourers?	many parents developed a change of opinion
What are the reasons that lead to a decline of child labour?	financial changes in the economy, changes in the development of technology, raised wages, and continuous regulations on factory legislation
When was the UN General Assembly of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights enacted?	1966
What did this act due?	legally limited the minimum age for when children could start work at the age of 14
When were safe working environments legislation adopted for child labourers?	1989
What did it help do to?	helped to reduce the exploitation of children
When did the English East India Company defeat Siraj-ud-Daula?	23 June 1757
Who was the master of the east of India?	British
Why were many children employed?	increasing need of cheap labour
What was the primary reason for India children being employed?	lack knowledge of their basic rights
How did India child workers act?	they did not cause trouble or complain
How much of the world's child labour does India's workers contribute to?	one-fourth
How many Asian child workers are from India?	one-third
Did the India goverment take any actions against child labour?	extensive actions to reduce the number of children working, and to focus on the importance of facilitating the proper growth and development of children.
When did the Geneva Declaration of the Right of Children Act pass?	1924
What did the international acts do?	encouraged major changes to the workforce
What is the age limit now in India for child workers?	14
What child working conditions are they protected from?	hazardous conditions
When were students used as workers?	1950s
For Russian student workers how many summer days were devoted to work?	21 days
Did they need parental consent?	this is only allowed as part of specialized occupational training and with the students' and parents' permission
What year were students killed as part of a road cleanup project?	2012
What former Soviet Union continued child labour programs?	Uzbekistan
What was the main source of income for Islam Karimov?	cotton harvesting
Did they have daily quotas for cotton?	daily quotas of 20 to 60 kg of raw cotton
What are the 2016 estimates for child labour in regards to cotton picking?	2.7 million
What is Kaminfegerkinder?	chimney sweep children
What types of child labour did Switzerland employ?	spinning mills, factories and in agriculture
Where did the children go to work primarily in Switzerland?	poor farmers who needed cheap labour
What happened at Verdingkinder auctions?	children were handed over to the farmer asking the least amount of money
In 1930s how many indentured children were there?	35,000
How many Swiss citizen signatures were collected?	100,000
How many countries have signed the Worst Forms Convention 183 (C182)?	151
What types of child labour does this prohibit?	all forms of slavery
What other international laws deal with child labour?	Minimum Age Convention (C138)
What did the United Nations take charge of with regards to child labour?	International Program on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC)
What is the aim of this?	progressively eliminate child labour
What are some of the target countries?	Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Egypt
What do they want to do with regards to schooling of young children?	universal primary school
What did the United States pass in 2004?	amendment to the Fair Labour Standards Act of 1938
What is the age of US children allowed to work outside of the home?	aged 14–18
What culture in the US benefits from this Act?	Amish
What grade do Amish children need to pass in order to be able to work for their families?	eighth grade
What happened in the European Union in 1996?	agreed to a number of exceptions for young people in its child labour laws
What age were children allowed to do light labour?	13
What age were children able to take part in European training programs?	aged 14 years or over
What is the most common occupation for Dutch youth to have?	babysitting
What does child labour do for adults?	leads to poor labour standards
What happens to the wages of adults?	depresses the wages of adults in developing countries as well as the developed countries
What are the implications for third world countries with regards to child labour?	low-skill jobs only capable of producing poor quality cheap exports
Does ending child labour have a global value?	there are moral and economic reasons that justify a blanket ban on labour
What do some scholars agress is the "disease" of child labour?	poverty
Do these scholars argue for or against ending child labour?	These will increase abuse of the children. In poor countries with very high incidence rates of child labour
What do these scholars argue for keeping child labour as a practice?	only option for survival
What caused child labour to decrease in the 20th century?	economic development
What caused child labour to decrease in Vietnam?	economic reforms
What do these scholars suggest with regards to child labour reductions?	emphasis on opening quality schools rather than more laws and expanding economically relevant skill development opportunities in the third world
What do international actions do according to these scholars?	increase child labour
Who reported Ivory Coast farmers usage of child labour?	UNICEF
What do child labourers work on in West Africa?	production of cocoa
How many child slaves were reported in cocoa, coffee and cotton farms?	15,000
What migrants worked on the Ivory Coast?	Malian
After a 10 year low in prices what did some farmers resort to?	stopped paying their employees
Where did the children mainly come from?	slums
Where were begging children often targeted for being sold into slavery?	bus stations
What industry was accused of profiting from child labour?	cocoa industry
Who dismissed the allegations?	European Cocoa Association
What are the figures for cocoa farmers using child labour?	700,000
Who claimed these reports as being inaccurate?	ambassador for Ivory Coast to the United Kingdom
What type of agreement was the 2001 Harkin-Engel Protocol?	voluntary
What was the foundation that was the direct result of the agreement?	International Cocoa Initiative
How many active programs does the foundation have?	290
What happened to the 2005 deadlines?	have not yet been met
Who was the supplier of copper and cobalt to China?	Congo
What are child creuseurs?	they dig the ore by hand, carry sacks of ores on their backs
What percent of materials go to China?	90 percent
What is the cobalt used for?	lithium-ion batteries powering electric cars and mobile devices worldwide
What did the BBC say that Glencore used child labour for in 2012?	mining and smelting operations of Africa
What did Glencore say in regards to the allegations?	denied
What did Glencore admit to with regards to child labor?	being aware of child miners
What is another source of mining dangerous to children workers?	gold
What is the third largest exporter of gold in Africa?	Mali
Why is gold vital to the people of Mali?	it is the second largest earner of its export revenue
What is the gold production income of poor families in Mali?	primary and sometimes the only source of income
How many minors did Agriprocessors employ?	57
What did Agriprocessors say in regards to the allegations?	claimed that it was at a loss to understand the allegations
When did the CEO go on trial?	4 May 2010
What was the verdict?	not guilty of all 57 charges of child labour violations by the Black Hawk County District Court jury in Waterloo, Iowa, on 7 June 2010.
Who accused H&M of using products made by child labours?	Anti-Slavery International and the Environmental Justice Foundation (EJF)
Who else did they accuse of using child labor products?	Zara
What country did the cotton come from that was picked by children?	Bangladesh
What are activists trying to get implemented?	"track and trace" systems
Who did the BBC in 2008 report as using child labor?	Primark
What does Primark produce?	clothing
What did the BBC program make their viewers question?	"Why am I only paying £4 for a hand embroidered top?
What else did the BBC expose?	the violent side of the child labour industry
How many years was Primark investigated for?	three years
What did they claim about the BBC report?	fake
What did the BBC do?	apologised for faking footage
What happened to the reward the BBC received?	returned the television award
What do some feel may happen if child labour products were completely rejected by society as a whole?	may force these children to turn to more dangerous or strenuous professions, such as prostitution
What happened to the 50,000 children in the UNICEF study?	stone-crushing, street hustling, and prostitution"
What does the study say in regards to boycotts?	that can actually harm rather than help the children involved."
Where did children work prior to the Industrial Revolution?	agriculture
How many children worked?	virtually all
Where did children go to work after doing farm work for so long?	factory work
What did parents do when the wages were finally raised?	send their children to school instead of work
Where is Thomas DeGregori from?	University of Houston
What country does he argue needs child labor to survive?	Bangladesh
What are the obstacles he claims are to ending child labor?	political obstacles
What is benefical work for children?	Domestic work
What can children do in countries were trading is involved?	children can start trading in small items at an early age, often in the company of family members or of peers
All but what type of children must learn to clean?	rich
What is a natural process of child development?	Work
What is an escape for the young that live in poverty?	Work
What are children able to do during intense work situations?	children often find ways to combine their work with play
What hinders schooling for child labourers?	full-time work
What can relieve tension for children at work?	Good relations with a supervisor
What can schools do to help children led to better work lives?	school may impede the learning of skills
How many main geographical sections make up North Carolina?	three
What section of North carolina makes up 45% of the state?	Atlantic Coastal Plain
What is the section in the middle 35% of North Carolina called?	the Piedmont region
Tha Appalacian mountains and foothills make up a region of what state?	North Carolina
The extreme eastern section of North Carolina is called what?	Outer Banks
Pilot Mountain and South Mountains are located in what region of North Carolina?	Piedmont
What section of Central North Carolina has the most dense population?	The Piedmont region
What is the average elevation in the west Piedmont region?	1,000 feet
What do you call the line that marks the elevation that waterfalls first appear on rivers?	Atlantic Seaboard fall line
At what point does the coastal plin transition to the Piedmont region?	along the Atlantic Seaboard fall line
The weatern part of North Carolina is part of what mountain range?	Appalachian Mountain range
The Great Smokey Mountains and the Black Moutains are subranges of what mountains?	Appalachians
What mountains are the highest in the eastern United States?	The Black Mountains
What is the name of the highest point east of the Mississippi river?	Mount Mitchell
How high is Mt. Mitchell?	6,684 feet
What ocean influinces the climate of North Carolinas coastal plain?	Atlantic
What is the climate of the coastal plain in the winter?	mild
What is the climate of North Carolinas coastal plain in the summer?	moderate, although humid
What is the average high North Carolina coastal temperature on the plains in the summer?	89 °F
How often do temperatures on the coastal plain of NC drop below freezing at night?	occasionally
What region of North Carolina has hotter summers and colder winters than the coast?	Piedmont
In summer, daytime highs often reach what temperature in the Piedmont region?	90 °F
Temperatures over 100 degrees will typically be found in what elevation of the Piedmont?	.
What type of influence of the Atlantic Ocean makes the temperatures fluctuate more than on the coast?	weaker
The Piedmont is colder than the coast in what season?	winter
What is the average winter daytime temperature in the Piedmont?	upper 40s–lower 50s °F
What do the temperatures often drop to at night in the piedmont region in the winter?	below the freezing point
What is the average snowfall per year in Charlotte?	3–5 in
What type of precipitation is the Piedmont known for?	sleet and freezing rain
What mountain range makes up the coolest part of North Carolina?	The Appalachian Mountains
What are the average high winter temperatures in the Appalachians?	low 40s and upper 30s °F
What are the low winter temperatures in the Appalachians?	low 20s °F (−5 °C) or lower
Temperatures rarely go higher than what temperature in the Appalachians?	80 °F
Average snowfall in the Appalachians can exceed how many inches?	30
Hoe often do hurricanes hit North Carolina?	once a decade
Floyd, Fran, and Hazel are examples of what that hit the state of North Carolina?	hurricanes
What was the strongest storm to make landfall in North Carolina?	Hurricane Hazel
What category of hurricane was Hazel?	4
What year did Hurrican Hazel hit North Carolina?	1954
How many tornadoes does North Carolina have per year?	fewer than 20
Houuricanes and tropical stors can produce what across the coastal plain?	tornadoes
What part of the state holds the highest risk for tornadoes?	eastern
What protects the western piedmont from tornadoes?	mountains
What weather phenomenom can weaken storms but cause major ice events in NW North Carolina?	cold air damming
During what time period did people buid earth mounds used for religious and ceremonial purposes?	Before A.D. 200
By 1000 AD, what culture of people settled in the Piedmont?	ancient Mississippian culture
About how many years before European contact did ancient Mississippian culture build large cities?	500–700 years
Pamlico and Cape fear indians are examples of what?	Algonquian-speaking tribes
Where did the Algonquin speaking tribes of North Carolina live?	the coastal areas
What was another name for Blackbeard?	Edward Teach
What was the name of blackbeards ship?	the Queen Anne's Revenge
Where in North Carolina did Blackbeards ship crash?	Beaufort Inlet
What year did Blackbeard run his ship aground in North Carolina?	1718
What year were the remains of the Queen Anne's Revenge discovered?	1996
North carolina and Sounth Carolina together were known as what?	the Province of Carolina
What year were the northern and southern carolinas seperated?	1729
What was the profession of most of the settlers in the Province of Carolina?	small farmers
What people were a menace to the coastal areas of the Province of carolina?	Pirates
By what year had all of the pirates in the NC Province been captured or killed?	1718
What was the state capital of North Carolina in 1722?	Edenton
What city became the capital of North Carolina in 1766?	New Bern
Who was the governor of North carolina in 1767?	William Tryon
What was the name of the offices and residence built for William Tryon?	Tryon Palace
What central North carolina cuty was chosen for the capital in 1788?	Raleigh
What state made the smallest contribution to the revolutionary war of any state?	North Carolina
How many men from NC joined the continental army?	7,800
What years were the highest concentration of military action in NC during the revolutionary war?	1780–81
Who led the continental army?	General George Washington
Frontiersmen from the Carolinas moved west into what area that is now known as Tennessee?	Washington District
After what year did cotton and tobacco become important crops in North Carolina?	After 1800
The Tidewater region was in what half of North Carolina?	eastern
What region of North Carolina used slave labor and developed a slave society?	the Tidewater region
Where did free black people migrate to because of the looser social system?	the frontier
By 1810, what percentage of the free population was black?	3
What year was the confederacy defeated?	1865
What Era began following the defeat of the confederacy?	Reconstruction Era
The US abolished slavery without giving what to slave owners?	compensation
When did white Democrats regain control of the state legislature?	1870
What did the KKK target with violence and terrorism at the polls?	black voting
What political party was elected to the legislature and Governors office?	Democrats
What political group attracted voters displeased with Democrats?	Populists
What year did a biracial Populist fusion gain the Governors office?	1896
What year did the Democrats regain control of the governors office from the biracial Populists?	1896
In the 19th century, how many african american congressmen were elected?	four
What did the NC state legislature pass in 1899?	a new constitution
What type of taxes were required by the new NC constitution?	poll taxes
What did the new constitution require for voter registration?	literacy tests
Being excluded from doing what, made it so that black people could not serve on juries or in public office?	voting
What year was the Federal Civil Rights Act?	1964
What political party Dominated NC after the confederacy?	Democratic
What was the economy of North Carolina based on after the confederacy?	tobacco, cotton and agriculture
When did a major industrial base appear in North Carolina?	late 19th century
Where did the major industrial base appear in North Carolina?	western counties of the Piedmont
What was the emergence of the industrial base of North carolina based on?	cotton mills
What programs created by FDR helped North Carolina during the Great Depression?	New Deal programs
Who did the new deal programs benefit?	farmers
What crops was the New Deal Program made for?	cotton and tobacco
After what war did the states economy improve?	World War II
In the 1990's what NC city became a national banking center?	Charlotte
What inhibited North Carolina for thousands of years?	prehistoric indigenous cultures
Before 200 AD, people built what kind of mounds for religious purposes?	earthwork
Who continued to build on to the religious mounds?	Succeeding peoples
Before European contact, who built large cities and regional trading networks?	Mississippian culture
What was the largest city in the Piedmont before European contact?	Cahokia
In the 16th century, where did Spanish explorers meet Mississipian cultureal people?	Joara
What is Joara?	a regional chiefdom
Where would present day Joara be?	near present-day Morganton
What was the name of the Spanish man that met the people in Joara?	Hernando de Soto
What year did hernando de Soto arrive in Joara?	1540
Who is the North Carolina state capital named for?	Sir Walter Raleigh
Who granted the charter for Sir Walter Raleigh to travel to present day North Carolina?	Elizabeth I
What year did Elizabeth I grant the charter to Raleigh to travel to North Carolina?	1584
What was the second american territory the English attempted to colonize?	North Carolina
How many colonies did Raleigh establish on the coast of carolina in 1580?	two
In 1650, settlers from what colony moved in to Albemarie Sound?	Virginia
What year did King Charles II grant a charter to North America?	1663
What did King Charles II's charter establish?	North Carolina's borders
Carolina was named after King Charles iI's father, what was his name?	Charles I
What year was a second charter made to establish the borders of Carolina?	1665
After the Spanish, who were the first Europeans to settle North Carolina?	English colonists
Where did the English colonists that settle North carolina come from?	Virginia
The English colonist  left virginia because of what issue with the land there?	less available
Who was one of the first Virginian migrants to reach the carolinas?	Nathaniel Batts
What year did Nathaniel Battes settle in North Carolina?	1655
Eastern North Carolina is also known as what?	Low Country
Western North carolina is also known as what?	uplands
Where was The Tidewater located?	eastern North Carolina
Where did immigrants from England and the Scottish Highlands settle?	The Tidewater
Who did the Tidewater settlers remain loyal to during the American revolution?	the British Crown
Most English colonists arrived as what?	indentured servants
Indentured servants hired theirselves out as what?	laborers
What did the English settlers get in return for their labor?	passage
Indentured servants were similar to what people in the early days?	African slaves
As indentured servants improved the economy, there became a greater need to import more what?	slaves
What year did North Carolina instruct its delegates to vote for independence?	1776
Who was north carolina seeking independence from in 1776?	the British Crown
What year was Americas Victory at King's Mountain?	1780
How many North Carolina mountain men fought at King's Mountain?	1000
How many British troops fought at king's Mountain?	1000
Who met the British army as they moved north?	the Southern Division of the Continental Army and local militia
Who lost the battle of Cowpens?	the British Cavalry
Who led the British calvary at Cowpen?	Commander Banastre Tarleton
What was the date of the battle of Cowpens?	January 17, 1781
What is another name for the race to the Dan?	The Race for the River
The Battle of Cowan's Ford was fought on the banks of what river?	Catawba
What year was the battle of Cowans Ford?	1781
What is the present day name of the city that the Battle of Guilford Courthouse was fought at?	Greensboro
After losing the battle of Guilford Courthouse, Cornawallis moved his troops where?	Virginia coastline
What did Cornwallis move to the coastline after losing the battle of Guilford Courthouse?	to get reinforcements
North Carolina was the twelth state to ratify what document?	the Constitution
What date did North Carolina ratify the constitution?	November 21, 1789
What year was the state capitol building of North Carolina completed?	1840
Where was the capitol building completed in 1840?	Raleigh
What part of the state were most slave and plantation owners concentrated in?	eastern
Some of the free people of color migrated from what state during the 18th century?	Virginia
After the revolution Quakers and mennonited encouraged slaveholders to do what?	free their slaves
What happened to the number of free colored people for the first few decades after the war?	rose
What was the name of the railroad that began construction in 1836?	Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad
The Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad was going to connect Wilmington to what city?	Raleigh
In 1849, what railroad was created?	North Carolina Railroad
What direction did the North carolina railroad extend?	west
What stretch of the railroad was vital to the confederates in the civil war?	Wilmington-to-Raleigh stretch
In 1860, what percent of the North Carolina population were slaves?	33
Where were most of the slaves in North Carolina located?	eastern Tidewater
What type of land did the slaves live on?	plantations
How many free people of color lived in NC in 1860?	30,463
Where were the free people of color located in north carolina in 1860?	eastern coastal plain
What fraction of the population of North Carolina was enslaved in 1860?	one-third
North Carolina did not vote to join the confederacy until they were ordered to invade what state?	South Carolina
When was North Carolinas official secession?	May 20
When was Tennessees informal secession?	May 7, 1861
When did Tennessee officially vote to secede?	June 8, 1861
Some North Carolinians still refused to support what after secession?	the Confederacy
Some of what farmers remained neutral during the civil war?	yeoman
Where were the yoeman farmers that remained neutral during the civil war located?	in the state's mountains and western Piedmont region
How many North Carolinians from the west fought for the union Army?	2,000
When did union forces occupy coastal areas of North carolina?	1862 and 1863
What was the name of the Confederacys most famous army?	Army of Northern Virginia
How many battles of the army of Northern Virginia did confederate troops from north Carolina fight in?	virtually all
What was the name of the largest battle fought in North Carolina?	Bentonville
What was the name of the confederate general that fought in Bentonville?	General Joseph Johnston
What was the name of the Union General that fought in Bentonville?	General William Tecumseh Sherman
Who was the first confederate soldier to be killed in the civil war?	Private Henry Wyatt
Where was henry Wyatt from?	North Carolina
What battle did Private Henry Wyatt die in?	in the Battle of Big Bethel
When did Henry Wyatt die?	June 1861
When was the battle of Gettysburg?	July 1863
What is the religious name given to the part of the country that includes the Carolinas?	Bible Belt
What religion holds the majority in the Bible Belt?	Baptists
What was the largest denomination in North Carolina in 2010?	Southern Baptist
What was the second largest denomination in North carolina in 2010?	United Methodist Church
What was the third largest denomination in North carolina in 2010?	Roman Catholic
Immigrants from latin America coming to North Carolina is increasing what?	ethnic and religious diversity
What has happened to the number of Roman Catholics and Jews in North Carolina?	increased
Religious diversity in North Carolina has generally what?	increased
What is the second largest Protestant denomination in North Carolina?	Methodism
What county in Piedmont is methodism especially strong in?	Guilford
What is the Nickname given to North Carolina?	Old North State
Science, Technology, energy, and math industries have risen what percent since 2001?	17.9
What is raleigh-Cary ranked among the 51 largest metro areas in the country?	5
What was North Carolinas gross state product in 2010?	$424.9 billion
What was North Carolinas state debt in 2012?	$2.4bn
North carolina voters have leaned republican since what year?	1976
What year did North Carolina voters once again vote for a Democrat?	2008
What year did Bill Clinton win North Carolina?	1992
What year did Bill Clinton lose North Carolina?	1996
Where was the 2012 democratic national Convention held?	Charlotte
Who was elected Governor of North Carolina in 2012?	Pat McCrory
What political party does Pat McCrory belong to?	Republican
Who ws elected Lieutenant Governor of North Carolina in 2012?	Dan Forest
What political party does Dan Forest belong to?	Republican
Who won North Carolinas 7th congressional district seat in 2014?	David Rouzer
What agency oversees public schools in North Carolina?	North Carolina Department of Public Instruction
Who holds most legal authority for making education policy?	the board
What year did the boards chairman become the Chief Executive officer of public schools?	2009
How many public school systems does North Carolina have?	115
What is the largest school system in North Carolina?	Wake County Public School System
What state opened the first public university in the United States?	North Carolina
What year was the first public university opened in the United States?	1795
What was the name of the first public university to open in the US?	University of North Carolina
What is the largest University in North Carolina?	North Carolina State University
How many students does North Carolina State University enroll?	34,000
Duke University and Shaw University are examples of what type of colleges that are in North Carolina?	private
What was the first black college in the south?	Shaw University
What is the name of the only Catholic college in the Carolinas?	Belmont Abbey College
What is the name of the only Lutheran University in North Carolina?	Lenoir-Rhyne University
How many major league sports franchises make North carolina home?	three
What is the only professional team from North carolina to have won a league championship?	The Hurricanes
The Carolina Hurricanes belong to what league?	National Hockey League
The Charlotte Hornets belong to what league?	National Basketball Association
The Caroli8na panthers belong to what league?	National Football League
What Speedway in North Carolina hosts two Sprint cupseries races each year?	Charlotte Motor Speedway
Where is Charlotte motor Speedway located?	Concord
What North Carolina city hosts the NASCAR Hall of Fame?	Charlotte
What North carolina city is home to several top racing teams?	Concord
How many colleges compete at the Division 1 level in North Carolina?	18
Where is the ACC headquarters?	Greensboro
Where were the ACC football and basketball championships recently held?	North Carolina
What stadium host the ACC championship game and the Belk Bowl each year?	Charlotte's Bank of America Stadium
How many times has North Carolina hosted the NCAA final four?	two
How many people go to see the Appalachian Mountains each year?	several million
What part of the state are the Appalachian Mountains in?	Western
Great Smoky mountain and Blue Ridge Parkway are located in what mountain range?	Appalachian
How many tourists visited the Smoky Mountains and Blue Ridge parkway in 2013?	over 25 million
What North Carolina City is consistently voted one of the top places to live in the United States?	Asheville
What Hockey team is located in Raleigh?	Carolina Hurricanes
What league do the Carolina Hurricanes belong to?	NHL
What Hall of Fame is located in Raleigh?	North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame
What arboretum is located in Raleigh?	J. C. Raulston Arboretum
What is the center of North Carolina called?	The Piedmont Triad
Where is the Krispy kreme headquarters located?	The Piedmont Triad
What city is the North Carolina Zoo in?	Asheboro
How many miles of shaded pathways does the Nort Carolina Zoo have?	five
What North Carolina City hosts the Merlefest?	Wilkesboro
Fishing, hunting, and birdwatching are what kind of activities that are provided in North Carolina?	recreational
In the Fall, people go to North Carolina to see what?	fall colors
What is another name for caving?	spelunking
Howmany state parks are in North Carolina?	34
How many national parks are in North Carolina?	14
Where is the Uwharrie national Forest located?	central North Carolina
Where is Croatan National Forest located?	Eastern North Carolina
Where is the Guilford Courthouse National Military Park?	Greensboro
What industry generates 1.2 billion in economic activity each year for North carolina?	nonprofit arts and culture
How many full time jobs are held by those in the non profit arts and culture industry?	43,600
How much money does the nonprofit arts and culture industry raise for government?	$119 million
What was the first museum in the country to be formed by legislature?	North Carolina Museum of Art
How much money does the North Carolina Museum of art generate?	millions
Where is SouthPark Mall located?	Charlotte
What is the largest mall in the carolinas?	SouthPark Mall
How big is SouthPark Mall?	2.0 million square feet
Where is the hanes Mall located?	Winston-Salem
Where is the Four Seasons Town Center located?	Greensboro
What is a culinary staple of North Carolina?	pork barbecue
What cut of pork do those in western North carolina prefer for BBQ?	Boston butt
What is another name for Western North Carolina Barbecue?	Lexington barbecue
What cut of pork do those in Western North Carolina prefer for BBQ?	pork shoulder
How many people visit the lexington Barbecue festival each year?	over 100,000
Krispy kreme is a chain of what kind of stores?	doughnut
Where is the Krispy kreme headquarters?	Winston-Salem
When was pepsi-Cola first produced?	1898
Where was pepsi first produced?	New Bern
What city was Cheerwine created and based in?	Salisbury
What international prize winning winery is located in North Carolina?	Noni Bacca Winery
What prized cheeses are made in North Carolina?	Ashe County
Much tobacco land has been transformed into what kind of orchards?	grape
North carolina state law allowed a jump in alcohol volume from 6% to what percent?	15%.
What city was named Beer City USA?	Asheville
Winston Salem is the headquarters of what tobacco Company?	R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
The invention of cigarettes made what popular?	Tobacco
What year was RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company founded?	1874
How many packs of camel cigarettes were sold per year in 1914?	425 million
What was one of the first growing industries to develope after the civil war?	Tobacco
Where is Camp Lejeune located?	Jacksonville
What is Camp Lejeune?	Marine Corps Base Camp
Bases making up the larges concentration of marines and sailors in the world is located in what NC city?	Jacksonville
Where is Seymour johnson air force base located?	Goldsboro
Where is the military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point stationed?	Southport
What is the name of the last period of classical Japanese history?	Heian
The Heian period is named after what city?	Heian-kyō
What does heian mean in Japanese?	peace
What was the name of the prominent clan during the Heian period?	Fujiwara
The Heian period was known for what types of art?	poetry and literature
What was the name of the period before the Heian era?	Nara
The Heian period began in what year?	794 A.D
What warrior class rose during the Heian era?	samurai
Heian-kyo is now what present-day city?	Kyōto
What was the name of the emperor who moved Japan's capital to Heian?	Kanmu
What noble family wielded power during the Heian period?	Fujiwara
Who threatened the authority of Japan's central government?	Taira no Masakado
Masakado led an uprising in what province?	Hitachi
What member of the Fujiwara family rebelled in western Japan?	Fujiwara no Sumitomo
In what year did Masakado begin his rebellion?	939 A.D
Heian was Japan's capital for how many years?	1,000
Nara was the former capital for how many years?	70
What religion was gaining popularity in Nara?	Buddhist
What time period was the early Heian era?	784–967
Kanmu modeled his government after what Chinese capital?	Tang
What was the name of the possible descendants of Jōmon?	Emishi
What was the name of the new commander Kanmu appointed in the year 797?	Sakanoue no Tamuramaro
What was Tamuramaro's military title?	Sei-i Taishōgun
The Emishi were defeated in what year?	801
The imperial capital extended to the eastern edge of which Japanese island?	Honshū
In what year did Emperor Kanmu die?	806
What office replaced the imperial guards?	Metropolitan Police Board
What new office allowed government to issue administrative orders faster?	Emperor's Private Office
Tang China's influence over Japan ended in what year?	838
In what century did the Soga family take the throne?	sixth
A member of what clan became the head of the Emperor's Private Office?	Fujiwara
Which emperor suspended the Fujiwara clan's power?	Daigo
Emperor Daigo ruled during what years?	897-930
What type of property obtained legal status during the early Heian period?	shōen
Farm laborers traded titles to shoen holders in exchange for what?	a share of the harvest
The Fujiwara and other noble families became richer during which century?	early tenth century
What script was developed with parts of Chinese characters?	katakana
What was the name of the cursive script that gave expression to spoken words?	hiragana
Who is the author of The Pillow Book?	Sei Shōnagon
Who is the author of The Tale of Genji?	Murasaki Shikibu
What was the name of the brightly colored paintings depicting court life?	yamato-e
What became the aristocracy's primary occupation?	Land management
What grew during the second phase of shoen development?	"house governments,"
What governmental reorganization lapsed during the period of shoen development?	Taihō Code
Succession to the throne was determined by what clan?	Fujiwara
The early courts' military conscription broke down around what year?	792
Warriors appointed to a province were called what?	oryoshi
Warriors appointed for specific tasks were called what?	tsuibushi
Where did final authority over the military lie?	imperial court
Who had increased access to better military technology?	Shōen holders
Which institutions also hired private guards for protection?	civil and religious
Which class became a new military elite?	provincial upper class
What does the word "bushi" mean?	warrior
Bushi formed new associations in what century?	tenth
How did military families gain prestige?	connections to the imperial court
Who were the three prominent families during the rise of the warrior classes?	Fujiwara family, Taira clan, and Minamoto clan
Who was the first non-Fujiwara emperor since the ninth century?	Go-Sanjō
Who implemented reforms to reduce the Fujiwara's influence on government?	Go-Sanjō
What term was used for behind the scenes governance?	insei
The decline of the Fujiwara's governmental power was filled by what?	In-no-cho
The members of what clan gradually replaced the Fujiwaras?	Minamoto
What allowed the paternal line of the imperial family to gain influence over royal succession?	insei system
The In-no-cho was prominent during what years?	1086 to 1156
What member of the Fujiwara attempted to rebel in the mid-twelfth century?	Fujiwara no Yorinaga
What battle resulted in the destruction of the Fujiwara?	Hōgen Rebellion
What clans fought during the Heiji Rebellion?	Taira and Minamoto
In what year did the Heiji Rebellion occur?	1159
After the Heiji Rebellion, what clan grew in power?	Taira
What military commander gained power after the fall of the Minamoto clan?	Taira Kiyomori
How old was Emperor Takakura when he died?	19
What was the name of Takakura's successor?	Antoku
Kiyomori removed how many court officials to protect his power?	45
What were the names of the temples that Kiyomori destroyed?	Todai-ji and Kofuku-ji
What was the term used to describe military governors?	daimyos
What was the term used to describe supervisors of estates?	jito
What was the name of the emperor that Yoritomo removed from the throne?	Go-Toba
What religion spread during the Heian period?	Buddhism
What were the two Japanese sects of Buddhism?	Tendai and Shingon
Who brought Shingon Buddhism to Japan?	Kūkai
Tendai Buddhism suggested that enlightenment was accessible to who?	every creature
What artform became a mark of status in the courts?	poetry
During the Heian period, what did the Japanese think could reflect one's soul?	handwriting
What was said to show low status or "poor breeding"?	poor or hasty writing
What is the name of the Japanese national anthem?	Kimi ga Yo
What famous poem with an unknown author was written during the Heian period?	Iroha
The Pillow Book was a collection of whose observations of the imperial court?	Sei Shōnagon
What crop was a primary source of income during the Heian period?	rice
What was the name of the beneficiaries of Heian culture?	Ryōmin
Currency gradually disappeared around what year?	1000
What crop became the primary unit of exchange?	rice
Buddhist temples in which two cities made use of the shoen system?	Heian-kyō and Nara
Why were travelers often robbed under Fujiwara rule?	The Fujiwara rulers failed to maintain adequate police forces
The integration of Shinto shrines into government branches reflected a greater what?	organizational dynamism
Which Total War game has an expansion set during the Heian period?	Shogun 2
What families are playable characters in Total War: Shogun 2?	Taira, Minamoto or Fujiwara
The Rise of the Samurai expansion for Total War: Shogun 2 depicts which war during the Heian period?	Gempei War
When was the Origin of Species published?	24 November 1859
Who wrote The Origin of Species?	Charles Darwin
What branch of biology was The Origin of Species founded on?	evolutionary biology
What was the expedition called that Charles Darwin discovered some of his evidence?	Beagle expedition
How do populations evolve according to Charles Darwin's theory?	through a process of natural selection
Which group of scientists began to support evolutionary ideas?	dissident anatomists
Which powerful religious institution was a big part of scientific study in the 19th century?	the Church of England
What was the general opinion about transmutation of species in the 19th century?	Ideas about the transmutation of species were controversial
How did the majority of science see humanity in relation to animals in the 19th century?	that humans were unique, unrelated to other animals.
Which theology did everyone agree science was a part of in the 19th century?	natural theology
What section of the population was Darwin's book written for?	non-specialist readers
Who attempted to secularize science during the debate over Darwin's book?	T. H. Huxley
What was T.H. Huxley promoting?	scientific naturalism
What was the growing change in opinion about evolution called?	"the eclipse of Darwinism"
When did Darwin's concept of evolution become widely believed and central to the modern theory of evolution?	in the 1930s and 1940s
To what ancient philosopher did Darwin trace some of his evolutionary ideas?	Aristotle
Whose ideas were summarized by Aristotle in the work Darwin studied?	Greek philosopher Empedocles
How did medieval scholars view the Genesis creation story?	allegorically
What kind of births did the Christian Church fathers believe occurred in nature?	monstrous births from union between species, and spontaneous generation of life.
Which group wanted to assuage fears that science was a threat to religious stability?	the Royal Society
Whose theory claimed that species were unchanging and designed by God?	John Ray
Who created a biological classification in 1735?	Carl Linnaeus
When did the Ussher chronology state that creation began?	4004 BC
Who proposed that life is a self-maintaining, infinite cycle?	James Hutton
What was the name of Charles Darwin's grandfather?	Erasmus Darwin
What theory did Erasmus Darwin outline in the 1790s?	hypothesis of transmutation of species
What was the name of the scientist who developed and published a more complex version of Erasmus Darwin's theory in 1809?	Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
What is the process of adapting to the environment and inheriting changes through use or disuse called?	Lamarckism
Whose paleontology work in the 1790s established the reality of extinction?	Georges Cuvier
Whose work considered adaptation to be evidence of God's design?	William Paley's
What was the name of William Paley's book claiming divine beneficial design?	Natural Theology
What religion were all naturalists working at the two English universities?	Church of England
How did most naturalists view the concept of transmutation of species?	a threat to divinely appointed social order.
How did geologists explain the creation of new species in keeping with their belief in divine creation?	adapted catastrophism to show repeated worldwide annihilation and creation of new fixed species adapted to a changed environment
When did Darwin begin attending university?	1825
What university did Darwin attend?	Edinburgh University
What was Darwin originally studying at university?	medicine
Who did Darwin assist in researching marine invertebrates?	Robert Grant
With whom did Darwin study about catastrophic geology?	Adam Sedgwick
What expedition did Darwin join in 1831?	Beagle expedition
Who wrote The Principles of Geology?	Charles Lyell
Where was the first stop of the Beagle Expedition?	St. Jago
What did some of the fossils Darwin found on St. Jago resemble?	huge armadillos
What caused Darwin to change his mind about the unbridgeable gap between animals and humans?	their relatives on the island seemed "miserable, degraded savages"
Who showed that extinct South American fossils were related to living species?	Richard Owen
What did John Gould announce in 1837?	Darwin's rhea was a separate species from the previously described rhea
How many species of mockingbirds were found to be present on the Galapagos Islands?	three separate species
What type of scientist was John Gould?	ornithologist
Which animal did Darwin see at a zoo that made him further consider evolution?	an ape
Which book did Darwin begin reading in 1838?	An Essay on the Principle of Population
What did Thomas Malthus' book theorize would happen to human populations if they were unrestrained?	breed beyond their means and struggle to survive
Which species did Darwin compare with the human struggle to survive?	plants
What concept was de Candolle considering as he studied plants?	"warring of the species"
Who did Darwin write his ideas to in 1842?	Lyell
What was the name of Darwin's 35-page writing of his theory?	"Pencil Sketch"
Which botanist did Darwin begin a correspondence with about his theories?	Joseph Dalton Hooker
What information was Darwin's essay based on?	scientific results of the Beagle voyage
How many pages had Darwin's sketch grown to in 1844?	230-page
What was the name of the anonymously published science book?	Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation
What kind of progression did Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation propose?	a linear progression
Who wrote Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation?	Robert Chambers
What was the evidence in Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation used to support?	that living things had progressed from the simple to the more complex over time.
Which scientist was in favor of Lamarckism in the 1850s?	Herbert Spencer
What creatures did Darwin study that made him believe variation arose constantly?	barnacle
In what year did Darwin begin to work on his evolution theory full-time?	1854
By which year had Darwin's theory become more complex and supported by a lot of evidence?	1856
Which bird species did Darwin become extremely interested in studying?	fancy pigeon
What species did Darwin study for dispersal across oceans>	plant seeds and animals
When was the "Introduction of Species" paper written?	1855
Who wrote the "Introduction of Species" paper?	Alfred Russel Wallace
How did Wallace claim that patterns in the distribution of species could be explained?	if every new species always came into existence near an already existing, closely related species
Which scientist recognized the possible validity and implications of Wallace's paper?	Charles Lyell
When did Lyell ask Darwin to publish his theory to give it priority?	1–2 May 1856
Which book was Darwin working on when he received a package from Wallace?	"big book" on Natural Selection,
What was in the packages Darwin received from Wallace?	twenty pages describing an evolutionary mechanism
Who wrote the paper, On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties?	Wallace
Who wrote the paper, On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties?	Darwin
What do some historians think made Wallace's concept of natural selection different from Darwin's?	Some historians have suggested that Wallace was actually discussing group selection rather than selection acting on individual variation.
What did Darwin decide to write in July, 1858?	"an abstract of my whole work".
Which publisher did Lyell convince to arrange publication of Darwin's work?	John Murray III
What did the publisher offer Darwin in payment for the book?	2⁄3 of the profits
What edition was the book in by the time of Darwin's death?	6th edition
How much had the book earned Darwin by the time he died?	nearly £3000
What title did Darwin's book ultimately have?	On the Origin of Species
What had Darwin wanted to name his book?	An abstract of an Essay on the Origin of Species and Varieties Through natural selection
Who convinced Darwin that his book needed a shorter, more compelling title?	Murray
What does the word "races" mean as referenced in Darwin's book?	an alternative for "varieties" and does not carry the modern connotation of human races
What is the extended name of The Origin of Species that is written on the title page?	by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life
By which year did Darwin have the basic premise of his natural selection theory?	1838
Why might Darwin have postponed publishing his theory of evolution for over 20 years?	fear of religious persecution or social disgrace
Which paper did Darwin write that was incorrect?	Glen Roy
Who might Darwin have feared upsetting by publishing his work?	his clergymen naturalist friends or his pious wife Emma.
What did Darwin's contemporaries think of the long delays on his publishing?	Darwin's contemporaries thought the time he took was reasonable
What was Darwin's process on writing his books?	Darwin always finished one book before starting another
What was Darwin's original estimate for the amount of time his book would take to write?	five years
Which scientist's study theorized that the idea of Darwin's work being delayed dates to the 1940s?	John van Wyhe
What was the cost for the first published copies of On the Origin of Species?	fifteen shillings
How many copies of On the Origin of Species were created in the first printing?	1250 copies
Where was the book, On the Origin of Species first offered for sale?	Murray's autumn sale
How many editions did On the Origin of Species go through during Darwin's lifetime?	six editions
Which institution bought 500 copies of the book, ensuring that a large number of people would have access to it?	Mudie's Library
What did On the Genesis of Species argue against natural selection?	claimed it included false metaphysics
Who wrote On the Genesis of Species?	George Jackson Mivart
When did Charles Darwin first use the word "evolution" in On the Origin of Species?	the sixth edition
What did Charles Darwin do to address Mivart's arguments?	added a new chapter VII,
What was chapter VII entitled?	Miscellaneous objections
Why couldn't Asa Gray use a Boston publisher for an American version of On the Origin of Species?	two New York publishing firms were already planning to exploit the absence of international copyright to print Origin
How much of a royalty was Gray able to negotiate with a New York publisher for On the Origin of Species?	a 5% royalty
When was the first American edition of On the Origin of Species published?	mid January 1860
What did Darwin decide to do with the profits of the American version of On the Origin of Species?	asked Gray to keep any profits
What was the print run that Darwin mentioned for On the Origin of Species?	2,500 copies
Who was the German translator that Darwin welcomed for On the Origin of Species?	Heinrich Georg Bronn,
What did Bronn do in his translation that went completely against what Darwin wanted in On the Origin of Species?	the German translation published in 1860 imposed Bronn's own ideas, adding controversial themes that Darwin had deliberately omitted.
What did Bronn change "Favoured Races" to in his translated edition of On the Origin of Species?	"perfected races"
Who published an improved translation of On the Origin of Species in 1867?	Julius Victor Carus
Why was Darwin unhappy with the first French translation of On the Origins of Species?	numerous explanatory notes giving her own answers to doubts that Darwin expressed
What was Isaac Newton's belief about God  on the theory of natural law?	a rational God who established a law-abiding cosmos
Whose epigraph did Darwin add to On the Origin of Species harmonizing God with science and miracles together?	Joseph Butler
Whose letter does the introduction to On the Origin of Species refer?	John Herschel
In which edition of On the Origin of Species was the epigraph from Joseph Butler added?	the second edition
How far back does Chapter One of On the Origin of Species go in its coverage of animal and plant species?	ancient Egypt
What does Darwin use to illustrate the effects of artificial selection?	fancy pigeon breeding
From what does Darwin assert all pigeons are descended?	one species of rock pigeon
Which evolutionary changes were the most important to Darwin?	the small changes
What does Darwin believe about the differences between species and varieties?	is arbitrary
What does Darwin theorize about different species with regard to variety?	"species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties"
What did Darwin and Wallace make central to understanding the natural world?	variation among individuals of the same species
What did Darwin say that a "well marked variety" could be called?	incipient species"
What did historians say that naturalists generally thought about the differences in variations in a species?	generally considered such variations to be limited and unimportant deviations from the archetype of each species
What is the struggle that Darwin describes about population likened to?	doctrine of Malthus
Within what frame of reference does Darwin use the phrase "Struggle for Existence?"	"a large and metaphorical sense
What was Charles Lyell's perception of what organisms are exposed to in their struggle for survival?	all organisms are exposed to severe competition
When is competition strongest in the natural world?	competition is most severe between closely related forms
Why is competition so fierce between related species?	fill nearly the same place in the economy of nature".
What did Darwin say that artificial selection by animal breeders often causes?	sharp divergence in character between breeds,
What did Darwin say could happen somewhere if there is a change in conditions?	extinction of some species
What can happen if species immigrate to a new location?	descendants of some species became adapted to new conditions
What does Darwin say can explain diverse feature such as antlers on deer and bright feathers on certain male birds?	sexual selection, driven by competition between males for mates
Which of Darwin's written works has more in depth information about sexual selection?	The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex
What did Darwin expect to see between species with the addition of artificial selection?	no limit to the amount of change, to the beauty and infinite complexity of the coadaptations between all organic beings
What did Darwin use to illustrate the way that original species change and adapt into new ones?	a tree diagram and calculations
What is the theory that is based on acquired characteristics within a species?	Lamarckism
What did Darwin learn about about the characteristics of domestic animals?	use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and disuse diminishes them
What did Darwin speculate might be how inheritable variations might come about in a species?	environmental factors
What did Darwin admit about acquired characteristics in chapter one of On the Origin of Species?	"The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown."
What did Darwin learn about variations by observing breeders?	breeders were able to select such variations and produce huge differences in many generations of selection
When was The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication by Charles Darwin published?	1868
What was the hypothesis that attempted to explain heredity?	hypothesis of pangenesis.
While Darwin wasn't sure about blending inherited traits, what was his opinion about utilizing inherited variation?	Darwin's concept of selection working on a population with a range of small variations was workable
When did a model of heredity begin to be integrated with that of variation?	in the 1930s and 1940s
What was the modern evolutionary synthesis named?	Neo Darwinian Evolution
What is one possible objection to the theory of integrated variation?	often no intermediate forms between closely related species are found
Why did Darwin wonder why all of nature isn't chaotic and random?	why, if species have descended from other species by insensibly fine gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms?
What did Darwin ultimately decide was the reason that nature is not a chaos of variation?	the competition between different forms, combined with the small number of individuals of intermediate forms, often leading to extinction of such forms.
What are some flying animals that Darwin thought might have evolved from bats?	flying squirrels, and flying lemurs
What example did Darwin give of eyes evolving?	simple eyes found in invertebrates, starting with nothing more than an optic nerve coated with pigment
How did Darwin justify his theory not breaking down?	any complex organ existed, which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifications, my theory would absolutely break down.
How does Darwin theorize that instincts have evolved in slave-making ants?	He thought it reasonable that species with an extreme dependency on slave workers had evolved in incremental steps.
How does Darwin theorize that instincts have evolved in bees?	He suggested that bees that make hexagonal cells evolved in steps from bees that made round cells, under pressure from natural selection to economise wax
What did Darwin notice specifically about slave-making ants?	some species of slave-making ants were more dependent on slaves than others
Why would hybrids have characteristics that keep them from being fertile?	in order to preserve separately created species
What are Darwin's thoughts on producing hybrids of related species?	the viability and fertility of the hybrids, varied greatly, especially among plants
What conclusion did Darwin come to after realizing that some diverse species were able to create variations easily, while other species thought to be closely related had difficulty?	support the view, that there is no fundamental distinction between species and varieties
Why did Darwin introduce a new chapter in On the Origin of Species in the sixth edition?	to respond to criticisms of earlier editions
What was one of the objections that Darwin addressed in his new chapter in On the Origin of Species?	that many features of organisms were not adaptive and could not have been produced by natural selection
Which of Darwin's books featured a plant whose elaborate structure aided with fertilization by insects?	Fertilisation of Orchids
Which scientist was addressed the most often in the new chapter of On the Origin of Species?	George Jackson Mivart
What was Darwin's response to the claims that certain animals could not have evolved through natural selection?	Darwin proposed scenarios for the incremental evolution of each feature.
Whose argument did Darwin borrow that geological record is very imperfect, because fossilization is rare?	Charles Lyell
Which book written by Charles Lyell contains the argument that fossils are too rare to be used as proof of life suddenly arising?	Principles of Geology
What did Darwin hope to find as he continued to explore new geologic discoveries?	that new finds would occasionally reveal transitional forms
How long did Darwin estimate the erosion of the Weald to be?	300 million years
What is the name of the group of well-developed organisms that were discovered within fossil-bearing layers?	the Cambrian explosion
How did Darwin expect species to change and evolve?	slowly, but not at the same rate
What did Darwin believe were the key things needed for variation of species to form?	variability and change in the environment
Which scientist theorized that the earliest members of a class in a species were simple and generalized?	Richard Owen
What did Darwin discover about more recently extinct species?	Recently extinct species were more similar to living species than those from earlier eras
Why couldn't differences in flora and fauna be explained by differences in regions alone?	South America, Africa, and Australia all have regions with similar climates at similar latitudes, but those regions have very different plants and animals
What did Darwin consider that could explain why different regions could have such different species when they are close together?	barriers to migration played an important role in the differences between the species of different regions.
What was the combination of effects that Darwin considered the most important in determining the differences in species that evolved separately in similar environments?	His explanation was a combination of migration and descent with modification.
What theory does Darwin discuss that is related to the importance of homologous structures?	morphology
What are some examples that Darwin gives of species whose basic form of limbs is similar, but who have vastly different uses for them?	the hand of a man, formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat
What does Darwin note about the embryos of many different species in the same class?	animals of the same class often have extremely similar embryos
What are some examples of rudimentary organs that Darwin discusses in the chapter?	e wings of flightless birds and the rudiments of pelvis and leg bones found in some snakes
What hopes does Darwin have for his theory in the natural history fields?	that his theory might produce revolutionary changes
Why did Darwin avoid the topic of the origins of humans in most of his book?	so as not to prejudice readers against his theory
What does Darwin allude to hoping in the final chapter of On the Origin of Species about humans?	that psychology would be put on a new foundation and that "Light will be thrown on the origin of man"
What were Darwin's two important aims about evolution?	to show that species had not been separately created, and to show that natural selection had been the chief agent of change
What did heknow his readers were already familiar with from Vestiges?	the concept of transmutation of species
How did Darwin view Vestiges in the introduction to On the Origin of Species?	his introduction ridicules that work as failing to provide a viable mechanism.
What is Darwin's belief about the accumulation of adaptive variations?	the accumulation of adaptive variations provides a scientifically testable mechanism for evolutionary speciation.
What does Darwin do to show that his theory can support many theories that could not be explained by individual creation of species?	Darwin presents supporting facts drawn from many disciplines
Whose scientific philosophy argued that a mechanism could be called a vera causa if three things could be shown as true?	John Herschel
What are the three things John Herschel maintains need to be shown to allow for a mechanism be called a true cause?	its existence in nature, its ability to produce the effects of interest, and its ability to explain a wide range of observations
What reason did David Quammen believe that On the Origin of Species was weakened in later editions?	Darwin making concessions and adding details to address his critics
Why did James T. Costa think that On the Origin of Species was more likely to draw interest than a larger book that Darwin had been working on?	because the book was an abstract produced in haste in response to Wallace's essay
What did On Origin of Species avoid in order to raise its chance of being taken seriously?	it avoided the narrative style of the historical novel and cosmological speculation
What element of On the Origin of Species ensured that the book would be taken seriously by scientists?	its dryness ensured that it was seen as aimed at specialist scientists and could not be dismissed as mere journalism or imaginative fiction.
Why did James T. Costa think the larger, abandoned book would not have been as successful?	would have been encumbered by scholarly footnotes and much more technical detail
Why did On the Origin of Species likely raise so much interest and debate?	no sharp line between scientific issues and ideological, social and religious implications
Why was the book taken seriously even though much of the response was hostile?	Darwin had to be taken seriously as a prominent and respected name in science
What field of ideas latched onto On the Origin of Species when it became a widespread success?	social reform
What did Darwin's book do for the field of scientific study of evolution?	Darwin's book legitimised scientific discussion of evolutionary mechanisms
What was the term used to not only describe Darwin's theories, but the whole spectrum of evolution-ism after his book met with success?	Darwinism
What was the general response from scientific readers to Lamarck's written work?	the transmutational ideas of Lamarck and the vague "law of development" of Vestiges had not found scientific favour
What was the likely reason that Darwin's ideas were accepted more readily than Lamarck's?	natural selection as a scientifically testable mechanism while accepting that other mechanisms such as inheritance of acquired characters were possible.
Which school did opponents to Darwin's method support?	the idealist school of William Whewell's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences
Where did early support for Darwin's findings come from?	the findings of field naturalists studying biogeography and ecology, including Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1860, and Asa Gray in 1862
Who authored research supporting insect mimicry  using natural selection?	Henry Walter Bates
Who supported Darwin's theories on evolution despite it having little impact on his own research?	Thomas Henry Huxley
What did Huxley's 1860 article in the Westminster Review promote?	scientific naturalism over natural theology
Why did Huxley coin the name "Darwinism?"	as part of his efforts to secularise and professionalise science
What did the morphologist Ernst Haeckel convince Huxley of about comparative anatomy and paleontology?	that comparative anatomy and palaeontology could be used to reconstruct evolutionary genealogies
Who was the leading naturalist in Britain?	Richard Owen,
How did Owen respond to On the Origin of Species with his review?	bitterly attacked Huxley, Hooker and Darwin, but also signalled acceptance of a kind of evolution as a teleological plan in a continuous "ordained becoming"
What was the debate between Huxley and Owen concerning humans and apes?	Huxley had emphasised anatomical similarities between apes and humans, contesting Owen's view that humans were a separate sub-class
What was the primary debate at the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting of 1860?	legendary 1860 Oxford evolution debate
When did Darwin publish his own explanation of the question of the evolution of man and ape?	Darwin published his own explanation in the Descent of Man (1871)
While evolutionary ideas were accepted by German biologists, what was not?	natural selection
What led to more misgivings of conservative scientists when Bronn's German translation of On the Origin of Species was published?	Bronn's alterations in his German translation added to the misgivings of conservatives
Which group of people was excited by the German translation of On the Origin of Species?	political radicals
Why were political radicals such as Ernst Haekel so interested in On the Origin of Species?	aiming to synthesise Darwin's ideas with those of Lamarck and Goethe while still reflecting the spirit of Naturphilosophie
What was the general feeling toward Darwin's ideas in France?	Darwin's ideas had little impact in France, where any scientists supporting evolutionary ideas opted for a form of Lamarckism
What people in what country had embraced the idea of evolution for many years before Darwin published his theory?	The intelligentsia in Russia
Which aspects of evolution theory were thought to be unimportant by many who read Darwin's work?	the Malthusian aspects
Which author voiced his displeasure of the morality of Darwin's views in a novel?	Leo Tolstoy
What justification for his objections to the process of natural selection did Karl von Nägel give?	insistence that a trivial characteristic with no adaptive advantage could not be developed by selection
What was Darwin's concession to Karl von Nägel's objections?	Darwin conceded that these could be linked to adaptive characteristics
Who disputed Darwin's estimate that the age of the earth allowed gradual evolution of species?	William Thomson
What were William Thomson's reasons for disputing Darwin's estimate?	calculated that it had cooled in less than 100 million years
When were the problems of the earth and heredity resolved?	in the 20th century
Why did most scientists accept the validity of evolution by the 1870s, but considered natural selection a minor part of it?	they believed evolution was purposeful and progressive.
What was meant by the term saltationism?	new species were thought to arise through "jumps" rather than gradual adaptation
What is the term for the belief that species have a tendency to change and adapt in a certain direction?	orthogenesis
What was the minority view on evolution that was believed by August Weismann?	neo-Darwinism
What rediscovered inheritance was thought to invalidate Darwin's views on evolution?	Mendelian inheritance
Who believed that action needed to be taken to level out the social and economic playing field before natural selection could occur to improve humanity?	Alfred Russel Wallace
Which political commentary attempted to widen the idea of natural selection to include competition between different races of people and countries?	Walter Bagehot's Physics and Politics (1872)
Why were some political commentaries attempting to attach natural selection to human races?	to provide scientific evidence for the superiority of Caucasians over non white races and justify European imperialism
What uses of his ideology did Darwin object to being used?	to justify military aggression and unethical business practices
What theory about humanity did Darwin oppose?	he opposed polygenism, the idea that human races were fundamentally distinct and did not share a recent common ancestry.
What view did Louis Agassiz have of On the Origin of Species?	strongly opposed to the ideas in the book
What view did some clergymen in the Church of England take of the theory of natural selection?	interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God's design
What did Darwin do to show that he admired the cleric Charles Kingsley?	Darwin quoted Kingsley as "a celebrated cleric", and added the phrase "by the Creator" to the closing sentence,
What did some commentators think about Darwin changing the phrasing in his book?	some commentators have taken this as a concession to religion that Darwin later regretted
What were Darwin's views on the part of God in his theory?	Darwin's view at the time was of God creating life through the laws of nature
What was Baden Powell's opinion of On the Origin of Species?	Baden Powell praised "Mr Darwin's masterly volume [supporting] the grand principle of the self-evolving powers of nature"
What did the pamphlet that Asa Gray published defend?	defending the book in terms of theistic evolution, Natural Selection is not inconsistent with Natural Theology.
What was a way that theologians compromised with the information in Darwin's book?	Theistic evolution became a popular compromise
What was later realized that caused naturalistic mechanisms such as neo-Lamarckism to be embraced?	supernatural intervention could not be a scientific explanation
How did people attempt to rationalize or reconcile the concept of natural selection?	by supposing there was some supernatural intervention on the path leading to humans
Which scientist argued that Darwinism was atheism?	Charles Hodge
What controversy around Darwin's book began in the 1920s?	the American creation–evolution controversy
What official position did the Vatican take on the subject of evolution in 1950?	The Vatican stated its official position in a 1950 papal encyclical, which held that evolution was not inconsistent with Catholic teaching.
What branching common descent theory has become the most unifying one of the life sciences?	Darwin's theory of evolution
What does the theory of evolution explain about living organisms?	The theory explains the diversity of living organisms and their adaptation to the environment.
In what fields has Darwin's theory of evolution become particularly essential?	medicine and agriculture
What kind of controversy has begun within school systems about Darwin's theory?	a religion-based political controversy
What kinds of things have been done by scholars interested in Darwin's work?	scholars have generated an extensive literature, the Darwin Industry, about his life and work.
What has been created in 1959 and filled with information about changes in every edition of On the Origin of Species?	a variorum
What was done on the 150th anniversary of the publication of On the Origin of Species?	Worldwide commemorations
What were the celebrants honoring with their commemorations?	They celebrated the ideas which "over the last 150 years have revolutionised our understanding of nature and our place within it".
On what date did the Soviet Union dissolve?	December 26, 1991
What entity was created in place of the Soviet Union?	Commonwealth of Independent States
Who was president of the Soviet Union when it came to an end?	Mikhail Gorbachev,
Who became president of Russia after Gorbachev left office?	Boris Yeltsin
Which flag replaced the Soviet flag at the Kremlin?	pre-revolutionary Russian flag.
Who was General Secretary prior to Mikhail Gorbachev?	Konstantin Chernenko
What caused Chernenko to leave office?	death
How old was Gorbachev when he was elected as the General Secretary?	54
What entity was responsible for Gorbachev's being elected?	Politburo
To which two people did Gorbachev grant membership into the Politburo for his own reasons?	Yegor Ligachev and Nikolai Ryzhkov,
What party did Gorbachev belong to?	Communist Party
What was the name of the legislative body that was brought into existance in 1989?	Congress of People's Deputies
When were opposition parties first allowed in the Soviet Union?	1990
In which country did Warsaw Pact regime remain in place?	Romania
What were some of the downsides of the more liberal Soviet Union?	nationalist movements and ethnic disputes
When was Gorbachev's speech addressing alcohol abuse?	May 1985
Other than increasing pricing what was another measure that was introduced to decrease alcohol consumption?	rationing
What was censored?	drinking scenes from old movies
Whose anti-alcohol program did Gorbachev's remind people of?	Tsar Nicholas II
When did Tsar Nicholas II ban alcohol?	during World War I,
When did Eduard Shevardnadze gain full membership in the Politburo?	July 1, 1985
Who was responsible for Shevardnadze's membership?	Gorbachev
Who was minister of foreign affairs prior to Shevardnadze?	Andrei Gromyko
What was Gromyko's western nickname?	"Mr Nyet"
Which person did Gorbachev kick out of the Politburo on the first of July?	Grigory Romanov
Who became Chairman of the Council of Ministers in 1985?	Nikolai Ryzhkov
Who was Chairman of the Council of Ministers prior to Ryzhkov?	Nikolai Tikhonov
How old was Tikhonov when he stopped being Chairman?	79-year-old
Who was the new chairman of the State Planning Committee in 1985?	Nikolai Talyzin
What is an analogous office to Chairman of the Council of Ministers?	chairman of the State Planning Committee
What party was Helsinki-86 in disagreement with?	Communist
What group was the first to oppose the Soviet government publicly?	Helsinki-86
Who created the CTAG?	Linards Grantiņš, Raimonds Bitenieks, and Mārtiņš Bariss.
What is the English translation of the word Jeltoqsan?	December
Who was fired by Gorbachev causing riots?	Dinmukhamed Konayev
What position did Konayev hold in Kazakhstan prior to his removal?	First Secretary of the Communist Party
Who took the place of Konayev?	Gennady Kolbin
When were the first demonstrations in Kazakhstan to protest the removal and replacement of Konayev?	December 17, 1986
Who was demonstrating?	Kazakh students
How many people were estimated by authorities to have attended the riots?	3,000
How did the Kazakh SSR government say the two protesters were killed?	blows to the head
What were the attendance estimates from non governmental groups?	30,000 to 40,000
Who wrote about the KGB officer's testimony?	Mukhtar Shakhanov
Whose support did Gorbachev seek in order to increase liberties?	the people's
What party was Gorbachev in charge of?	Communist
What group wanted to stop reforms?	"conservatives."
When were the prisoners set free?	February 7, 1987,
Who released the prisoners in the 1950s?	Khrushchev's
What sort of prisoners were released?	political
Who demonstrated close to the Kremlin in July of 1978?	Crimean Tatars
Prior to 1987 when was the last large release of prisoners?	mid-1950s.
Who disagreed vocally about the demonstrations being permitted?	Yegor Ligachev
Who resigned in September of 1987?	Boris Yeltsin
What was Gorbachev's reaction to Yeltsin's resignation?	stunned
What did Yeltsin dislike about the reforms?	slow pace
Who took Yeltsin's side?	No one
Where did the demonstrators meet in June of 1987?	Freedom Monument
Where is Freedom Monument?	Riga
What did the protesters do?	laid flowers
Where did further protests take place?	Baltic States
Who were the protesters remembering?	Latvians
What was being protested in Estonia?	new phosphate mines
When did the phosphate mine protests begin?	spring 1987
What group was started by ex-political prisoners?	MRP-AEG group
Who was in charge of the MRP-AEG group?	Tiit Madisson
What was requested for Estonia in the proposal printed by the Edasi newspaper in 1987?	autonomy
When was the Yerevan demonstration?	October 17, 1987
How many people demonstrated?	about 3,000
What was the demonstrators' nationality?	Armenians
The protesters were unhappy with the pollution in what body of water?	Lake Sevan
Where did the protest march start?	Opera Plaza
What ws the final day of the 19th Party Conference?	July 1, 1988
What did Gorbachev hope to create?	new supreme legislative body
What was Gorbachev trying to separate?	party and state
What was the proposed legislative body called?	Congress of People's Deputies
What was the ideology of Gorbachev's opponents?	conservative
Whose laws would take precedence according to the declaration of national sovereignty?	Estonian
Who claimed Estonia's national resources?	Estonia's parliament
What was the name of the group that made its platform known on October 2?	the Popular Front
How many Azerbaijanis died in the Askeran clash?	two
When was the Askeran clash?	February 22, 1988
Who killed the two Azerbaijanis?	Karabakh police.
What was triggered by the radio broadcast of the deaths?	Sumgait Pogrom
How many were killed in the ensuing riots?	32
Who did Gorbachev make First Secretary of the Azerbaijan Communist Party in 1988?	Abdulrahman Vezirov
Who was First Secretary prior to Vezirov?	Kamran Baghirov
How many soldiers died on September 17?	two
People of what ethnicity were thrown out of Shusha?	Armenian
How long did the Lenin Square protest last?	18 days
Where were the first demonstrations in Armenia?	Yerevan
What is the capitol of Armenia?	Yerevan
How many people protested on February 23?	300,000,
What sort of strike was called?	transport
What percentage of Armenia's total population protested on February 25?	about a quarter
Who banned the Azerbaijani people from Armenia?	Nationalists
How many protesters died in the airport violence?	one
Who had been previously removed from Azerbaijan?	Armenians
Who took charge of Yerevan in November of 1988?	a military commandant
When did the Democratic Movement of Moldova start operating?	February 1988
Which monument was a popular meeting place?	Stephen the Great Monument
Where was the Stephen the Great Monument located?	Chişinău
What did the movement seek to make the official language of Moldova?	Romanian
What was Moldova's previous name?	Moldavia
What group was responsible for the April 25, 1988 protest?	Ukrainian Cultural Club
Where did the march happen?	Kiev's Khreschatyk Street
What did the marchers wish to commemorate?	Chernobyl nuclear disaster,
Which group held secret Milleneum of Christianity celebrations?	Ukrainian Catholics
In what city did the Ukrainian Cultural Club have its Millennium celebration?	Kiev
How many people attended the Lviv rally?	50,000
Where was the dispersal attempt made?	in front of Druzhba Stadium
Who tried to stop the rally?	Authorities
Who led the Millennium celebration in Zarvanytsia?	Pavlo Vasylyk
Who wanted to break up the celebration?	militia
What is the English translation of Zelenyi Svit?	Green World
What sort of issues were Zenlenyi Svit and Noosfera concerned with?	ecological
What sort of organization is Spadschnyna?	cultural heritage
What did people gather to observe on December 10th?	International Human Rights Day
When did The Partyja BDF start?	1988
Who found mass graves?	Zianon Pazniak
What is Pazniak's occupation?	historian
Where were the graves found?	Kurapaty
In addition to the police who did the BDF often have conflicts with?	KGB
What was elected in 1989?	new Congress of People's Deputies
Who was questioned on live TV?	Communist leadership
Where was the Communist government overthrown first?	Warsaw
When did the Berlin Wall get torn down?	1989
What did Eastern European people want to do with communism?	abandon it
What percentage of people voted on March 26?	89.8%
How many constituencies had run-off elections?	76
How many CPSU endorsement having candidates lost to independents?	more than 300
Who used the legislative session to debate and criticize?	reformers
Who made up the Inter-Regional Deputies Group?	Russian nationalists and liberals.
When did Yeltsin acquire a seat on the Supreme Soviet?	May 29
What did the Communist Party lose on October 25, 1989 with regards to elections?	special seats
Who voted to get rid of the special seats?	the Supreme Soviet
When did congress meet to ratify the amendment to remove special election seats?	December 12–25
What year did the Prague Spring take place?	1968
What happened to Prague and Hungary's attempts at independence?	suppressed by military force
Under what doctrine was the Soviet Union required to intervene in the Warsaw Pact states?	Brezhnev Doctrine
Other than being expensive what was wrong with the Brezhnev Doctrine?	oppressive
What is the nickname for Gorbachev's new doctrine?	Sinatra Doctrine
How many people were involved in the Baltic Chain?	estimated 2 million
How long was the chain?	600 kilometres
What states did the chain extend over?	Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
What anniversary did the chain take place on?	50th anniversary of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
What part of Europe was split up by the pact?	Eastern
Who was in charge of Lithuania's Communist Party in 1989	Algirdas Brazauskas
What party did  Lithuania's Communist Party break apart from?	Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Who was in charge of the loyalist faction?	Mykolas Burokevičius,
What place's control was the Communist Party of Lithuania out from under after the split?	Moscow's
Who visited with the hope of bringing back the Communist Party of Lithuania to the Soviet Party?	Gorbachev
When was Abulfaz Elchibey elected to Chairman of the Popular Front?	July 16, 1989
How many protesters filled Lenin Square on August 19th?	600,000
What did the protesters want?	release of political prisoners
What did the Popular Front do to Armenian railways?	blockade
What shortages were caused by the blockade?	petrol and food
How much freight into Armenia originated in Azerbaijan?	85 percent
When was the sovereignty law passed?	September 25
What in Jalilibad was taken over by the Popular Front?	local party offices
What did the protesters want Georgia to leave?	Soviet Union
What did the protesters hope to see become a part of Georgia?	Abkhazia
Who attacked the protest?	troops
How many people died in the April 9 attack?	20
What happened to Georgian politics as a result of the attack?	radicalized
What is commemorated on January 22 in Ukraine?	Ukrainian Independence Day
What is a moleben?	religious service
Where was the moleben held?	in front of St. George's Cathedral.
What were people protesting in Kiev during the last part of February?	election laws
Who did the protesters want to resign?	Volodymyr Scherbytsky
What was Scherbytsky's nickname?	the mastodon of stagnation
Who visited the Ukraine while the protests were taking place?	Gorbachev
How many people attended the service in Lviv?	between 20,000 and 30,000
What ideology's victims were being honored by the Memorial Society?	Stalinism
How many people from the pre-election meeting in Lviv were detained?	nearly 300
Members of what ideology were more heavily elected to the union Congress of People's Deputies?	conservatives
How many deputies were elected?	225
How many people attended the Lviv pre-election meetings?	25,000
How long did the warning strike last?	one-hour
Where did the strike take place?	eight local factories and institutions
Prior to the warning strike when was the last labor strike in Lviv?	1944
At what sight was the Bykivnia meeting held?	mass grave
What were the hunger strikers hoping to draw attention to?	plight of their Church.
When did the Lviv regional Memorial Society have its first conference?	May 27, 1989
How many people attended the services in western Ukraine?	an estimated 100,000
What were the protesters on September 2 demonstrating against?	draft election law
How many protesters were there in Lviv?	50,000
Who was put in charge of the People's Movement of Ukraine?	Ivan Drach
Where did the People's Movement hold its founding congress?	Kiev
How many people demonstrated on October 1?	10,000 to 15,000
Who attacked the protest?	militia
Where did the attack occur?	in front of Lviv's Druzhba Stadium
What was happening in the stadium at the time?	concert
Prior to the October 20 synod, when was the last one held in Lviv?	1930s
Where were the strikes?	Lviv
What were the strikes in protest against?	police brutality
How many factories had strikes on October 26?	twenty
What was made Ukraine's official language in 1990?	Ukrainian
Who decided Ukraine's official language?	Ukrainian Supreme Soviet
For what reason would the Russian be spoken?	communication between ethnic groups
Where was the January 2 memorial service?	Demianiv Laz
When was The Shevchenko Ukrainian Language Society made official?	mid-November
The three human rights activists reburied November 19th were prisoners where?	Gulag Camp No. 36
Where was Gulag Camp No. 36 located?	Perm in the Ural Mountains
Where were the activists reburied?	Baikove Cemetery.
Who met with Gorbachev on November 22?	Pope John Paul II
What did the Belorussians wish to be cleaned up?	Chernobyl disaster site
Where did the Chernobyl Disaster occur?	Ukraine
When did the Chernobyl disaster happen?	1986
What symbol did the protesters wear on their arms?	radioactivity symbols
How was the weather during the protest?	torrential rain
Who went to the Fergana Valley to restore order?	Soviet troops
Where is the Fergana Valley located?	southeast of the Uzbek capital
Who were targeted by the local Uzbeks?	members of the Meskhetian minority
Who was fired from First Secretary position by Gorbachev?	Rafiq Nishonov
Who replaced Nishonov?	Karimov
Where was the fatal June 19th riots?	Zhanaozen
Who were the rioters?	young men
What did the rioters try to take over?	police station and a water-supply station
How many towns had riots of their own following the initial riots?	five
What was attacked in Mangishlak?	police station
Which two groups saw increasing ethnic conflicts in 1988?	Armenians and Azerbaijanis
Who was killed in the January 9 riots?	four Soviet soldiers
How many people died in the Soviet response to the clashes?	more than 130
What were the January incidents called?	Black January
How many Soviet troops occupied Baku?	26,000
What party's candidates were murdered in the September 30 elections?	Popular Front
How many members were from opposition parties?	45
How many total members were there?	350
Who was elected to be Chairman in May?	Mutalibov
How many miles long was the human chain?	300
Who organized this chain?	Rukh
What country's independence were the chain members celebrating?	Ukrainian
When had the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church been broken up by the Soviets?	1946
In 1990 which party had most of the election victories?	the Democratic Bloc
Who was voted to get their cathedral back in 1990?	Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church
What party was formed from the dissolved Ukrainian Helsinki Union?	Ukrainian Republican Party
What was the first day that the new parliament met?	May 15
Who became the new patriarch of the UAOC in 1990?	Metropolitan Mstyslav
How long did it take Parliament to accept Ivashko's resignation?	a week
Who was elected to be the new deputy general secretary of the Communist Part of the Soviet Union in July?	Volodymyr Ivashko
How many Parliament members voted against the Declaration on State Sovereignty of Ukraine?	four
Who would succeed Ivashko as the chairman of Parliament?	Leonid Kravchuk
What did Parliament vote to shut down in August?	Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant
Where was the August 9 liturgy held?	St. George Cathedral.
Prior to the September 8th rally when was the last Youth for Christ rally held?	1933
How many people attended the Youth for Christ rally?	40,000
Where was the UAOC protest held?	near St. Sophia’s Cathedral
Who were in the cathedral at the time of the protest?	Russian Orthodox Church Patriarch Aleksei and Metropolitan Filaret
What had Aleksei and Filaret been up to at the time of the protest?	liturgy
What was attacked by Soviet troops on January 13?	Vilnius TV Tower
Where was the TV Tower located?	Lithuania
What were the Soviets hoping to stop?	independence movement
How many civilians died in the attack?	Fourteen
What was attacked by Russians on July 31?	Lithuanian border post in Medininkai
What was Gorbachev attempting to decentralize?	Soviet Union
What was supposed to be signed on August 20?	New Union Treaty
Who supported the treaty?	Central Asian republics,
What would have maintained power if the treaty was signed?	Communist Party
What did radicals want to change the economy to?	market economy
What were they prepared to have happen to the Soviet Union in order to get a market economy?	disintegration
What was Yeltsin president of?	the Russian Federation,
Whose control were regional authorities hoping to do away with?	Moscow’s
Who arrived to protect the White House?	Muscovites
Who did the organizers want to arrest?	Yeltsin
Where was Yeltsin during the coup?	atop a tank
What was Yeltsin doing on the tank?	speech-making
What TV channel carried the broadcast of the coup?	CNN
Where was the secret meeting of the leaders?	Belarus
What was signed at the secret meeting in Balarus?	Belavezha Accords
When was the meeting held?	December 8
What was formed to replace the Soviet Union?	the Commonwealth of Independent States
What was coming to an end?	the USSR
When were the Belavezha Accords ratified?	December 12
Who ratified the Accords?	the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR
Who was recalled?	Russian deputies
Who showed signs that he was considering resigning his position?	Gorbachev
Which republic did not sign the Alma-Ata Protocol?	Georgia
How many of the former republics had representatives sign the Protocol?	11
What did the Protocol establish?	CIS
What was dissolved by the Protocol?	Union
Which news organization did Gorbachev talk to about his resignation plans?	CBS
When did Gorbachev resign?	December 25, 1991
Who was given control after Gorbachev left?	Yeltsin
What was Russia's new legal name?	Russian Federation
What was the Russian Federations previous legal name?	Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
What went down after Gorbachev departed from the Kremlin?	Soviet flag
What replaced the Soviet flag?	Russian tricolor
When did Gorbachev make his final Kremlin exit?	December 25, 1991, at 7:32 p.m. Moscow time
What was declared as having ceased to exist?	the Soviet Union
What body also stopped existing following a vote by itself to end itself?	upper chamber of the Union's Supreme Soviet,
Which country took over the Soviet Union's UN membership?	Russia
What made Russia the successor state to the USSR?	Alma-Ata Protocol
Who wrote the letter to the UN secretary general informing them that Russia would be replacing the USSR?	Yeltsin
What was the date on the Yeltsin letter?	December 24, 1991
When did the UN accept the statement?	December 31, 1991
Who was set up as Patriarch of Kiev and all Ukraine on the 18th of November?	Mstyslav
Who gave Mstyslav this title?	Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Who was the Canadian consul-general to Kiev?	Nestor Gayowsky
What country made John Stepanchuk its consul-general to Kiev?	United States
How long lasting was the pact between Kravchuk and Yeltsin?	10-year
Who was the person that tried Jesus?	Pontius Pilate
How long was Jesus hung for?	six hours
What did the sign say on top of Jesus' cross?	Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews
What was done to make sure Jesus was dead?	they pierced his side with a spear
How many statements did Jesus make on the cross?	seven statements
What is one of the historical certain facts about Jesus?	baptism of Jesus
Do non-Christians agree that the Crucifixion happened?	the crucifixion of Jesus is as certain as any historical fact can be
Is the exact reason known that Jesus got Crucified for?	the exact reasons for the death of Jesus are hard to determine
Who said the Crucifixion of Jesus is firmly established.	Eddy
Who said the Baptism of Jesus was Univeral Assent?	James Dunn
Are all sources of the crucification literary?	almost all ancient sources relating to crucifixion are literary
What evidence was found that Crucifixion did happen?	the 1968 archeological discovery
Who was the crucified man discovered in an archaeological find?	ben Hagkol
When was Ben Hagkol crucified?	about 70 AD
What institution holds a heel bone with a spike inserted?	Israel Museum
What holds the records of the death of Jesus?	four canonical gospels
What part of the Bible references the death of Jesus?	New Testament epistles
How many times did Jesus predict his own death?	three
What part of Jesus' life is detailed in these gospels?	Jesus' arrest, trial, crucifixion, burial, and accounts of resurrection
How detailed is the description of Jesus' death?	hour-by-hour account
Where was Jesus arrested?	Gethsemane
What did Jesus do before he was arrested?	the Last Supper
How many Apostles were there at the Last Supper?	Twelve Apostles
How was Jesus tortured before he was crucified?	flogged
What was placed on Jesus' head?	crowned with thorns
What was Jesus offered to drink after his arrest?	wine mixed with gall
Where was Jesus Crucified?	hung between two convicted thieves
How many hours did Jesus endure Crucifixion?	six hours
How many accounts are there of Jesus' last words?	seven statements altogether
Who removed Jesus from the cross?	Joseph of Arimathea
What detail of Jesus's Crucifiction was only found in Matthew's Gospel?	an earthquake
Which gospel mentioned the time of Crucifiction?	Mark
Who did Jesus talk to in the Gospel of Luke?	words to the women who were mourning
What gospel talks about breaking Jesus' legs?	John
What prophecy was fulfilled by the piercing of Jesus' side?	Old Testament prophecy
Which Epistle details the raising of Jesus?	First Epistle to the Corinthians
Which writing detailed Jesus' appearance before ascension?	canonical Gospels
How long did Jesus stay with the Apostles per the Acts of the Apostles?	forty days
What day is accounted in the Gospel of Luke as the ascension?	Easter Sunday
Who wrote both accounts of the Crucifixion and ascension?	St. Luke
Who was crucified with Jesus per Mark?	two rebels
How does Mark say Jesus' life ends?	Jesus calls out to God, then gives a shout and dies
what natural disaster is mention when Jesus died?	an earthquake
What does Luke say one of the rebels does?	promises that he (Jesus) and the criminal will be together in paradise
How does Luke make Jesus seem at his Crucifixion?	impassive
Where can an early non-Christian reference be found to the Crucifixion?	Mara Bar-Serapion's letter to his son
What is the author of the letter assumed to be?	pagan
What does the letter reference?	retributions that followed the unjust treatment of three wise men
Other than Jesus, who was one of the wisemen?	Socrates
Does everyone agree with the content of the letter?	others place less value in the letter
What day is presumed the Crucifixion happened?	Friday
Why do some scholars propose a Thursday is possible?	a "double sabbath" caused by an extra Passover sabbath
Why do some other scholars argue that it happened on a Wednesday?	on the grounds of the mention of "three days and three nights" in Matthew
How long was Jesus said to be in the tomb?	three days and three nights
Was Jesus in the tomb exactly 72 hours?	references to a resurrection on the third day do not require three literal nights
What time was the crucifiction per Mark?	9 a.m.
What time did Jesus die per Mark?	3 p.m.
Why do scholars say the times are different depending on the gospel it's written in?	based on the use of Roman timekeeping in John but not in Mark
What is another reason the times differ so much?	no standardization of timepieces, or exact recording of hours and minutes was available
How close was time guessed in the day of the Gospels?	approximated to the closest three-hour period
Who described an interaction between Jesus on the cross and women?	Luke's gospel
What did Jesus say to women in the crowd?	do not weep for me
Where are the words found in the Gospel?	Lk. 23:28-31
What followed Jesus around?	crowd of mourners
Where was Jesus Crucified?	Calvary
Where was the location of the Crucifixion detailed?	all four Gospels
What was one reason Calvary was chosen?	a place of public execution
What is rumored to be found in Calvary?	skulls of abandoned victims
What is a reason the place was called Calvary?	the name was derived from the physical contour
Matthew described that who was present at the Crucifixion?	many women
The three gospels speak of the presence of which priests?	the chief priests
How many people were crucified with Jesus?	two robbers crucified, one on Jesus' right and one on his left
Who kept watch over Jesus?	the soldiers
Name one other group present at the Crucifixion?	acquaintances
What kind of cross is generally believed that Jesus was crucified on?	traditional two-beamed cross
What cross do Jehovah Witnesses claim Jesus was crucified on?	single upright stake
What causes the different accounts of the cross used?	The Greek and Latin words used in the earliest Christian writings are ambiguous
What latin word was used to describe the cross used?	crux
Why was there doubt about the Latin word?	crux was also applied to objects other than a cross
What Epistle described the cross?	Epistle of Barnabas
Who says with certainty that the cross was made out of two beams?	Justin Martyr
Why was that type of cross important?	a symbol of the suffering
How many ends did the cross supposedly have?	five extremities
How is one attached to the cross?	fixed by the nails
How many nails were suggested they used for the crucifixion?	three nails
According to some sources, what is theorized to be the maximum nails used?	14 nails
What adds to the confusion of the number of nails used?	artistic depictions of the crucifixion
What do all artworks have in common regarding the crucifixion?	Nails are almost always depicted
Jesuits claim how many nails were used?	three nails
Where were the nails placed?	the hands, or the wrists
Who claims the hands were pierced?	the Greek
The Romans tried to affix by avoiding what?	without fracturing any bones
What other location is offered by the Greek?	forearm
What other way to affix to the cross is there?	Ropes
What was said to be used as a platform for crucifixion?	a hypopodium
Why was a platform used?	the hands may not have been able to support the weight
Who considered this topic in the 17th century?	Rasmus Bartholin
Who performed crucifixion experiments in the 20th century to test theories?	Frederick Zugibe
Who also used suspension as a form of punishment?	Nazis
What Psalm gives the words of Jesus on the cross?	Psalm 22
What contradiction is found in this Psalm?	verse is cited in Aramaic rather than the Hebrew
What was the psalm said to be in Jesus' time?	a proverbial saying in common usage
How do the other gospels describe Jesus' last words?	theologically correct and reassuring
How does the sentence appear to historians?	a genuine cry
As what was the event mistaken by some pagans?	a solar eclipse
Why was a solar eclipse impossible?	the full moon
Which Greek historian wrote about these natural occurrences?	Greek historian Phlegon
Who reigned Rome during the Crucifixion of Jesus?	Tiberius Caesar
What other event supposedly took place that shook people?	earthquakes
Which historian was referenced for the reports?	Thallus
What event did Thallus describe?	an eclipse of the sun
What day do Hebrews celebrate Passover?	the 14th day
When does the passion of Jesus fall?	the day before the passover
Where were these events documented?	the Roman archives
What is recently considered the type of eclipse that occurred?	lunar
How long would a lunar eclipse be visible?	thirty minutes
What person possibly made a mistake while copying text?	a scribe wrongly amending a text
Which historian says this opinion is indefensible?	David Henige
What inconsistency would be found in this explanation?	the lunar eclipse would not have been visible during daylight hours
Who created the account of Jesus?	author of the Mark Gospel
Who amended the account at a later date?	Luke
What prompts darkness over the land in old literary works?	the death of kings and other major figures
What ethnicity are these literary works mostly?	Jewish
Who describes the idea of an eclipse as totally wrong?	Géza Vermes
Who wrote The Crucifixion of Jesus?	Frederick Zugibe
What did Frederick Zugibe study in detail for this book?	the likely circumstances of the death of Jesus
How did Zugibe try to prove his theories?	carried out a number of experiments over several years
What kind of experiments did Zugibe run?	experiments in which volunteers with specific weights were hanging
What specifics were recorded in his experiments?	amount of pull and the corresponding pain
What do Christians believe regarding Jesus' death?	instrumental in restoring humankind to relationship with God
How are people united with God?	through faith in Jesus’ substitutionary death
What specific fact do Christians believe about death?	eternal life in heaven after the body’s death
Jesus's Resurrection fills believer with what?	confidence of eternal life
What feeling usually fills a believer regarding the resurrection?	joy
What book details the submission of Jesus to being crucified?	agent Christology
Why did Jesus accept Crucifixion.	sake of eventual victory
What theme is central is the Gospel of John in resurrection?	salvific theme
How is Resurrection detailed in the book of Revelations?	lamb slain but standing
What is another name for Jesus given?	The Lamb of God
Who's Christology focuses on the death and Resurrection?	Paul's Christology
How is the crucifixion related to the resurrection per Paul?	directly related
What term does Paul use for the Gospels?	the cross of Christ
Paul claims the Resurrection was needed for what reason?	based on the plan of God
How does Paul view the Resurrection of Jesus?	power of the cross
What did John Calvin claim Jesus could have done?	successfully argued for his innocence
Why did Jesus submit to crucifixion?	obedience to the Father
The Eastern Church believes what regarding the death and ressurection?	"pre-eternally" determined by the Father
What did Jesus's death accomplish per the Eastern Church?	redeem humanity from the disgrace caused by the fall of Adam
What is the blood of the lamb?	had a cleansing nature, similar to baptismal water
What does Jesus' death and Resurrection support?	how salvation is granted to humanity
How important is Jesus' death to modern theology?	central importance
Did Jesus sacrifice himself without fighting?	Jesus willingly sacrificed himself
Why did Jesus sacrifice himself?	an act of perfect obedience
What church is the sacrifice important to?	the Roman Catholic church
Who was present under the cross?	Virgin Mary
What symbol is popular in Marian Art?	Marian Cross
Which pope claims Mary was present at Jesus' Crucifixion?	Pope John Paul II
Who painted the Mond Crucifixion.	Raphael
Who was responsible for the art names "His Entombment"?	Caravaggio
On which coast of Florida is Miami located?	Atlantic
Miami is located in which Florida county?	Miami-Dade County
Where does Miami fall among the most populous urban areas in the United States?	eighth
Which city is the only one with a larger population than Miami in the southeastern United States?	Washington, D.C.
What is the approximate population of Miami's metro area?	5.5 million
Which Florida county is Miami located in?	Miami-Dade
How does Miami rank as a populous metropolis compared with other Southeastern states in the U.S.?	second most populous
What is the population of Miami?	430,332
How is the size of Miami's urban area rated compared with other U.S. urban areas?	fourth-largest
Which coast is Miami located on?	Atlantic
What is the approximate population of the Miami metro area?	5.5 million
In what geographic portion of Florida is Miami located?	southeastern
What county is Miami located in?	Miami-Dade County
Where does Miami rank among American cities by population?	44th
How many people live in Miami?	430,332
What classification did the World Cities Study Group give to Miami?	Alpha−World City
Where did Miami rank among cities around the world in regard to finance?	33rd
What did Forbes call Miami in 2008?	America's Cleanest City
What is a nickname given to Miami?	Capital of Latin America
Where does Miami rank in terms of US Spanish-speaking populations?	second
What does downtown Miami possess more of than any other US city?	international banks
Along with cruise lines, in what traffic does Miami's port rank first?	passenger
What is called the "Cruise Capital of the World"?	Port of Miami
How long has Miami been the world's top cruise passenger port?	two decades
Along with hospitals, medical centers and biotechnology industries, what is notably present in the Civic Center?	research institutes
Where was Julia Tuttle born?	Cleveland
Prior to the naming of Miami, what was the area around Miami called?	Biscayne Bay Country
When did the Great Freeze occur?	1894–95
What railroad was owned by Henry Flagler?	Florida East Coast Railway
Who was "the mother of Miami"?	Julia Tuttle
In the early 1900s, what percentage of Miami's population was of African origin?	40
What was NW Fifth Avenue previously called?	Avenue J
Where did a portion of Miami's black population migrate from in the early 1900s?	Bahamas
Who was a notable chief of the Miami police?	H. Leslie Quigg
To what controversial organization did a Miami chief of police belong?	Ku Klux Klan
For what reason did H. Leslie Quigg kill a black man?	speaking directly to a white woman
What was the occupation of the African-American man killed by Quigg?	bellboy
In what year did Fidel Castro take over Cuba?	1959
From what country did people notably emigrate to southern Florida in the 1980s and 90s?	Haiti
What notable hurricane occurred between the 1980s and 1990s?	Andrew
What is the largest city in the United States where a majority of the population speaks Spanish?	El Paso, Texas
Miami is the US city with the largest population of what ethnic group?	Cuban-American
Where are the Everglades in relation to Miami?	east
To travel from Biscayne Bay to Miami, in what direction would one move?	west
What is the northern terminus of Biscayne Bay?	Lake Okeechobee
In kilometers, how far is the Gulf Stream from Miami's coast?	24
In meters, what is the average height above sea level of the Miami area?	1.8
What is another name for Miami limestone?	Miami oolite
How many meters thick is the bedrock under Miami at its maximum?	15
What Stage occurred approximately 130,000 years ago?	Sangamonian
How many meters did the Sangamonian Stage raise sea levels compared to their present level?	8
What event caused sea levels to decrease approximately 100,000 years ago?	Wisconsin glaciation
Along with Miami Springs, where is the highest point of the Biscayne Aquifer?	Hialeah
The Biscayne Aquifer stretches from Palm Beach County to where?	Florida Bay
After digging how many meters is one sure to reach running water in Miami?	5 to 6
What is limited by Miami's high water table?	underground construction
Along with West, Downtown and North, what is the other notable area of Miami?	South
By cardinal direction, what part of the city is referred to as Downtown?	eastern
Along with Port Miami, Watson Island and Brickell, what area is in Downtown Miami?	Virginia Key
On what street is the highest concentration of international banks in the US?	Brickell Avenue
Where is South Beach in relation to Downtown?	East
Along with Coconut Grove and Coral Way, what is notably present in southern Miami?	The Roads
When was Coral Way constructed?	1922
What does Coral Way connect to Coral Gables?	Downtown
In what year did the establishment of Coconut Grove occur?	1825
What part of Coconut Grove houses the city hall of Miami?	Dinner Key
What notable theater is present in Overtown?	Lyric
After whom is the performing arts center in Midtown named?	Adrienne Arsht
In what part of Miami is Midtown?	northern
What is the name of the architectural style originating in 1950s Miami?	MiMo
What northern Miami neighborhood is named for a Caribbean country?	Little Haiti
What is Miami's Köppen climate classification?	Am
What type of weather does Miami have in the summer?	hot and humid
In degrees Celsius, what is the average January temperature in Miami?	19.6
In degrees Fahrenheit, what is the normal range of high temperatures in Miami?	70–77
In degrees Celsius, what temperature does Miami rarely see?	2
When is the beginning of Miami's wet season?	May
What month sees the end of the wet season in Miami?	October
In degrees Celsius, what is the range of temperatures during the wet season?	29–35
How many millimeters of rain fall on Miami annually?	1,420
What is the typical August dew point in degrees Fahrenheit?	73.7
Where does Miami rank in population among US cities?	42nd
Along with Palm Beach and Miami-Dade, what county is part of the Miami-Dade metropolitan area?	Broward
How many people live in the Miami-Dade metropolitan area?	5.5 million
Where does Miami-Dade rank in population among metropolitan areas in the US?	seventh
What fraction of the southern Florida population lives in Miami?	one-thirteenth
What percentage of Miami-Dade's population was non-Hispanic white in 1960?	80
What percentage of the Miami population in 1970 was black?	22.7
What was the largest ethnic group in 1970 Miami?	Hispanic
Along with Downtown and Edgewater, what area of Miami has notably seen increasing population densities?	Brickell
Starting in what decade did immigration from outside the United States begin to have a significant influence on Miami's population?	1960s
Approximately how many multinationals have their Latin American operation headquarters in Miami?	1400
Why do so many multinationals have their Latin American headquarters in Miami?	proximity to Latin America
Along with Celebrity, Carnival, Norwegian, Oceania and Royal Caribbean, what cruise line is based in Miami?	Seabourn
Along with UniMÁS and Univisión, what Spanish language television station is headquartered in Miami?	Telemundo
As of 2011, what percentage of original Telemundo programming was filmed in Miami?	85
Along with Sony Music Latin, what music recording corporation is located in Miami?	Universal Music Latin Entertainment
What is the name of the business that produces a significant portion of Telemundo's original programming?	Telemundo Television Studios
How many 400+ foot skyscrapers have been built or are in the process of being built in Miami since 2001?	50
What US cities have more impressive skylines than Miami's?	New York City and Chicago
What is Miami's world rank in terms of how impressive its skyline is?	19th
Of the fourteen tallest skyscrapers in Florida, how many are in Miami?	thirteen
What is the tallest skyscraper in Florida?	Four Seasons Hotel & Tower
When did the Florida land boom occur?	1920s
What year saw the crash of the Miami housing market?	2007
Where does the area around Miami rank nationally in terms of foreclosures?	8th
Along with its political corruption, why did Forbes call Miami the country's second most miserable city in 2011?	high foreclosure rate
In what year did Forbes call Miami the country's most miserable city?	2012
What is Florida's busiest airport?	Miami International
What is the busiest cruise port in the world?	Port of Miami
In what year did Miami play host to the negotiations concerning the Free Trade Area of the Americas?	2003
What street is central to the financial district of Miami?	Brickell Avenue
Along with the Caribbean, from where does a significant amount of cargo enter MIA?	South America
How many tourists come to Miami each year?	38 million
How much money do tourists spend in Miami every year?	$17.1 billion
What neighborhood is home to the Art Deco District?	South Beach
Who sponsors Fashion Week Miami?	Mercedes-Benz
Along with nightclubs, beaches and shopping, what notable attraction exists in the Art Deco District?	historical buildings
As of 2004, what city was the poorest in the United States?	Detroit
What was the second poorest US city in 2004?	El Paso
In 2004, what city ranked third poorest in America?	Miami
In what year did Miami's government declare bankruptcy?	2001
In terms of purchasing power, where did Miami rank among world cities in a 2009 UBS study?	fifth
What is the largest performing arts center in the US?	Lincoln Center
What organization calls the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts home?	Florida Grand Opera
What is the largest venue in the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts?	Ziff Ballet Opera House
Where is Lincoln Center located?	New York City
What venue in Miami is notable for hosting outdoor music?	Bayfront Park Amphitheater
In what year did the Bee Gees relocate to Miami?	1975
In what decade was disco popular?	1970s
What band performed the song "Conga"?	Gloria Estefan and the Miami Sound Machine
What group performed the song "Hot Number"?	Foxy
What music label showcased KC and the Sunshine Band?	TK Records
Along with Electro and disco, what genre of music influenced Freestyle?	hip-hop
What genre of music does Uffie perform?	electro
Where did the band Nonpoint form?	Fort Lauderdale
What is Ana Cristina's ethnicity?	Cuban American
Along with Cat Power, what indie/folk musician is based in Miami?	Iron & Wine
Who was the Warsaw Ballroom's house DJ?	david padilla
By what other name is John Benetiz known?	JellyBean Benetiz
In what area of Miami is there a notable secondhand turntable market?	SoBe
What is a notable restaurant in Little Havana?	Versailles
Along with Benihana and Burger King, what chain restaurant is headquartered in Miami?	Tony Roma's
In what decade did Cuban immigrants introduce their cuisine to Miami?	1960s
What ocean is Miami adjacent to?	Atlantic
Along with the Miami River, near what body of water are Miami seafood restaurants notably located?	Biscayne Bay
What is another term for Miami's dialect?	Miami accent
What area of the country has a similar dialect to Miami?	Mid-Atlantic
What non-English language influences the Miami dialect?	Spanish
What sport do the Miami Heat play?	Basketball
What is the nickname of Miami's NFL team?	Dolphins
What professional hockey team is based in Miami?	Florida Panthers
At what tournament in Miami is professional tennis played?	Sony Ericsson
Where do NASCAR races in Miami take place?	Homestead-Miami Speedway
How many gardens and parks are in Miami?	80
In what park is the American Airlines Arena located?	Bicentennial
Due to the presence of coral reefs, what activities are popular in Biscayne Bay?	snorkeling and scuba diving
In what neighborhood is Bicentennial Park located?	Downtown
Why can outdoor activities take place all year in Miami?	tropical weather
Under what government system does Miami operate?	mayor-commissioner
How many members are on the city commission?	five
Who is the Mayor of Miami?	Tomás Regalado
What is the street address of Miami City Hall?	3500 Pan American Drive
In what neighborhood is Miami City Hall located?	Coconut Grove
When did El Nuevo Herald leave Miami?	2013
In what community is the Miami Herald currently located?	Doral
Among television markets in Florida, where dies Miami rank?	second
What is the largest newspaper in Miami?	Miami Herald
What is Miami's largest newspaper written in Spanish?	El Nuevo Herald
In what neighborhood of Miami is Miami New Times based?	Midtown
What neighborhood houses the headquarters of Miami Today?	Brickell
Approximately how many people read The Miami Herald?	million
For what university is The Beacon the student newspaper?	Florida International
What is the name of the student newspaper at Barry University?	The Buccaneer
When did Univisión announce it was building a production studio in Miami?	2009
What was the name of the production studio built in Miami by Univisión?	Univisión Studios
Where will the programs made at Univisión Studios be broadcast?	all of Univisión Communications' television networks
How many passengers use Miami International Airport annually?	35 million
What airline uses Miami International as its biggest international gateway?	American Airlines
What airport is the largest international port of entry for overseas air travelers in the United States?	John F. Kennedy International Airport
From Miami International Airport, to approximately how many non-American cities can one fly nonstop?	seventy
Along with "Cargo Gateway of the Americas," what is another nickname for PortMiami?	"Cruise Capital of the World"
How many passengers used PortMiami in 2007?	3,787,410
How many tons of cargo arrived in PortMiami in 2007?	7.8 million
What North American port sees the largest amount of imported and exported cargo?	Port of South Louisiana
How many square kilometers is PortMiami?	2
What is the name of Miami's heavy-rail system?	Metrorail
How many miles long is Metrorail?	24.4
How many stations does Metrorail have?	23
How many lines does Metromover have?	three
How much does it cost to use Metromover?	free
What year was to see the completion of the Miami Intermodal Center?	2011
When was Phase II of the Miami Center Station supposed to enter service?	2013
Approximately how many people were intended to use Miami Intermodal Center?	150,000
What airport is Miami Intermodal Center next to?	Miami International
What part of 2012 was to have seen Phase I of Miami Central Station begin?	spring
Along with the Silver Star, what Amtrak line runs to Miami?	Silver Meteor
From Miami, to where does the Silver Star run?	New York City
In what city is the Miami Amtrak Station?	Hialeah
In what year was the Miami Central Station originally supposed to have been completed?	2012
After the first delay, in what year was the Miami Central Station supposed to open?	2014
Along with Orlando, what city would have been connected to Miami via Florida High Speed Rail?	Tampa
Who was the governor of Florida in 2011?	Rick Scott
In what year did All Aboard Florida begin?	2014
From South Florida, where will All Aboard Florida stretch to?	Orlando International Airport
What company is responsible for All Aboard Florida?	Florida East Coast Railway
What company was previously headquartered in the Downtown Macy's?	Burdine's
What is another name for Tamiami Trail?	SW 8th St
In what neighborhood of Miami is the corner of Miami Avenue and Flagler Street?	Downtown
What is Miami's street plan called?	Miami Grid
If a street is west of Miami Avenue and north of Flagler Street, what will necessarily be in its address?	NW
Along with Virginia Key, what does the Rickenbacker Causeway connect to Brickell?	Key Biscayne
What causeway connects South Beach with Downtown?	MacArthur
Which Miami causeway has the smallest size?	Broad
What causeway is furthest to the south?	Rickenbacker
How many major causeways are in Miami?	six
What cannot travel on Downtown Miami streets during "Bike Miami"?	automobiles
How many people participated in Bike Miami in October of 2009?	3,000
Who was a recent mayor of Miami?	Manny Diaz
Along with Downtown, in what neighborhood of Miami does Bike Miami take place?	Brickell
In what month in 2008 did Bike Miami start?	November
What kinds of governed nations may not have a specific, individual high court?	Civil law states
What is an example of a highest court not being specifically called a Supreme Court?	the High Court of Australia
To which body can decisions made by this specific high court be appealed?	the Privy Council
What Canadian courts also are not specifically the highest courts in that country?	the Supreme Courts of several Canadian provinces/territories
Countries with more than one supreme court may divide their primacy by what factors?	different geographical extents, or which are restricted to particular areas of law
What is an example of the highest court in a federal system of government?	the Supreme Court of the United States
What are some countries that have a separate supreme court to decide constitutional matters?	Austria, France, Germany, Luxemburg, Portugal, Spain and South Africa
A court system with a hierarchy of different administrative courts occurs in what kind of legal system?	a civil law system
What term describes a system where the supreme court's decisions are binding over the lower courts?	stare decisis
What jurisdictions does this system not apply to?	civil law jurisdictions
In a civil law jurisdiction, rulings by a supreme court are only binding for which decisions?	the immediate case before it
Even in civil law jurisdictions, decisions by supreme courts establish what?	a very strong precedent
What is the legal term for the precedence established by multiple court rulings?	jurisprudence constante
When was Canada's Supreme Court first established?	1875
Canada's Supreme Court didn't actually become that country's highest court until when?	1949
If a provincial case is appealed, how is the Supreme Court's decision applied?	The court's decisions are final and binding
Before 1949, Supreme Court decisions in Canada could be appealed to what body?	the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
When did Britain formally surrender sovreignty over Hong Kong?	1997
When Hong Kong was a colony of Great Britain, which body was the highest court of appeal?	the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC)
Where is the JCPC located?	London, United Kingdom
When was the Court of Final Appeal established?	1997
The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress is seated in what city?	Beijing
On what date was India's Supreme Court established?	January 28, 1950
What article of India's Constitution makes decisions by their Supreme Court binding on lower courts?	Article 141
India's Supreme Court has ultimate power to determine interpretations of what?	the Constitution
When the Supreme Court ensures that lower courts have properly applied the law it is called what?	judicial review
In addition to national laws, India's Supreme Court may also interpret what regulations?	local bylaws
What is the highest ranking court in Ireland?	The Supreme Court
Ireland's highest court has the power to determine whether laws are allowed by what document?	the constitution
Who is the highest judge in Ireland's Supreme Court?	the Chief Justice
Besides chief justice, how many other judges sit on Ireland's Supreme Court?	seven other judges
Where is Ireland's Supreme Court seated?	the Four Courts in Dublin
Where is Israel's Supreme Court located?	Jerusalem
Israel's Supreme Court fulfills what two major functions?	both an appellate court and the high court of justice
Israel's legislative body is called what?	the Knesset
Israel's Supreme court has uses what internal method to review its own decisions?	a panel of three or more justices
A retrial is also called what?	"trial de novo"
When did New Zealand's Supreme Court come into being?	2004
What is the role of New Zealand's highest court?	purely appellate
What court's decisions may be appealed to New Zealand's supreme court?	Court of Appeal of New Zealand
New Zealand's second ranking court is known as what?	the High Court
Local decisions by what judicial body may remain within the jurisdiction of local courts?	the District Court
What are some of the territories within Pakistan?	FATA, Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas and Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT)
What type of cases may Pakistan's Supreme Court hear from FATA?	appeals only of a constitutional nature
What Pakistani territory's own courts retain supremacy?	Azad Kashmir
What is the relationship between Pakistan's Constitution and Azad Kashmir?	does not apply to it
The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom holds Supremacy in what jurisdictions?	England, Wales and Northern Ireland and for civil matters in Scotland
What is the high court in Scotland that has supremacy on criminal matters?	the High Court of Justiciary
What legislation established the Supremacy of the Supreme Court of the UK?	Constitutional Reform Act 2005
When did this act go into affect?	1 October 2009
What body previously had judicial supremacy in the UK prior to this?	House of Lords
What may cause some confusion in the US regarding state supreme courts?	titles of state supreme court vary
The Court of Appeals is the high court in which US States or territories?	New York, Maryland, and the District of Columbia
What is West Virginia's highest court called?	Supreme Court of Appeals
What state's supreme court is the oldest appellate court body in the western hemisphere?	Massachusetts
Supreme Courts in New York serve what function?	trial courts of general jurisdiction
What document established judicial oversight of legislation in Austria?	the Austrian Constitution of 1920
What court is charged with the responsibility of deciding the constitutionality of laws in Austria?	Constitutional Court
What is the German word for this constitutional high court?	Verfassungsgerichtshof
What is the Constitutional Court's power over the executive branch of Austrian government?	the review of administrative acts on whether they violate constitutionally guaranteed rights
The Supreme Court of Austria is known by what German name?	Oberste Gerichtshof (OGH)
What is the highest court in Brazil?	Supreme Federal Tribunal (Supremo Tribunal Federal)
What are the two areas this court has supremacy over?	cases that may be unconstitutional or final habeas corpus pleads for criminal cases
Which legislative bodies does this court sit in cases over?	cases involving members of congress, senators
What other government officials are subject to judgments of Brazil's highest court?	ministers of state, members of the high courts and the President and Vice-President of the Republic
What is Brazil's high court for labor law?	The Superior Labour Tribunal (Tribunal Superior do Trabalho)
What is Germany's constitution called?	the Grundgesetz
What German high court has the responsibility for interpreting this document?	Bundesverfassungsgericht
The english translation of this court and its duties is what?	Federal Constitutional Court
What unique electoral power does this German high court possess?	the power and authority to outlaw political parties
Under what circumstances may the court enact this responsibility?	it is deemed that these parties have repeatedly violated articles of the Constitution
The German high court has jurisdiction over what two areas of law?	civil and criminal cases
What court has supremacy for matters of social security?	Bundessozialgericht
What court sits in supremacy for cases related to employment and labor law in Germany?	Bundesarbeitsgericht
Germany's Joint Senate of the Supreme Courts is also known by what name?	Gemeinsamer Senat der Obersten Gerichtshöfe
Decisions of the Dutch Supreme Court are called what?	arresten
The Supreme Court of the Netherlands cannot interpret what?	legislation against the constitution
What areas of interpretative oversight does the supreme court have?	legislation against some treaties
Holland's regular court system does not handle cases related to what area of law?	administrative law
The high court for administrative law is also known as what?	Council of State (Raad van State)
What type of legal system is the Philippines officially?	a civil law nation
The high court in The Philippines is modeled after what judicial body?	the American Supreme Court
What document grants the Philippines Supreme Court the right of judicial review?	1987 Philippine Constitution
How many justices make up the Philippines Supreme Court?	1 Chief Justice and 14 Associate Justices
When all judges of a court hear a case at once it is called?	en banc
The Spanish Supreme Court hears all cases related to law in what areas?	private and public
What types of cases can be appealed to Spain's Constitutional Court?	those cases related to human rights
What is the other power of this latter court?	decides about acts accordance with Spanish Constitution
High courts in Spain do not establish what for lower court rulings?	binding precedents
In practicality, how do lower courts typically view the rulings of higher courts?	lower rank courts usually observe Supreme Court interpretations
Sweden's two high courts are what?	the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court
What is a type of case heard by the Supreme Administrative Court?	cases concerning disputes between individuals and administrative organs
The Supreme Court hears what?	all other cases
How are judges placed on Sweden's high courts?	appointed by the Government
The ability to appeal a case provided by Sweden's court system is called what?	prövningstillstånd
When was the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka created?	1972
The Sri Lankan Supreme Court's decisions override what?	all lower Courts
Sri Lankan law mixes what two categories of jurisprudence?	common-law and civil-law
What majority is necessary in the Sri Lankan Parliament to dismiss a president and the Court?	2/3
South Africa used what type of system to determine it's high courts until 2013?	"two apex"
When was the Supreme Court of Appeal created?	1994
What court in South Africa has authority over the SCA?	the Constitutional Court
When did the Constitutional Court become the highest court in South Africa in all matters?	August 2013
What nation's model gives the power of the high court to the legistlature?	Soviet Union
What is the name of China's high court which sits as a legislative committee?	Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC)
Current decisions by the NPCSC do not affect what?	cases which have already been decided
Hong Kong's legal system was traditionally based on what?	common law
Macau's legal system comes from what tradition?	Portuguese-based legal system
What type of documents does a textual critic usually analyze?	a manuscript copy, several or many copies, but not the original document
What is the goal of the textual critic?	the production of a "critical edition" containing a scholarly curated text.
What is the proper name for textual scholarship?	philology
Why are there differences in ancient copies of the same text?	Ancient scribes made alterations when copying manuscripts by hand
What do textual critics call a revised edition of a text?	recensions
Interest in an analysis of what text has arose in the early 1970's?	Qur'an
Why are scholars concerned with analysis of the Gospels over the letters?	biblical books that are letters, like Greek plays, presumably had one original
Why is it important for textual critics to analyze the Gospels?	the question of whether some biblical books, like the Gospels, ever had just one original has been discussed
What manuscripts prompted a textual analysis of the Qur'an	Sana'a manuscripts
When were the Sana'a manuscripts probably written?	possibly date back to the 7–8th centuries.
What is one reasons Shakespeare is a good place to focus on textual criticism?	the texts, as transmitted, contain a considerable amount of variation,
Name two of the oldest civilizations that textual criticism has focused on.	Mesopotamia and Egypt
Why is there opposition to textual criticism of Jewish and Muslim religious books?	is, to the devout, taboo.
Aside from Shakespeare, what is another book that is a major focus of textual criticism?	Bible
Over approximately what expanse of time can textual criticism be applied to written works?	a period of about five millennia
What is the first goal when attempting to analyze a new text?	identification of the first exemplar
Why is finding the first exemplar important in textual criticism?	split in the tradition
The exemplar is otherwise known as what?	the archetype
The final product of reconstruction is known as what?	the constitutio
What is included in or accompanies in "critical edition"?	apparatus criticus or critical apparatus
What is the purpose of the critical apparatus?	presents the author's work in three parts
What is the goal of the textual critic?	a "critical edition"
A critical edition of a text is accompanied by what?	apparatus criticus or critical apparatus.
What is included in the first part of the critical apparatus?	a list or description of the evidence that the editor used (names of manuscripts, or abbreviations called sigla)
What is included in the second part of the critical apparatus?	the editor's analysis of that evidence (sometimes a simple likelihood rating)
What is included in the final part of the critical apparatus?	a record of rejected variants of the text (often in order of preference)
Why are there multiple variations of texts before the advent of the printing press?	literature was copied by hand
Are printed editions immune to variation?	not immune to introducing variations from an author's autograph
How do differences in works arise when using a printing press?	a compositor or a printing shop may read or typeset a work in a way that differs from the autograph
An edited text compiled through many sources is known as what?	eclectic.
Different documents that represent the same original text are called what?	witnesses
What are the variations in the text of witnesses known as?	variant readings, or simply variants or readings.
How or why do variations enter a witness text?	either by accident (duplication or omission) or intention (harmonization or censorship)
As well as representing the original text, a critical text must also do what?	document variant readings
Why is it important to document variations in witness texts when compiling a critical text?	so the relation of extant witnesses to the reconstructed original is apparent to a reader of the critical edition.
What is a variorum?	The collation of all known variants of a text
What is the purpose of a variorum?	so that a reader can track how textual decisions have been made in the preparation of a text for publication
Name one author who is less frequently the subject of a variorum.	Edward Fitzgerald
Name two works that are often the subject of a variorum.	The Bible and the works of William Shakespeare
What is often included in an eclectic reading?	an impression of the number of witnesses
Why would someone prefer a second edition to a first edition?	a second edition of a Shakespeare play may include an addition alluding to an event known to have happened between the two editions
Do textual critics always include additions found in the majority of subsequent versions of a work?	textual critics may reconstruct the original without the addition.
What is external evidence?	evidence of each physical witness, its date, source, and relationship to other known witnesses.
Why are older manuscripts preferred?	Since errors tend to accumulate, older manuscripts should have fewer errors.
What characteristic of a compilation of witnesses is the most beneficial to a textual critic?	geographically diverse
What characteristic of a single witness is the most beneficial to a textual critic?	more than one prior copy (exemplar) was consulted in producing the current one
Is a lectio brevrio or lectio difficilior approach more akin to the original text?	Applying this principle leads to taking the more difficult (unharmonized) reading as being more likely to be the original.
What is the main principle of lectio brevior?	scribes tended to add words, for clarification or out of habit
Define "lectio brevior"	shorter reading
What is the main principle of lectio difficilior?	the tendency for harmonization—resolving apparent inconsistencies in the text.
Define "lectio difficilior"	more difficult reading
How many rules were proposed in the 1881 publication of the New Testament in Greek?	They proposed nine critical rules
What is Bengel's rule?	The reading is less likely to be original that shows a disposition to smooth away difficulties.
Does ease of reading correlate to accuracy in relation to the original text?	"The reading is to be preferred that most fitly explains the existence of the others."
What is more important for a textual critic: quality or quantity?	Readings are approved or rejected by reason of the quality, and not the number, of their supporting witnesses
What is the criteria needed to include or dismiss a reading when critiquing texts?	The reading is to be preferred that most fitly explains the existence of the others.
When did scientists begin searching for a more defined guideline for textual criticism?	19th century
What inclusion helps readers and critics understand the motivation behind the compiler?	The citing of sources used, and alternate readings, and the use of original text and images
What is a further benefit of including sources, texts and original images in a critique?	the depth of research of the critic
Is textual criticism immune to bias on the part of the critic?	justify a result that fits the textual critic's aesthetic or theological agenda
What is stemmatics?	a rigorous approach to textual criticism
What is a cladogram?	The family tree is also referred to as a cladogram.
What is implied when two witnesses have a number of errors in common?	it may be presumed that they were derived from a common intermediate source
What is a hyparchetype?	a common intermediate source
What is recension?	The process of constructing the stemma
Which steps most closely resembles copy-text editing?	examinatio and emendatio
What process is best used when only one manuscript is viable?	copy text editing
What process is best used when there are a number of viable manuscripts available?	eclecticism
What was Joseph Bédier's main criticism of the stemmatic method?	critics tended overwhelmingly to produce trees divided into just two branches.
Why is a methos that only produces two branches seen as inferior?	the method was tending to produce bipartite stemmas regardless of the actual history of the witnesses.
To what did Joseph Bédier attribute the prevalence of the stemmatic method?	editors tended to favor trees with two branches
Why would editors only want two alternative branches when analyzing a text?	this would maximize the opportunities for editorial judgment
What was the final implication of Joseph Bédier's analysis of the stemmatic method?	the method was not as rigorous or as scientific as its proponents had claimed.
What is the last step in the stemmatic method?	emendatio
At what point can a critic using the stemmatic become less concerned with critical analysis?	the critic employs conjecture at every step of the process
Why may the dominant reading may be the weaker reading?	, it may be no more than fortuitous that more witnesses have survived that present a particular reading
When was the term copy-text introduced?	1904
What was the initial definition of copy-text?	the text used in each particular case as the basis of mine
Explain the process used by McKerrow as an alternative to the stemmaic method	choose one particular text that was thought to be particularly reliable, and then to emend it only where the text was obviously corrupt.
Why did McKerrow alter his previous method of criticism?	deviate more widely than the earliest print from the author's original manuscript."
How did McKerrow alter his approach to copy-text analysis?	inserting into it, from the first edition which contains them, such corrections as appear to us to be derived from the author."
What did McKerrow concede about his new copy-text method?	we must accept all the alterations of that edition, saving any which seem obvious blunders or misprints
What work was the first to see McKerrow use his new method?	Prolegomena for the Oxford Shakespeare
Are there times when an editor's judgement should be deferred?	the claims of two readings ... appear to be exactly balanced
What should one do when two readings are contradictory but balanced?	if there is no reason for altering its reading, the obvious thing seems to be to let it stand.
What do editors call variants that are exactly balanced?	indifferent
Is the idea formed by Greg limited to a specific time period?	The principle is sound without regard for the literary period.
What will an editor do in the case where an author's work was not wiped out?	the manuscript should generally serve as copy-text
What where the limitations of Greg's analyses?	English Renaissance drama
What is the main criticism of Greg's work?	works where an author's manuscript survived
What are editors trying to ultimately accomplish?	our ideal of an author's fair copy of his work in its final state
If an editor can't achieve an exact reproduction of an authors work, what should be the goal?	approximate as nearly as possible an inferential authorial fair copy
What did Bower's say about Greg's method?	represent the nearest approximation in every respect of the author's final intentions
What did Tanselle say about textual criticism?	has generally been undertaken with a view to reconstructing, as accurately as possible, the text finally intended by the author
Who argued against works where the author listens to input from others?	Bowers and Tanselle
Who wanted to determine why an author made changes to a work?	Tanselle
Does Greg believe a later work can be substituted for a earlier one?	a later reading "is one that the author can reasonably be supposed to have substituted for the former
What idea did Tanselle champion?	unconstrained authorial intention
What alterations did Crane make to secure commercial publication?	remove profanity, but he also made stylistic revisions
What was Bower's first step in editing multiple works into a single product?	to preserve the stylistic and literary changes of 1896
What was Bower's second step in editing multiple works into a single product?	to revert to the 1893 readings where he believed that Crane was fulfilling the publisher's intention rather than his own
What was one of the criticisms Bowers faced after editing Maggie?	his judgment
I what year was Maggie printed for commercial use?	1896
What was the first step Bowers took in editing a single work with two versions?	to preserve the stylistic and literary changes of 1896,
What was the second step Bowers took in editing a single work with two versions?	to revert to the 1893 readings where he believed that Crane was fulfilling the publisher's intention
What changes were made for the commercial publication of Maggie?	to remove profanity, but he also made stylistic revisions
When was Maggie first published?	1893
Are appendices easy to use for the average reader?	appendices that are difficult to use,
Can a reader be certain of the validity of information found in a clear-text edition?	suggesting a greater sense of certainty about the established text than it deserves
How do most editors work around the reference problems of clear-text editing?	notes at the foot of the text page
Where can a reader find more information on text variants after noticing a footnote?	appendices
What is the biological basis for Cladistics?	to determine the evolutionary relationships between different species
How is evolution applied to textual criticism?	manuscripts are then grouped according to their shared characteristics
How is cladistics similar to the stemmatic method?	cladistics assumes that they are part of a branching family tree
What is the main difference between cladistics and stemmatics?	does not indicate which branch of the tree is the "root"
When did textual criticism applied to the Book of Mormon?	the early 1970s
What was one portion of preparing a new edition of the Holy Scriptures?	digitizing the text and preparing appropriate footnotes
How was the most reliable version of the Holy Scriptures determined?	applying modern text critical standards to the manuscripts
When did Larson finish his project?	1974
Whose observations were included in the 1981 publication of the Book of Mormon?	Larson
What is FARMS?	Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies
Who spearheaded the Critical Text of the Book of Mormon project?	Robert F. Smith
How many years did it take to publish all three volumes of the Book of Mormon Critical Text?	the first volume of the 3-volume Book of Mormon Critical Text in 1984. The third volume of that first edition was published in 1987
Was the third volume of the first edition deemed sufficient?	The third volume of that first edition was published in 1987, but was already being superseded by a second, revised edition of the entire work
Who is the head of FARMS?	Professor John W. Welch
When was phase one completed?	1988
Who took over after the preliminary phase?	Professor Skousen
Why did Professor Skousen gather fragments and have them analyzed?	to obtain fine readings
What process what used to study the gathered fragments?	advanced photographic techniques
On what did Skousen analyze ink and pencil remnants?	Printer’s Manuscript
How common are variations in text that alter the meaning of the Urtext of the Hebrew Bible?	extremely rare
To what degree do variations in the Old Testament alter the meaning?	hardly affect any doctrine
Who claims that the Old Testament is essentially the same throughout all variations?	Professor Douglas Stuart
How many variations of the Old Testament offer the same meaning?	virtually every possible alternative reading
Does the Bible or Plato's Republic have more witnesses?	There are far fewer witnesses to classical texts than to the Bible
What's the gap between original Christian texts and subsequent editions of the same works?	within 200 years
What's the gap between original classical texts and subsequent editions of the same works?	about a millennium after their composition
How does the expanse of time correlate to authenticity with regard to original and subsequent versions of texts?	a larger time gap between an original and a manuscript means more changes in the text.
What is the criteria for copyright?	if enough creativity/originality is provided
What minor things can be included and not invalidate a copyright?	The mere addition of a word, or substitution of a term with another one believed to be more correct
Are footnotes included in the copyright of the original work?	All the notes accounting for the analysis and why and how such changes have been made represent a different work autonomously copyrightable
What rights do scientific publications in the EU enjoy?	the relevant neighboring right that protects critical and scientific publications of public domain works
What does LP stand for when it comes to time capacity?	long playing
What are common diameters found in phonograph records?	12", 10", 7"
What is a gramophone or 'vinyl' record?	analogue sound storage medium
Where does the groove on a vinyl record typically start?	near the periphery
In what method is the rotational speed measured in?	rpm
What was the primary use of a phonographic disc record?	music reproduction
Which year did vinyl records leave the main steam media market?	1991
From the 1990s to 2010s who was the primary consumer of vinyl records?	disc jockeys (DJ)s
Approximately how many phonograph records were sold in 2014?	9.2 million
What is the niche market of phonograph record fans known as?	audiophiles
What was the original intent of the phonautograph?	visual analysis
In what years where phonautograms converted to audible sound?	2000s
What year were the earliest known recordings of sound?	1857
By whom was the phonautograms patented?	Léon Scott
In what year was phonautograms patented?	1857
In what year did Thomas Edison invent the phonograph?	1877
How did the phonograph differ from the phonautograph?	capable of both recording and reproducing sound
What was unique about Einsteins invention?	reproducing sound
At what era was the recorded sound market introduced?	1880s
What is the name of lateral cut disc records?	gramophone
What was an issue found with Berliner's records initially?	poor sound quality
Where were lateral cut disc records developed?	United States
What is 'Victor Talking Machine now known as?	RCA Victor
Where is the museum dedicated to Berliner located?	Montreal
What was the name of the discs Edison introduced in 1909?	Blue Amberol cylinders
What year did the patent for lateral cut discs expire?	1919
What format dominated the market in the late 1980s?	digital compact disc
What disc format was the least fragile prior to 1919?	Amberol cylinder
What was the playing surface of the blue amerbol cylinder discs made of?	celluloid
What were two drawback of early recordings?	Sensitivity and frequency range were poor
How would one make to early recordings?	face in the recording horn
What types of violins worked best with early recordings?	Stroh violins
What instruments did not record well?	Lower-pitched orchestral instruments
How was the frequency response in early recordings?	very irregular
What tool was used to improve sound quality in early recordings for special effects?	moveable platform
Where were loud instruments best placed for good sound quality?	farthest away from the collecting horn
How far away has a trumpeter been known to stand?	fifteen feet
Were drums heard on early jazz recordings?	drums could be effectively used
What was the item called that recorded the sounds?	collecting horn
What was an early took used to amplify sounds?	vacuum tubes
What company was vital in progression of quality sound recordings?	Western Electric
How early were electrically recorded discs made available for purchase?	1925
What was new about the way Western Electrics method of capturing sound?	microphone
How could the sounds produced by Western Electric be described?	fuller, clearer and more natural
What was a drawback of early home recording systems?	high cost
What was the initial cost range of early recording devices?	US$95 to US$300
What year  was the  Victor Orthophonic Victrola released?	1925
What was the typical weekly pay of a worker in 1925?	$20
What options were available that effected the cost of the Victor Orthophonic Victorla?	cabinetry
What materials were discs made of in 1889-1894?	hard rubber
What was the standard material for discs around 1895?	a shellac-based compound
What company was known for laminate construction of discs?	Columbia Records
What material give the vinyl records their known black color?	carbon
What material is used in order to release the vinyl records from their molds?	lubricant
What was a major downfall of the success of Durium records?	Great Depression
What year were Durium records no longer released in the US?	1932
What are most 78 rpm records made of?	shellac compounds
What was a common problem found in early flexible records?	surface noise
What was the thin translucent plastic most successfully used to make discs called?	Durium
What material was used by RCA Victor for special purpose records?	vinyl-based Victrolac compound
What was Metrolite and Sav-o-flex materials primarily used for?	children's records
What year was the Victrolac compound released?	1931
What were advantages of vinyl in the 1930's?	light weight, relative unbreakability and low surface noise
What was a downfall of ordinary 78 rpm vinyls in household house?	higher cost
What was the most popular sized disc by 1910?	10-inch
How long could a recording be on a 10 inch disc in the 1903?	four to five minutes of music per side
How small were the earliest discs released?	12.5 cm
What was one requirement issue with discs popular in Britain?	modification of the equipment
Which disc could hold about three minutes of recording on either side?	10-inch
What factors would effect playing time of a phonograph?	turntable speed and the groove spacing
What was the playing time common in the early 20th century?	two minutes
How many recordings did Kind Oliver's Creole Jazz band require?	13
What was the normal size disc for popular music?	10-inch
What was the recording time available on a 12 inch disc?	three and a half minutes
On which label did Frank Sinatra release his recording of Soliloquy?	Columbia's Masterwork label
What was a typical recording time of a song in 1948?	about 3:30
What was a way musicians got sounds such short recording times?	release a set of records
How many sides of a disc commonly held a recording?	two sides
What was unique about Odeon's 1909 release of the Nutcracker Suite?	4 double-sided discs in a specially designed package
What was one of the first releases with a photo on the cover?	The Mikado (Gilbert & Sullivan)
When were albums said to be pioneered?	1909
What was one of the very first albums released?	Nutcracker Suite by Tchaikovsky
When could record album covers first be found?	1910
What were early record album covers made of?	empty sleeves with a paperboard or leather cover
What sizes were record album covers available in?	10-inch and 12-inch sizes
How were record album covers intended to be stored?	upright
What was the purpose of record album covers?	protecting them
When were albums as we currently know them widely released?	1930s
What is typically found on the front cover of an album?	artwork
How may records were commonly found in an album?	three or four
When did the vinyl LP records Era begin?	1949
How many songs did most albums contain?	six or eight
What are reasons for recent releases of 78 rpm speed vinyls?	collectable or nostalgia purposes
What is a benefit of newer releases of 78 rpm speed vinyls?	higher-quality audio playback
Who released 7" microgrooved records in the 1950s?	Bell Records
What benefits to vinyl have been found in the 1950s?	wider range of audio
Who founded Audiophile Records?	Ewing Dunbar Nunn
In what year did Reprise plan to release a series of 78 rpm singles?	1968
Which disc did Reprise release in 78 rpm format?	Think It's Going to Rain Today
What two songs were featured on the 1978 release by Leon Redbone in 78 rpm format?	Alabama Jubilee and Please Don't Talk About Me When I'm Gone
What record company released recordings of 'Buena' and 'Tuff Enuff' in 1980?	Stiff Records
Why did Reprise only release one 78 rpm vinyl?	lack of sales for the single, and a lack of general interest
When was the release by Rhino Records of 78 rpm for jukebox owners?	1990s
What was the result of the use of this release of 78 rpm vinyl when used in vintage jukeboxes?	they were destroyed
What was needed to successfully play the newer released 79 rpm vinyl?	lightweight tone arms and jewel needles
For whom was the 1990 release of 78 rpm intended?	owners of vintage jukeboxes
How did the 1990 release of 78 rpm effect Rhino Records?	bad reputation
What was the playing time of program-transcription discs?	ten minutes playing time per side
How successful was RCA Victor's program-transcription discs?	commercial failure
When did RCA Victor release long play discs?	1931
Who released the first commercial long play discs?	RCA Victor
By when were long play records discontinued?	early 1933
What was a benefit of using vinyl over shellac?	lower surface noise
By the mid 1940s what was the primary material records were made of?	vinyl
What was a factor in shellac availability?	World War II
Which material was more durable,  shellac or vinyl?	vinyl
What material were most mailed records made of?	vinyl
What caused a delay in the production of high quality records?	World War II
Who released the 12 inch LP?	Columbia Record Company
On what date was the 12 inch LP released?	June 18, 1948
In what city was the 12 in LP released?	New York
How long did it take Columbia to produce a consumer friendly long play record?	about eight years
What did RCA release to complete against Columbia's LP?	The 45 rpm player
What materials were 45 rpm records made of?	vinyl or polystyrene
What was the play time of a 45 rpm	eight minutes
What was the size of a RCA Victor 45 rpm?	7 inches
Who had made an attempt in the 1920s to release a long play time recording?	World Records
What caused the constant linear velocity?	Noel Pemberton Billing's patented add-on governor device
What was a unique feature of World Records records?	played from the outside to the inside
What currently utilized item was World Records CLV similar to?	Philips Laser Disc
What gear ration creates 78.26 rpm?	46:1
In what year was 78.26 rpm chosen as standard?	1925
How many rpm did the electrically powered synchronous turanable motor run at?	3600 rpm
Why are these records known as '78s'?	to distinguish them from other newer disc record formats
When did the 45 rpm gain popularity over the 78 rpm	1950s
With which crowd did the 45 rpm gain popularity?	teenagers
At which time were the 79 rpm no longer mass produced?	about 1960
On which date did Columbia release it's last 78?	November 1, 1954.
What was the last country to phase out the 78 rpm?	United Kingdom
What percentage of Elvis Presley's single sales were of 78s?	less than 10%
What was the last 78 released in the UK by RCA?	A Mess Of Blues/Girl Of My Best Friend
Why did Elvis sales of 78s perform so well in the Southern States?	45 rpm player was a luxury few could afford at the time
On which label did Elvis release his early singles?	Sun Records
What was the last Elvis Presley single released on 78?	I Got Stung/One Night
What two formats replaced the 78?	33 1⁄3 rpm (often just referred to as the 33 rpm), and the 45 rpm
Who developed the 33 1/3 rpm LP?	Columbia Records
When did the 33 1/3 rpm hit the market?	June 1948
When did RCA release their 45 rpm format?	March 1949
When were RIAA standards established?	mid-1950s
What was 16 2/3 rpm speed used for?	narrated publications
Who developed the 33 1/3 rpm speed record?	Peter Goldmark
What record format was created for use in Chrysler automobiles?	Highway Hi-Fi 16 2⁄3 rpm record
Why did Chrysler discontinue use of the Hifi 16 2/3 rpm record?	poor performance
To the end of which era could you find 16 rpm setting on record players?	1970s
Which company lost the "War of the Speeds"?	RCA
What speed ultimantly ended up winning the war of the speeds?	45 rpm
Over which years did the "War of the Speeds" last?	1948 to 1950
By 1945 what was the total sale of 45s?	200 million
Which two companies were involved in the "War of the Speeds"?	RCA Victor and Columbia Records
What format of LPs was discontinued?	10-inch
What was the significance of October 26th, 1956?	The last Columbia Records reissue of any Frank Sinatra songs on a 10-inch LP
In which country did the 10 in LP exist the longest?	United Kingdom
Which format offered up to 1/2 an hour of recordings per side?	12-inch LP
Did the 45 rpm or 12 inch disc offer longer playing time?	12-inch LP
What do the initials EP stand for?	extended play
Why were 45s more popular with jukeboxes?	The large center hole
What format was phased out by the end of the 1950s?	EPs
What was a benefit of EPs over LPs?	EP discs were cheaper
What three speeds were sound on most home stereos in the mid 1950's?	78, 45, 33 1⁄3
What feature of 45s required an adapter in most home stereos?	larger center hole.
What feature was found on more home stereos that allowed continuous play between records?	changer
What format was less common but could sometimes be found on home stereos?	16 2⁄3 rpm
Wy did records outside of the US often have small holes with the ability to punch out the center?	for use in jukeboxes
What were the plastic inserts which would adapt 45s to the smaller spindle of an LP player called?	spider
What invention did Thomas Hutchinson introduce?	spider
Whom were the adaptable inserts for 45s to LPs commissioned by?	RCA president David Sarnoff
How many spiders were sold in the 45 rpm heydays?	tens of millions per year
What term was coined to differentiate better sounding products in the 1920s?	high fidelity
What magazines provided reviews for audio equipment?	High Fidelity and Audio
What happened in 1958 that changed the home music scene?	variety of improvements in recording and playback technologies
During what years did the term HiFi take off with engineers?	1930s and 1940s
What term would be used when one said they produced perfect sound reproduction?	high fidelity
What did Alan Blumlein event?	stereophonic record system
When did EMI create the first stereo discs?	1933
What was the benefit of 45/45 stereo sound?	more natural listening experience
What year was stereo sound patented?	1931
How was the commercial success of stereo sound in the 1930s?	was not exploited commercially until much later.
What did quadraphonic recording feature?	recorded four separate sound signals.
What was the newest break through in home sound systems in 1971?	development of quadraphonic records
How would the commercial success of quadraphonic records be defined?	commercially unsuccessful
What did developments in quadraphonic recordings inspire?	later surround-sound systems
What was a major issue with CD-4 technology?	no cutting heads were available that could handle the HF information
How widespread was the success of CD-4 format?	even less successful than the two matrixed formats
What format was less successful than quadraphonic?	CD-4
What were potential benefits of the CD-4 format?	reduced distortion and greater headroom
Who created the CD-4 format?	RCA
For which company did C. Robert Fine work for?	Mercury Records
What benefits were found in using the 35mm magnetic film?	prevented tape layer print-through and pre-echo and gained extended frequency range and transient response
Who developed the 3-to-2 mix to create lifelike recordings?	Mercury
Which microphone hold the most importance in 3 microphone recording?	The center
In which year did Mercury begin 3 channel stereo recording?	1955
What technique were used to reduce inner-groove distortion?	CBS DisComputer and Teldec Direct Metal Mastering
Who developed the Dynagroove format?	RCA Victor
Why did some music lovers frown upon diaphragming?	unnatural side effects
What did closer groove spacing result in?	Lower recorded volume
What would be found with higher recorded volumes?	wider spacing
How did Disco Eye-Cued system benefit DJs?	visual cue to DJs mixing the records
How did Disco Eye-Cued sysems differ from LPs?	only contain one track each side
When was the Disco Eye-Cued System developed?	late 1970s
What were direct to disc recordings expected to product?	a "purist" transcription
When were 'half speed' and 'digitally remastered' recordings being released?	late 1970s
What was required for quality playback of DBX recordings?	automatic gain control
When were DBX recordings released?	mid-1970s
How compatible were DBX encoded recordings with prior technologies?	completely incompatible with
What was the intention of DBX encoded recordings?	reduced the effect of surface noise on quiet passages
What did CBS develop in order to reduce outside noise?	"CX" noise reduction
What company out of Japan offered laser turntables that read vinyl discs optically?	ELPJ
What was a benedit of laser read discs?	eliminates record wear
What was a drawback of laser read discs?	degrade the sound
What was the primary use of laser read discs?	archiving of analog records
What was a major issue for laser read discs?	dust
Who is Irene?	scanning machine for disc records
Where was IRENE developed?	Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories
What is the primary use of IRENE?	retrieve the information
Can IRENE read vertically modulated information?	cannot read vertically modulated information
Does IRENE require the  ability to touch the media?	without touching the medium
What terms are used for recording with more than one track?	long-play" (LP) and "extended-play" (EP
What is a typical max playing time of an LP?	forty-five minutes
Which format is cheaper, LP or EP?	LPs
Which format held recordings ranging from 10 to 15 minutes?	7-inch EP
What was a normal play time per side for LPs?	22 minutes
Which colors of 45 were available as late as 1952 before being discontinued?	yellow and deep red
PeeWee the Piccolo was what?	The first 45 rpm record created for sale
What significance does Dec 7/ 1948 hold?	The first 45 rpm record created for sale
How many colors were 45s available in when first released?	seven colors
When did RCA release the 45?	March 1949
In which direction does the groove in a normal disc run?	outside edge towards the center
How is sound encoded on a commercial disc?	by fine variations
Does it matter at which speed a disc is spun?	correct speed
Do all grooves bear data?	no
What is a 'lead out'?	wide-pitched section
What is the center where the data joins to complete a circle?	lock groove
Do turntables play music on lock grooves?	most automatic turntables are incapable
What do most automatic turn tables do when they meet a lock groove?	lift the arm
Where do you find a lead out?	Towards the center, at the end of the groove
Where were records made with raised label areas?	reducing the risk of damage
Are longer recordings, as found in operas, made for use with auto-changing systems?	interleaved across several 10-inch or 12-inch discs for use with auto-changing mechanisms
Do grooves on records touch when stacked?	allowing records to be stacked onto each other without the delicate grooves coming into contact
Do records touch when in auto changers?	Auto-changers included a mechanism to support a stack
What is the most used material for modern audiophile vinyl releases?	New or "virgin" heavy/heavyweight (180–220 g) vinyl
What is the material preference of collectors?	heavyweight vinyl
How does the manufacturing process differ between heavyweight and normal vinyl?	Manufacturing processes are identical
Would would a non filled area in a vinyl press cause when listening to a record?	grinding or scratching sound
Which pressing of vinyl require more attention to detail, lightweight or heavyweight?	lightweight records requires more care
What is an effect of using worn molds when casting records?	The "orange peel" effect
What is the expected finish of a vinyl record?	mirror-like
On what frequencies is an orange peel effect most noticeable?	lower frequency range
What is the effect on a copy if a master as an orange peel effect?	there is no ill effect
What material is on a direct metal mastering disc?	copper
What is the two step process?	"father" is removed of its silver and converted into a stamper
What is the limitation of the two step process?	limited to a few hundred vinyl pressings
Which is preferred the two step or three step process?	three-step
Which have stronger structures the father or son mold?	sons
What can increase the output of a stamper mold?	quality of the vinyl is high
What was a known issue of using shellac to make records?	Breakage was very common
In which novel does 'Whiteman's Lady of the Evening" record get broken?	John O'Hara novel, Appointment in Samarra
In Blackboard Jungle what record breaking mention is made?	teacher's collection of 78 rpm jazz records is smashed
What causes clicks and pops on vinyl records?	Dust and scratches
What is the cause of lock grooves on vinyl records?	Dust and scratches
Where does the saying "Like a broken record" originate?	locked groove
How easily do vinyl records break?	Vinyl records do not break easily
What is a common damage to vinyl records?	easily scratched.
What causes warping in vinyl records?	heat, improper storage, exposure to sunlight, or manufacturing defects
What is a cause of once per revolution pitch variation?	warp, or from a spindle hole that was not precisely centered
What method was used to protect a vinyl record?	place the LP in a paper or plastic inner cover
What were often found with a paper outter cover and no inner cover?	Singles
What happens if a vinyl comes with a bit of warp?	A small degree of warp was common,
When is distortion most common on a gramophone record?	Distortion towards the end of the side
What happens as a record wears?	Distortion
What is a drawback of using gramophones?	fidelity steadily declines as playback progresses
How much vinyl can be found at the start of an LP?	510 mm
Where can you find only 200-210mm of vinyl?	ending of the groove
What would be a cause of low frequency sounds when listening?	warped disk
What is a feature many stereos contain to fight back against unwanted noises?	subsonic filter
What is a sounds commonly heard when listening to a vinyl that is unintentional.	Tonearm skating
Which frequencies are you most likely to hear tonearm skating?	frequencies below about 20 Hz
Are there any visual signs of tracking when listening to a record?	cones can sometimes be seen to vibrate with the subsonic tracking
What is a limitation of low frequency recordings?	limiting the playing time
What kinds of unwanted sounds are often heard at high frequencies?	hiss, pops, and ticks
What is done during recordings to help reduce unwanted sounds?	amplitude of low frequencies is reduced
What is a benefit of using equalization devices?	problems can be reduced
What is done to high frequency  sounds to lessen sound issues?	amplitude at high frequencies is increased
Whom found that they can make musical instruments sound more natural with an amplifier boost at the turnover point?	G. H. Miller
What is found when a complementary boost is used at the bass turnover point?	reproduction was more realistic
When frequency in the treble increases what happens to the recording amplitude?	recording amplitude decreased
What happens when frequency decreases in the bass?	recording amplitude increased
Whom found Wente-style condenser microphones helpful?	P. G. A. H. Voigt
How were Wente-Style condenser microphones helpful?	pre-emphasis in the recording
When was a pre-emphasis most useful?	above 1,000 Hz
On which recording types were pre-emphasis used most in the 1920s?	78 rpm and 33 1⁄3 rpm
In which Era was this finding most significant?	1925 era
What was the industry standard in Europe for record equalization?	there was no industry standard
In which country was the treble roll off greater?	US
Which country prefers a bass turnover setting of 250-300 Hz?	Europe
What was the industry standard on equalization practices?	there was no industry standard
Which country used the most varied equalization practices?	US
How far back did records show the art of sound recordings?	1925
How was standardization prior to 1942?	considered a proprietary art
Around what time period was there an attempt made to standardize recordings?	1942–1949
Who made the move to standardize recordings?	National Association of Broadcasters
When were recording standards officially released?	1949
 Which recording types were effected by the imposed industry standards?	laterally and vertically cut records, principally transcriptions.
What was one issue of a lack of industry standards?	Broadcasters were faced with having to adapt daily to the varied recording
What is the NAB?	National Association of Broadcasters
What bass settings were needed to eliminate hum?	below 100 Hz
What helped cause the most life like sound?	using a complementary inverse curve
How did the NBC Othacoustic curve relate to the NAB curve?	remarkably similar
What was a benefit to broadcasters of recording standards?	programming sounded more lifelike.
How far back could these recording practices be traced?	1925
What were the recording standards based off from?	long-held recording practices
What became the predecessor to the RIAA curve?	New Orthophonic curve
Who developed the New Orthophonic curve?	RCA Victor
Whom wrote the publication outlining the New Orthophonic curve?	R.C. Moyer
What was the quality of sound recordings made with horns at the end of the acoustic era?	many fine examples
What were issues facing play back and recording mechanics?	acoustic limitations
Why do photos show take on horns?	help mute these resonances
What was the cause of delicate and fine sound loss?	took a lot of sound energy
How would a record recorded with a horn sound played through modern equipment?	like it was recorded through a horn
What technique offered realistic sounds during playback?	Western Electric licensed recording method
At at time was radio gaining popularity?	1925
What type of microphones were losing popularity in the 1920s?	carbon microphones used,
What benefit did the use of the Wente style condenser microphone offer?	brilliant midrange
What was a benefit of early radio recordings?	microphones and amplifiers
What is one example of an acoustic phonograph on which one would listen to electric recordings?	Victor Orthophonic phonograph
What allowed better sounds inside the cabinet of the orthoponic phonograph?	folded horn with an exponential taper
What adjustments were made to the orthophonic  to accommodate electric recordings?	mechanical pickup head was redesigned with lower resonance than the traditional mica type
Was it common to hear electric recordings on phonographs?	not unusual
How similar was the sound of a orthodontic  record to a radio?	sounded like
What are two examples of high quality microphones?	moving coil microphone was introduced around 1930 and the velocity or ribbon microphone
What was used to dampen resonances in recordings?	Magnetic pickups
When would you have first found the moving coil microphone?	around 1930
What was a more economical option to magnetic pickups?	Crystal pickups
In what years would you find electronic recordings played electronically?	1930s and 1940s
What was a benefit of the use of magnetic pickup cartridge?	high quality cuts
In what era could you find good quality recordings and playbacks at home?	1940s
What was a unique feature of the Capeart radio phonographs?	large diameter electrodynamic loudspeakers
How similar were live and recorded versions?	harder to tell the difference
When was the Western Electric System introduced?	early 1930s
What two companies worked together to develop the Western Electric System?	Bell Telephone Laboratories and Western Electric
What system was used by Warner Brothers?	Western Electric system
What speed was used in the Western Electric System?	33 1⁄3 rpm
What was the Western Electric System believed to do?	improve the overall quality
What was a benefit of vertical groove cuts?	longer playback time
What could be avoided by using vertical groove cuts?	inner groove distortion
How was the moving coil microphone unique to the Wente type?	didn't require electronics installed in the microphone housing
How was sound improved using the moving coil microphone?	override noise in playback
How was wax used to improve recordings?	avoiding the microscopic irregularities
What were used to make vinyl pressings?	master cuts
What were the top licensees of the Western Electric system in the 1930s?	World Broadcasting System and Associated Music Publishers
Who was responsible for 2/3 of all recordings in the 1930s?	World Broadcasting System and Associated Music Publishers
How was gold spluttering used in vinyl creation?	cuts that were electroplated in vacuo by means of gold sputtering
When was the business booming for do it yourself sound fanatics?	1949
What kind of recordings worked best for pop music?	45 rpm
What was used for longer recordings?	LP record
What opened doors for long recordings?	The complete technical disclosure of the Columbia LP by Peter C. Goldmark, Rene' Snepvangers and William S. Bachman
What aided in records sales in the 1950s?	Radio listeners heard recordings broadcast
What is generally the lowest sound a human can hear?	20 Hz
What is believed to better offer sounds of higher frequencies, compact discs or records?	vinyl records
What is the higher end of typical human hearing?	20,000 Hz
Does the hearing range of the human vary?	The upper and lower frequency limits of human hearing vary per person
Who would engrave the master disc of a vinyl record?	record cutter
What was used in first recordings of vinyl records?	soft wax
What was used in final recordings of vinyl records?	harder lacquer
After the 1950s  what was a typical recording process?	first recorded on audio tape, which could then be processed and/or edited, and then dubbed on to the master disc
Where were sound recordings originally made to?	master disc
Should alcohol be used to clean gramophone recordings?	alcohol should only be used on PVC or optical media
Is gramophone equipment readily available?	manufactured only in small quantities
What is the recommendation of gramophone recordings to preserve integrity?	transferring them onto other media
What is a drawback of gramophone use?	gradual degradation
How are gramophones best stored?	on edge
Is it difficult to transfer recording from historic interest to newer technologies?	Anyone can do this
What would offer the highest quality transfers of historic interest?	professional archivists
What would a hobbiest need to transfer historic recordings to digital formats?	standard record player with a suitable pickup, a phono-preamp (pre-amplifier) and a typical personal computer
Is an original destroyed when transferred to digital format?	without any further damage to the source recording
What is one benefit of transferring an older format to a newer format?	manipulated to remove analog flaws
What was a major cause of declined vinyl sales?	major label distributors restricted their return policies
Which allows for more profits, vinyl or compact discs?	CDs, which were more profitable for the record companies
When did vinyl record sales decline?	between 1988 and 1991
When did compact disc popularity take hold?	1988
When were groove recordings developed?	final quarter of the 19th century,
Are records generally out of print as of date?	Vinyl records continue to be manufactured and sold today
Are albums ever reproduced?	Many popular new albums are given releases
What types of vinyl hold the most popularity?	Old records and out-of-print recordings
Does vinyl record maintain any popularity?	records still have enthusiastic supporters
What is a reason a DJ would prefer vinyl to CD?	direct manipulation
In what techniques would a DJ require a vinyl record?	slip-cueing, beatmatching, and scratching
Are all turn tables capable of DJ manipulation of vinyl records?	provided the stylus, record player, and record itself are built to withstand it
What is commonly preferred by DJs vinyl or CD?	any electronic dance music and hip hop releases today are still preferred on vinyl
Had vinyl technology ceased expanding?	However, many CDJ and DJ advances, such as DJ software and time-encoded vinyl, now have these capabilities and more.
Whom set the most recent sales record of vinyl records since 1991?	Jack White
What medium has seen the biggest fall in sales as of late?	compact discs
What was unique to vinyl sales in 2014?	was the only physical music medium with increasing sales with relation to the previous year
Who sold 34,000 vinyl records in 1994?	Pearl Jam
Prior to 2014 when was the most recent large sale of vinyl records?	1991
Warner Bros. pictures before what year are part of the Turner Entertainment library?	1950
Up until what month and year of release are films from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer part of the Turner Entertainment library?	May 1986
What company owns TCM and Warner Bros.?	Time Warner
What is Turner Classic Movies called in France?	TCM Cinéma
What is the Spanish version of Turner Classic Movies?	TCM España
How much did Ted Turner pay for Metro-Goldwyn Mayer?	$1.5 billion
In what year did Ted Turner buy Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer?	1986
Who did Ted Turner sell Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to?	Kirk Kerkorian
Who did Ted Turner buy Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from?	Kirk Kerkorian
Up to what date of release did Turner retain ownership of the MGM film library?	May 9, 1986
On what network did Turner Entertainment's film library air prior to the creation of TCM?	TNT
What was a notable film that Turner colorized?	The Maltese Falcon
Who did Turner ink a deal with to distribute Warner Bros. films from before 1950?	MGM/UA
The MGM/UA-Turner deal concerned MGM films released prior to what date?	May 1986
How many subscribers had access to TCM upon it launch?	one million
When TCM premiered, what was AMC called?	American Movie Classics
What sorts of films did American Movie Classics primarily show?	released prior to 1970
By what year was AMC showing commercials?	2002
With what company did Turner Broadcasting Systems merge in 1996?	Time Warner
Along with Lorimar and National General Pictures, what library was included in the Warner Bros. library?	Saul Zaentz
When did MGM give Warner Home Video the rights to MGM/UA's films on home video?	March 1999
In what year did TCM begin the Young Composers Film Competition?	2000
How often is the Young Composers Film Competition?	annual
What is the grand prize in the Young Composers Film Competition?	score a restored, feature-length silent film
In what year was Laugh, Clown, Laugh released?	1928
Who starred in The Temptress?	Greta Garbo
In what year did TCM receive a Peabody Award?	2008
For what reason is a Peabody Award granted?	excellence in broadcasting
When did the inaugural TCM Classic Film Festival take place?	April 2010
In addition to the Grauman's Chinese Theater, where did the first TCM Classic Film Festival take place?	Grauman's Egyptian Theater
Where is Grauman's Chinese Theater located?	Hollywood
What were TCM Extras previously known as?	One Reel Wonders
When did short films from TCM begin to stream on TCM's website?	2007
Along with The Passing Parade, Crime Does Not Pay and Pete Smith Specialties, what short subjects feature on TCM?	Robert Benchley
Along with :45, :30 and :15 past the hour, at what time do TCM features begin?	top of the hour
In what year did the Motion Picture Association of America introduce its rating system?	1968
In what year did the Motion Picture Production Code cease?	1968
What rating system is often used by TCM?	TV Parental Guidelines
What retrospective of the Oscars is shown yearly on TCM?	31 Days of Oscar
When does TCM's programming season begin?	February
On its standard definition broadcast, what format does TCM use to preserve the original aspect ratio?	letterboxed
Along with Cary Grant, who is a notable actor whose career a viewer might follow on TCM?	Humphrey Bogart
Who owns the Selznick International Pictures library?	Walt Disney Studios
Who is the owner of Columbia Pictures content?	Sony Pictures Entertainment
How many films are present in the TCM library?	thousands
Who owns the majority of pre-1950 Paramount sound releases?	EMKA, Ltd./NBCUniversal Television Distribution
Who owns Paramount?	Viacom
Who holds TV distribution rights to Paramount's post-1949 releases?	Trifecta Entertainment & Media
Who owns Walt Disney Studios?	The Walt Disney Company
Who manages the TV distribution of Walt Disney Studios?	Disney-ABC Domestic Television
Who presents films on TCM on Wednesday nights?	Robert Osborne
What is Robert Osborne by profession?	film historian
Why did Robert Osborne stop presenting films on TCM for several months?	medical leave
Who presents Silent Sunday Nights?	Ben Mankiewicz
What is the time period covered by prime time and the early overnight?	8:00 p.m. to 2:30 a.m. Eastern Time
On what day of the week are Star of the Month films aired?	Wednesdays
Who hosts the Star of the Month films?	Robert Osbourne
During what month and year did TCM Guest Programmer feature TCM employees as guests?	February 2011
In what year did Spike Lee appear as a TCM Guest Programmer?	2012
When does 31 Days of Oscar occur?	month preceding the Academy Awards
When does the Summer Under the Stars event take place?	August
As of 2015, who hosted The Essentials along with Robert Osborne?	Sally Field
On what day does The Essentials have its first airing each week?	Saturday
On what day are repeats of The Essentials shown?	Sunday
What movie block shows silent films?	Silent Sunday Nights
What movie block shows foreign films?	TCM Imports
When did TCM Underground first appear?	October 2006
On what day is TCM Underground shown?	Friday
Who was the first host of TCM Underground?	Rob Zombie
In what month does the Summer Under the Stars event take place?	August
Who hosted Funday Night at the Movies?	Tom Kenny
What character was Tom Kenny best known for portraying?	SpongeBob SquarePants
In what year did Funday Night at the Movies first appear?	2007
What series replaced Funday Night at the Movies?	Essentials Jr.
Along with Chris O'Donnell, who was the original host of Essentials Jr.?	Abigail Breslin
Who hosted Essentials Jr. between 2009 and 2011?	John Lithgow
Who began to host Essentials Jr. in 2011?	Bill Hader
In what year did Essentials Jr. replace Funday Night at the Movies?	2008
In what year did Screened Out appear?	2007
What year saw the debut of Religion on Film?	2005
What series premiered in 2011?	AFI's Master Class: The Art of Collaboration
In what year did Arab Images on Film first appear?	2011
What was the topic of Screened Out?	history and depiction of homosexuality in film
In what month and year did TCM Remembers premiere?	December 1994
Along with individual tributes, what form did TCM Remembers occur in?	end-of-year compilation
In what month of the year does a longer version of TCM Remembers appear?	December
In what year did Badly Drawn Boy provide a soundtrack for TCM Remembers?	2007
Who provided the soundtrack for the longer TCM Remembers episode in 2009?	Steve Earle
Through what company is the TCM Vault Collection released?	Warner Home Video
What do the TCM Vault Collection bonus discs feature in addition to documentaries?	shorts
After the initial batch of TCM Vault Collection DVDs are printed, how are they made afterwards?	on-demand
What month and year saw the introduction of the TCM Wineclub?	October 2015
Who was TCM's partner in the TCM Wineclub?	Laithwaite
The winery of what notable director provided wines for TCM Wineclub?	Francis Ford Coppola
Who starred in True Grit?	John Wayne
How long do TCM Wineclub subscriptions last?	3 month
What Canadian cable provider first carried Turner Classic Movies?	Shaw Cable
In what year did Turner Classic Movies appear on Canadian cable television?	2005
In what year did Rogers Cable begin to include TCM?	2006
What is the name of the TCM spinoff channel operated in the UK?	TCM 2
In what month and year did Rogers Cable add TCM to its analog broadcasts?	February 2007
What was the origin of Hindu philosophy?	ancient India
How many main systems of Hindu philosophy are there?	six
What are the main orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy called?	Astika
What is the accepted source of knowledge in the Astika system?	Vedas
What are the non-orthodox Indian philosophies that do not accept Vedas called?	nāstika
What have scholars argued about with regards to nastika and astika philosophies?	relationship and differences
In what centuries the writings of scholars been used to debate the philosophies?	18th and 19th
What are Buddhism and Jainism regarded as in relation to religion and philosophy?	distinct
What are other schools regarded as within Hindu philosophy?	distinct schools
How available are the sources of knowledge on Indian philosophy?	limited
How many orthodox philosophies are in Hindu?	six
Which orthodox Hindu philosophy concerns realism?	Nyāya
What Hindu philosophy is about naturalism?	Vaiśeṣika
Which Hindu philosophy concerns dualism?	Sāṅkhya
What Hindu philosophy stresses self knowledge?	Advaita
What do ancient Hindu writings identify as the means to knowledge and truth?	pramāṇas
How many pramanas are there in Hindu philosophy?	six
What is the pramanas for perception?	pratyakṣa
What Hindu philosohy is concerned with inference?	anumāṇa
Which pramanas is understanding of experts?	śabda
Which Hindu school stresses dualism between consciousness and matter?	Samkhya
How does Samkhya view the universe?	two realities
What is the Samkhya name for consciousness?	Puruṣa
What is the Samkhya school word for matter?	prakriti
What does the joining of Purusa and Prakriti produce?	buddhi
How many types of Guna exist in Hindu philosophy?	three
Which state of guna is that of compassion, positiveness, and goodness?	Sattva
Which type of guna is concened with passion and activity?	Rajas
What is the focus of the guna for negativeness and destruction?	Tamas
What is the interpretation of classical  of Samkhya?	atheist / non-theistic
Of what is yoga a part  in Indian philosophy?	philosophical schools
To what school of Hindu philosophy is yoga aligned?	Samkhya
What concept does yoga accept the differentiates it from Samkhya?	personal god
How many of the six pramanas does yoga accept?	three
Unlike other schools of Samkhya, what attitude makes yoga different?	theistic
What principle does yoga use from Samkhya?	jñāna
What is the meaning of jnana?	knowledge
To what does yoga say personal experimentation and knowledge lead?	moksha
To what school does yoga share central ideas?	Advaita Vedanta
What state in life does yoga believe is achievable?	liberation/freedom
What philosophy is a naturalist school?	Vaiśeṣika
What is the definition of paramanu in Hindu philosophy?	atoms
When was the Vaisesika darsana  produced?	first millennium BCE
Who is credited with the Vaisesika darsana?	Kaṇāda Kaśyapa
By understanding what does Vaisesika school believe one gains knowledge and liberation?	world of experience
According to Vaisesika philosophy, how many substances comprise reality?	four
What are the substances of Vaisesika reality?	earth, water, air, fire
Of what does Vaisesika philosophy say the things are made ?	atoms
According to Vaisesika what is divisible into atoms?	composite
What form are atoms in Vaisesika?	invisible
What school of thought is closest to Vaisesika school?	Nyāya
What does Nyaya say causes human suffering?	mistakes/defects
What state is achieved through knowledge?	Moksha
What is moksha in Hindu philosophy?	liberation
Besides ignorance, what does false knowledge include in Nyaya?	delusion
How many ways does the Mimamsa separate into subschools?	several
How many ways does the Prabhakara subschool of Mimamsa say there are to gain knowledge?	five
How is pratyaksa defined in the Prabhakara subschool?	perception
What is the word for inference in the Prabhakara subschool?	anumāṇa
What is comparison and analogy in the Prabhakara school?	upamāṇa
What type of doctrines are contained in the Mimamsa  school?	atheistic and theistic
How did the Mimamsa school view the soul?	eternal
What was the focus of the Mimamsa school of philosophy?	dharma
How did the Mimamsa school consider dharma?	rituals and duties
What school disagreed with the principles of the Mimamsa school?	Vedanta school
To what study did Mimamsa give rise?	philology
What did the Mimamsa school think that language was meant to describe?	proper, correct and right
What school thought that language was supposed to be widened to describe and develop?	Vedantins
What parts of the Vedas did the Mimamsa school emphasize?	early parts
What sections of the Vedas did the Verdanta school favor?	latter parts
On which sutras did the Vedanta school focus?	Upanishads and Brahma
In what time did the Vedanta school become active?	first millennium BCE
Which is the most developed and well known of the Hindu schools?	Vedānta
How many ways did the Vedantins have of gaining knowledge?	five or six methods
On what was dependent for the choice of methods in gaining knowledge?	sub-school
What did the Vedanta school represent in Hindu philosophy?	knowledge-centered understanding
On what aspects of Vedic did the Vedanta understanding focus?	jnana
On what did the Vedanta school lessen focus?	ritualism
Due to differences in text interpretations,into  what did the Vedanta school separate?	many sub-schools
What metaphysical concepts were included in the Vedanta school?	ātman and Brahman
What means	Advaita
According to a school of Vedanta, what is all reality?	Brahman
What concepts of metaphysics are included in Vedanta?	māyā and ātman
How is the reality of maya viewed in Vedanta?	always changing
To what does the concept of atman refer?	soul
To what do Advaita Vedantins view atman as the same?	Brahman
What is the philosophy of dualism?	Viśiṣṭādvaita
Who was the leader in pushing the philosophy of Visistadvaita?	Ramanuja
When did Ramanuja live?	c. 1037–1137
For the existence of what did the Visistadvaita philosophy argue?	Supreme Being
What being did Ramanuja believe was the personification of Brahman	Vishnu
Of what does Dvaita Vedanta theorize the existence?	two separate realities
To what entity is the Vedanta Vishnu similar in other religions?	monotheistic God
How is the God of Dvaita different from that of Advaita in actions?	takes on a personal role
As what did the Dvaita school view dualism?	permanent
Who did the Dvaita school identify as the Supreme Being?	Vishnu
What early philosopher proposed Dvaitadvaita?	Nimbarka
In what century did Nimbarka live?	13th-century
How many categories of existence are there in Dvaitadvaita?	three
What are the categories of existence in Dvaitadvaita?	Brahman, soul, and matter
Who is named as the highest entity worshiped in Dvaitadvaita?	Krishna
In what text is Shaivism recounted?	Śvetāśvatara Upanishad
When was the text on Shaivism written?	400 – 200 BCE
Who reported the major schools of Shaivism?	Vidyaranya
How many major schools of Shaivism did Vidyaranya mention?	three
What is the Kashmir Shaivism mentioned by Vidyaranya?	Pratyabhijña
What is the oldest school of Shaivism?	Pāśupata Shaivism
Who organized the Pasupata philosophy?	Lakulish
When did Lakulish systematize the Pasupata Shaivism?	2nd century CE
What school of philosophy did the Pasupatas dislike?	Vaishnava theology
What aspect of Vaishnava was unpalatable for the Pasupatas?	servitude of souls
What group divided the world into two parts?	Pāśupatas
Into what parts did the Pasupatas divide the world?	insentient and the sentient
In what staet was the insentient considered to be?	unconscious
How was the sentient seen as being?	conscious
For the Pasupatas, how was the union of the soul with God achieved?	through the intellect
What type of philosophy does both Kasmir Shaivism and Advaita Vedanta share?	non-dual
What aspect do non-dual philosophies give to the highest order of worship?	Universal Consciousness
As what does Kashmir Shaivism view the conscious world?	real
Which group sees the world as illusion?	Advaita
According to Kashmir Shaivism, what is the goal in belief?	merge in Shiva
What are the two most powerful political parties in the United States?	Democratic Party and the Republican Party
Name a nation that has a one-party political system.	China
How are political parties elected in democracies?	the electorate
What are some countries that have multiple powerful political parties?	Germany and India
Around what time did the first political factions start to emerge?	late-17th-century England
Who was the dominate political party for the first half of the 18th century?	Whigs
Who was the leader if the Whigs?	Robert Walpole
In what year did the jacobite rising fail?	1715
Who's liberal political ideas influenced the Whigs?	John Locke
Name the two people who's concepts of universal rights influenced the Whigs.	Locke and Algernon Sidney
Did the Whigs want to limit the monarch's power?	championing constitutional monarchy with strict limits on the monarch's power
Did the Whigs support or oppose the Catholic king?	the Whigs adamantly opposed a Catholic king as a threat to liberty
Who did the Tories oppose?	Whigs
Who did the Tories occasionally cooperate with?	the "Opposition Whigs"
When did the Tories regain power?	1760
For how long were the Tories dismissed from office?	half a century
Why could the Tories and the Opposition Whigs never form a single party?	ideological gap
Who was the first distinctive Whig party that emerged from the chaos?	the Rockingham Whigs
Who was the leader of the Rockingham Whigs?	Charles Watson-Wentworth
What was the description for the basic framework of the Rockingham Whigs party?	"a body of men united for promoting by their joint endeavours the national interest, upon some particular principle in which they are all agreed"
Did the Rockingham Whigs ever regain power as a opposition to the government?	remained out of power as a united opposition to government.
What was the modern Conservative party created from?	the 'Pittite' Tories
Who Issued the Tamworth manifesto?	Robert Peel
Which party did the Whigs, along with others form?	the Liberal Party
In what year was the Tamworth manifesto introduced?	1834
What were the two proto-political parties?	the Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party
In which year did the period known as the "Era of Good Feelings" begin?	1816
What did the founding fathers not intend American politics to become?	partisan
Who were the leaders of the Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties?	Framers Alexander Hamilton and James Madison
Who was the leader of the Irish political party in the 1880s?	Charles Stewart Parnell
What did Charles Stewart Parnell change his parties name to in 1882?	Irish Parliamentary Party
Did the Irish Parliamentary Party ever adopt the Parnellite model?	they soon came to model themselves on the Parnellite model.
Do political parties have a Party leader?	A political party is typically led by a party leader
Who maintains the daily work and records of party meetings?	party secretary
Who is responsible for the membership fees and expenses?	party treasurer
Who is responsible for recruiting and maintaining party members?	party chair
When does a party form an official opposition?	When a party becomes the largest party not part of the Government
What type of parties allow leaders to form frontbench teams?	Westminster-based parties
When does a party's frontbench become the Cabinet of government ministers?	When a party achieves enough seats in an election to form a majority
If a party is represented by members from the lower house of parliament, what other position can the party leader serve?	leader of the parliamentary group of that full party representation
What is considered a measurement of a state's support to liberal democracy?	The freedom to form, declare membership in, or campaign for
How are parties regulated?	a crackdown on or repression of all opposition parties
Will parties that hold a counter belief to the general beliefs of the state's incumbents be repressed?	to the repression of certain parties which hold or promote ideals which run counter to the general ideology of the state's incumbents
Will mainstream political parties not cooperate towards outsider parties if they are too extream?	mainstream political parties may form an informal cordon sanitarian which applies a policy of non-cooperation towards those "Outsider Parties"
which  outsider parties considered unacceptable to work with?	far-right, far-left and regionalism
What has been increasingly abandoned in the past two decades?	Cordon Sanitarian
Do official political parties exist in a nonpartisan system?	In a nonpartisan system, no official political parties exist
Was the administration of George Washington nonpartisan?	The administration of George Washington and the first few sessions of the United States Congress were nonpartisan.
What did Washington warn against during his farewell address?	political parties
What do factions within nonpartisan systems evolve into?	political parties
In what systems is the political party allowed to legally hold effective power?	one-party systems
What are North Korea and China examples of?	positions within the party may in fact be more important than positions within the government
When was Nazi Germany in a one-party system?	1934 and 1945
What is the one-party system often compared with?	dictatorships and tyranny
When are opposition parties allowed?	In dominant-party systems
What are some of the reasons for a party's failure?	political, social and economic circumstances, and public opinion
What are some ways a dominant party can stay in power?	patronage and sometimes by voting fraud
What are some examples of dominant party systems?	African National Congress in South Africa, the Cambodian People's Party in Cambodia
For how long did the dominant one-party system last in mexico?	1990s
What type of party system is the United States?	two-party system
What were the first parties in the united States called?	Federalist and Republican
For how long did the Whigs survive?	two decades
What are challenged to an unpopular political party?	tremendous land area and large population of the country
Which party was anti-slavery?	Democratic Party
What has the UK political system functioned as?	a two-party (sometimes called a "two-and-a-half party") system
What are the two largest political parties in the UK?	Conservative Party and the Labour Party
What was the other major party before the Labour party?	Liberal Party
What is Duveger's Law?	A plurality voting system usually leads to a two-party system
In which case are parties not likely to gain power on their own?	in cases where there are three or more parties
Is Ireland ever not led by a coalition Government?	since the forming of the Republic of Iceland there has never been a government not led by a coalition
Since what date has Ireland not been led by a single power?	1989
When is political change easier?	Political change is often easier with a coalition government
What are prime examples coalition governments that struggle to change policy?	post World War II France and Italy
What are called factions by some people?	Political parties
What are political parties lobbied by?	organizations, businesses and special interest groups
What are traditional sources of funding for parties?	Money and gifts
Around which time was the mass membership party started?	19th century
Why did parties that relied on donations or subscriptions run into problems?	increased scrutiny of donations there has been a long-term decline in party memberships
When did parties that relied on donations start to run into problems?	second half of the 20th century
In the United Kingdom, what is awarded to people who help fund the parties?	peerages
Who was discovered to be selling peerages?	Lloyd George
What act did parliament put into place to stop such corruptions?	Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act
What did the Honours act do?	outright sale of peerages and similar honours became a criminal act
How did people attempt to overcome this law?	cloaking their contributions as loans
What are the two categories of public funding?	direct, which entails a monetary transfer to a party, and indirect
Which percentage of nations provide no direct or indirect public funding?	25%
What percentage of nations provide direct funding?	58%
Are parties required to reveal their funding?	required to disclose their finances to the Election management body.
What percentage of nations provide indirect funding?	60%
What can also be provided by foreign aid?	funding
What do international donors do to promote democracy?	provide financing to political parties in developing countries
What is another common occurrence of international support for a party?	Developing links between ideologically linked parties
What does the overseas development institute want to do?	to increase support to political parties
What parties is the color green for?	Islamist parties, Nordic agrarian parties and Irish republican parties
What was purple considered the color for?	royalty
What parties is the color black associated with?	fascist parties
Brown is associated with what parties?	Nazism
What color is orange associated with?	nationalism
What is the color red associated with?	right-wing Republican Party
What political party is the color blue associated with?	left-wing Democratic Party
Did the political parties choose those colors?	unlike political color schemes of other countries, the parties did not choose those colors
In what year did the occurrence of using different color schemes for the parties stop?	2000
When did political parties organize themselves into international organizations?	19th and 20th century
What are some examples of this?	The Universal Party, International Workingmen's Association
Name an example of an administration that outlaws links between local and foreign political organizations.	Hong Kong
Who drew a difference between cadre parties and mass parties?	Maurice Duverger
What are cadre parties?	political elites that were concerned with contesting elections and restricted the influence of outsiders
What are mass parties?	Mass parties tried to recruit new members who were a source of party income and were often expected to spread party ideology
What is an example of a mass party?	Socialist parties
What type of parties are the two major parties in the United States?	cadre parties
What does A cappella mean in the Italian language?	in the manner of the chapel
What is another term occasionally used to refer to A cappella?	alla breve
At what point did Renaissance polyphony become popular again?	19th century
How is A cappella currently defined?	group or solo singing without instrumental accompaniment
A cappella was originally used to tell the difference between which two styles?	Renaissance polyphony and Baroque concertato
What form of music was A cappella predominately used for in its early years?	religious music
What was considered part of A cappella until the Baroque period?	The madrigal
The madrigal became what type of form that prevented it from being accompanied with A cappella?	instrumentally-accompanied
In what era was most of the vocal music considered A cappella?	Renaissance
Who was a known composer of A cappella music in the 15th century?	Josquin des Prez
Bach was influenced by a popular A cappella composer heavily for what composition?	Mass in B Minor
How many of Schutz's Easter pieces were in the A cappella style?	three
Lagrime d'amante al sepolcro dell'amata's well known A cappella composition was written in what year?	1610
Some compositions were found after which composer's death?	Andrea Gabrieli
When did Russian musika show up?	khorovïye kontsertï
khorovïye kontsertï were typically done similar to what pieces?	Venetian-styled
What bible passage gave rise to certain a cappella attitudes?	Psalms 150
Who composed a popular Venetian-styled piece in 1675?	Nikolai Diletsky
What is the name of the religious a cappella style used with shape notes?	Sacred Harp
A cappella exists in some liturgical churches as an influence from what era?	apostolic times
In the modern day, what broad religious group is most known to implement a cappella?	Christian religious bodies
Why were instruments more unwelcome to Christians?	They were considered a Catholic innovation
What was the name of the book in which Jeanie Deans is the protagonist?	The Heart of Midlothian
Who is quoted for saying instruments in religious services are like "A cow bell in a concert"	Alexander Campbell
Who authored The Heart of the Midlothian?	Sir Walter Scott
What does the rejection of instruments in Christian music likely stem from?	an interpretation of history
During what time is there no record of Christians using instruments for worship?	33 AD to 180AD
At what point did instruments begin to receive condemnation from Christians?	the 2nd century
For what reason do modern Christians continue to oppose the use of instruments?	Church Fathers had a better understanding of God's desire for the church
On what day is using musical instruments not allowed?	Sabbath
In what style do Jewish families typically sing Sabbath songs?	a cappella
What is a cappella music occasionally called among those of Jewish faith?	sefirah music
How many days are counted between Passover and Shavuot?	49
What is part of the time between Passover and Shavuot thought to be?	a time of semi-mourning
What is the name of the philosopher who praised music without instruments?	Philo
What did Philo's views on the absence of instruments clash with?	Jewish scriptures
What is the one instrument still in use today by the synagogue?	shofar
The shofar stops being used at the end of what Jewish event?	Yom Kippur
How is the shofar used?	by itself, without any vocal accompaniment
When did a cappella begin to take hold in the United States?	1911
What was the name of the choir F. Mellus Christiansen used?	The St. Olaf College Choir
Who did the St. Olaf Choir influence?	other regional conductors
How many singers are typically in the choirs?	40 to 80
What a cappella group rose to popularity in 1943?	The Song Spinners
What was boycotted by American musicians in 1943?	US recording studios
Who is credited for first introducing elements of Jazz into a cappella?	The Hi-Los and the Four Freshmen
What number one song was covered by an a cappella group in 1983?	"Only You"
During and after the 80's, what helped a cappella music rise in popularity?	the success of Top 40 recordings
In place of instruments, what do some modern a cappella groups implement?	vocal percussion
Where does a cappella still maintain a heavy presence?	Christian music
In a cappella, what do the voices not contributing lead vocals or a bass line contribute?	chordal or polyphonic accompaniment
How many works of a cappella in musical theater have been successful in Off-Broadway productions?	four
What was the name of the a cappella musical that first opened 28 January 1994?	Avenue X
What time period was Avenue X set in?	the 1960s
What was the final number of performances in Avenue X's original run?	77
Who was responsible for the lyrics of Avenue X?	Ray Leslee
What Off-Broadway theater did Perfect Harmony open at?	Theatre Row’s Acorn Theatre
Before coming to New York, at what theater had Perfect Harmony previously been successful?	Stoneham Theatre
Perfect Harmony has been called a combination of which two musicals?	Altar Boyz and The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee.
In what month was Perfect Harmony's Off-Brodway debut?	October
What genre best describes Perfect Harmony?	comedy
What is the name of the a cappella musical that debuted Off-Broadway in the same year as Perfect Harmony?	In Transit
Where does most of In Transit take place?	the New York City subway system
What a cappella vocal style is implemented in many of In Transit's songs?	beat boxing
How many Lucille Lortel Awards was In Transit nominated for?	four
What is the name of the actor who played the subway beat boxer?	Chesney Snow
What type of a cappella music is specific to American culture?	Barbershop music
What did the a cappella organization founded in 1938 change its name to in 2004?	Barbershop Harmony Society
How many people currently have membership to the BHS?	over 22,000
What racial group was primarily involved in babershop a cappella in its earliest days?	African Americans
What were the initials of the BHS before it changes its name in 2004?	S.P.E.B.S.Q.S.A
What is the name of the first female barbershop organization?	Sweet Adelines
When did the Sweet Adelines change their name to acknowledge their international reach?	1991
How many women are members of the Sweet Adelines?	nearly 25,000
Where is the Sweet Adelines HQ?	Tulsa, Oklahoma
In what year did the Sweet Adelines become an international group?	1953
What is the name of the Swedish man known for being a large influence to a cappella across the world?	Eric Ericson
Which music school began the implementation of high musical standards?	Adolf Fredrik's Music School
What portion of the Swedish population engages in a cappella singing?	5%
Who describes the many reasons for Sweden's heavy involvement in a cappella?	Richard Sparks
What is the previous name of oldest recorded college a cappella group?	RPI Glee Club
What prominent composer was once a member of The Whiffenpoofs?	Cole Porter
What is the name of the a capella group that was a parody of The Whiffenpoofs?	the Smiffenpoofs of Smith College
What is the name of the college a capella event that's been held since 1975?	Georgetown Chimes' Cherry Tree Massacre
What well-known musician was once part of the college a capella group The Counterparts?	John Legend
Whas is the name of the ethnic a capella group founded at the University of Pennsylvania in 1996?	Penn Masala
Among which group is a capella becoming more prominent?	South Asians
What is the name of the first South Asian a capella group to accept both men and women?	Anokha
What a capella competition is hosted at UC Berkeley?	Anahat
What group hosts the a capella competition "Sa Re Ga Ma Pella"?	Maize Mirchi
What popular a capella competition is not specific to college groups?	Harmony Sweepstakes
Aside from the monetary reward, what was offered to the winner of The Sing-Off?	a recording contract with Epic Records/Sony Music
What is the name of the group that won The Sing-Off?	Nota
Who won The Sing-Off final season?	Pentatonix
In The Sing-Off, where did the groups not from the United States come from?	Puerto Rico
What do some a capella groups do other than sing words?	emulate instrumentation
What a capella group is credited for being one of the earliest to adapt instrumental emulation?	The Mills Brothers
What types of music did the Swingle Singers implement instrumental emulation for?	Baroque and Classical music
What is the name of the ABC Family show whose theme is entirely a capella?	The New Addams Family
What did the Swingle Singers primarily use to emulate musical instruments?	nonsense words
What is another term for beatboxing?	vocal percussion
What was used to make an a capella recording of The Who Sell Out?	a four-track recorder
What car manufacturer hired Petra Haden to perform a capella songs in commercials for their car?	Toyota
On what website can many a capella groups' music be listened to?	YouTube
What is the Latin for Order of Preachers?	Ordo Praedicatorum
What Pope approved of the Order of Preachers?	Pope Honorius III
After the 15th century, what was the Order of Preachers known as?	the Dominican Order
What religion does the Dominican Order belong to?	Roman Catholic
What Spanish Priest founded the Order of Preachers?	Saint Dominic de Guzman
During what time period did the Dominican Order do its best work?	the Middle Ages
What was one reason why the Dominican Order was established?	to combat heresy
The head of the Dominican Order is known as what?	Master of the Order
Who is the current Master of the Order?	Bruno Cadoré
What is the Order of Preachers known for?	its intellectual tradition
During the Middle Ages, who was no longer expected to stay behind walls away from the common man?	Men of God
How many orders of mendicant friars came out of the Middle Ages?	two
Who led the Friars Minor order at this time?	Francis of Assisi
Dominic of Guzman led what order of mendicant friars?	the Friars Preachers
What two groups grew quickly during the Middle Ages?	the Dominicans and Franciscans
The Dominican Order received influence from what monastic order?	the Benedictines
What type of order was the Dominican Order?	a preaching order
What did previous religious orders do for a living?	farms
How did the Dominican Order earn money?	by begging
How did Dominic inspire his followers?	with loyalty to learning and virtue
What group especially benefited from the Dominican Order's mystical spirituality?	nuns
In what country did Dominican Order nuns thrive in?	England
What type of spirituality did Dominic want his followers to learn?	a "mixed" spirituality
What subject did Dominic particularly love?	theology
Why did Dominic sell his books?	to help his neighbors
In what country did Dominic experience a great famine?	Spain
At around what age was Dominic ordained as a Priest?	twenty-five
After completing his studies, under whose rule did he become a regular canon?	St. Augustine
With whom did Dominic travel with to Denmark?	Prior Diego de Acebo
Who requested that Dominic travel to Denmark?	monarchy of Spain
In 1203, what area was a stronghold of the Cathar?	south of France
During what time period did the Albigensian Crusade occur?	1209–1229
Why did Dominic travel to Denmark in 1203?	to arrange the marriage between the son of King Alfonso VIII of Castile and a niece of King Valdemar II of Denmark
How did Prior Diego think the members of the Holy Church acted?	with an offensive amount of pomp and ceremony
Who did Prior Diego admire more than the Holy Church?	the Cathars
How did the Cathars live?	in a state of self-sacrifice
In order to change to a better way of life, what did the legates request of Diego?	a strong leader
Who did Diego and Dominic try to convert?	the Albigensians
In what year did Dominic establish a convent?	1206
What women did Dominic convert for his convent?	Albigensian
What group are older than the Dominican Friars?	Dominican nuns
Why did families send their girls to Diego's monastery?	too poor
How long after his mission did Prior Diego die?	two years
What framework did Dominic use in order to build his institution?	Rule of St. Augustine
In what year did Dominic order his followers into an institutional life?	1215
Who was the successor to Dominic?	Jordan of Saxony
What did the Rule of St. Augustine believe in?	the "salvation of souls through preaching"
What were the Dominican Brothers?	canons-regular
Dominic studied in what city?	Palencia
Dominic's education helped him to overcome who?	the Manicheans
What helps define the work of the Dominican Order?	charity
In what city did Dominic establish a school?	Paris
Who did Dominic entrust to start his school?	Matthew of Paris
Where did Dominic and his followers live during early 1220?	the ancient Roman basilica of Santa Sabina
Who invited Dominic to stay in the Roman Basilica of Santa Sabina?	Pope Honorius III
What was required of each new priory?	its own studium conventuale
When did Pope Honorius III transfer property to the Order of Preachers?	June 5, 1222
The College of Saint Thomas became what institution of learning in the 20th Century?	the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum
What European country did the Dominican Friars quickly expand to?	England
What British university did the Dominican Friars appear in?	Oxford
What did the Dominican Order fight against?	paganism
What is one branch of knowledge that the Dominican Order created works in?	Thomas Aquinas
Who appointed the Dominican Order to begin the inquisition?	Pope Gregory IX
The term "Dominican mysticism" is also knows as what?	German mysticism
In what European countries did the Dominican Order experience changes to how they thought?	Germany and Italy
What saint is associated with the new Dominican mysticism?	St. Catherine of Siena
Dominican mysticism also spread to what European country?	the Netherlands
What friar helped to spread Dominican mysticism to Italy?	Savonarola
What historical period gave the Dominican Order a challenge?	the Renaissance
What was it about the Renaissance that gave the Dominican Order problems?	pagan tendencies
The theologians of what German city gave the Dominican Order resistance?	Cologne
What writer fused humanism with the Dominican Order teachings?	Matteo Bandello
What Dominican friar celebrated the arts of the Renaissance age?	Fra Angelico and Fra Bartolomeo
In 1876, how many preachers were expelled from the Dominican Order?	500
In 1910, how many Dominicans were actively engaged in Order work?	4,472
How many Dominican friars were there in 2013?	6058
In what year were there 4,470 priests in the Dominican Order?	2013
How many student brothers were there in the year 2000?	917
What country held a prominent place in the revival movement?	France
What orator was very famous during the revival movement?	Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire
When was the province of France canonically erected?	1850
What title did Pere Vincent Jandel hold during this time?	master general
What country has produced a large number of preachers?	France
What Dominican Friar inugurated the conferences of Notre Dame of Paris?	Père Lacordaire
What is the name of another French Dominican friar during this time?	Thomas Etourneau
What is one of the leading international centers for biblical research?	the École Biblique et Archéologique française de Jérusalem
What was prepared at the Ecole Biblique?	Jerusalem Bible
What school publishes the Revue Biblique?	Biblical school at Jerusalem
When was the University of Fribourg put into the Dominican Order's care?	1890
How many students does the University of Fribourg have?	250
What is the name of one Dominican Order institution of learning?	Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas
What Dominican founded the Revue Thomiste?	Père Thomas Coconnier
What do present day Dominican Order associates do?	share the mission and charism of the Dominican Family
What is an example of a modern Dominican Order follower?	Christian women and men
What draws many people into following the Dominican Order?	charism
Present day members continue to do what for the Dominican Order?	to praise, to bless, to preach
The tradition of the Dominican Order includes what?	charity
What is one area the Dominican Order puts emphasis on?	learning
What is one way that the Dominican Order differentiates itself from other religious orders?	charity
In what country did some of the Dominican Order attributes change?	England
What did Dominic greatly struggle with?	relationship with God
Who remembered Dominic as a cheerful fellow?	St. Cecilia
What did Dominic enjoy doing?	sing
Who did Dominic pray for?	poor sinners
What did Dominic refuse to do?	carry money
What spirit did Dominic give to his followers?	to assist those searching for the truth
Where did Dominic want his followers to look for truth?	gospel of Christ
What type of man was Dominic?	a man of prayer
Who was the Master general of the Dominican Order during the mid 1200s?	Humbert of Romans
What years was Humbert of Rome the Master General?	1254 to 1263
What did Humbert do that was very significant during his time as Master general?	the sisters in the order were given official membership
What did subject did Humbert love very much?	languages
What language did Humbert want the Dominican Order members to learn?	Arabic
What did Humbert use to teach even weak members of the Dominican Order?	uncomplicated language
What did Humbert tell Dominican students to not concentrate on?	miracles
According to Humbert, what is all that God regards?	good will
What did Humbert instruct the students not to be?	sad
The Dominican Order was also greatly helped by what German friar?	Albertus Magnus
Albert Magnus was also known as "Albert the what"?	Great
What was a discipline of Albert the Great?	ecumenist
Who did Albert Magnus introduce to Dominican Order students?	Aristotle
Who helped Albert Magnus bring Aristotelian curriculum to Dominican classrooms?	Thomas Aquinas
Albert Magnus studied Dionysus during what historical period?	medieval
What was one of Albert the Great's biggest contributions during the medieval period?	his study of Dionysus the Areopagite
Who was Dionysus?	a mystical theologian
What refers to the conviction that all believers are capable of experiencing God's love?	Mysticism
Albert magnus' writings contributed greatly to what?	German mysticism
What idea did Albertus champion?	positive knowledge of God is possible
Who influenced Magnus at this time?	Dionysus
What is it easier to do regarding God?	state what God is not
How do we deny things of God?	absolutely
What enhances man's faith in God according to Albertus Magnus?	wisdom
What is a tool that God uses to speak to the average man?	understanding
How can man obtain understanding of God?	Contemplation
If someone contemplates God forever, what type of knowledge will they obtain?	imperfect
What cannot see God itself?	The soul
What virtue guides Christians in their understanding of God?	Meekness
According to Christianity, who is the "One"?	God/Christ
What is Charity to a Christian?	manifestation of the pure love of Christ
What should man's nature be centered on?	the One
What did the Europeans of the Dominican Order bring to the group?	ecstatic mysticism
What did the English Dominicans hope to do within the Order?	to emulate the moral life of Christ more completely
What group of nuns are used all aspects of the Dominican Order for their work?	Dartford
The Dartford Nuns are similar to what group?	mystics
What do ecstatic mystics hope to achieve?	a union with the Creator
The search for mysticism in the Dominican Order goes back to what?	Hebrew Bible
What is the Holy Writ?	Bible
Who wanted to put mysticism into the Dominican Order?	Albertus Magnus
Whose writings introduced the idea of 'unknowing' to the Order of Preachers?	Jewish and early Christian writings
Who did some early Dominican followers have trouble reconciling?	female Dominican houses
Where was one female Dominican house located?	Prouille
How many female Dominican houses were there in Germany?	seventy-four
Who were an order of religious women who later converted to Dominican?	Beguines
How many Dominican nunneries were there by 1358?	one hundred and fifty-seven
How did female Dominican houses differ from male ones?	lack of apostolic work
What did the sisters do instead of apostolic work?	chanted the Divine Office
What did the sisters not have?	government of their own
Who were the nunneries under the jurisdiction of?	friars
What is one role that the friars served as to the nuns?	teachers
After what age could women become members of the Dominican Order?	thirteen
What type of veil must the sisters wear?	black
The formula for profession into the Dominican Order is presented in what text?	the Constitutions of Montargis Priory
What were the nuns allowed to minimally do?	Speak
What were the nuns tested on?	intellectual abilities
What did the nuns not do in the Dominican Order?	preach among the people
What was one of the activities the nuns enjoyed?	embroidery
Who was expelled from a nunnery for not wanting to learn?	Margarette Reglerin
Where was Margarette Reglerin from?	Nuremberg
What monastery did the nuns belong to who could speak Latin fluently?	Strassburg monastery of St. Margaret
The Dartford sisters were heirs of what priory?	priory of Poissy
Where was the priory of Poissy located?	France
What book could be found in The Dartford sister's library?	Suso's Little Book of Eternal Wisdom
What did the Dartford nunnery have in common with the priory of Poissy?	a religious house founded by a royal house
The Dominican Order in England was controlled by who?	Englishmen
The national side of the Order was influenced by what other side?	international
Why was the English order of the Dominicans so successful in England?	Its direct supervisors were from England
What famous school was home to the first English Dominican Order?	Oxford
Who did the friars build an oratory in honor of?	the Blessed Virgin Mary
What was a subject that all Dominican students had to learn?	natural philosophy
What was the most important subject for Dominican students?	theology
By what year was the school in Oxford completed?	1265
What did European mysticism concentrate on that English mysticism didn't?	ecstatic experiences of union with the divine
English mysticism was composed of how many elements?	four
What is one element of English Dominican mysticism?	it emulated the moral essence of Christ's life
What was the focus of English Dominican mysticism?	one's personal relationship with God
What was so important to English mystics?	the journey of, or process of, faith
The process of faith leads one to what?	knowledge of divinity
What did the English Dominican mystics not require in their work?	visions and voices
What did the English Order of Dominicans believe was the only thing they needed?	faith
How did the English order hope to gain knowledge of Christ?	through an imitation of His life
Who is at the center of all mystical experiences?	Christ
What is the most significant way to know Christ?	emulation of the moral actions and attitudes that Jesus demonstrated in His earthly ministry
What did English mystics tend to focus on in their studies?	the moral values that the events in Christ's life exemplified
What type of understanding of scripture did the English Order subscribe to?	progressive
The English Dominican Order focused primarily on what?	the events of Christ's life
What did the English Order not care about?	the stigmata
The English Dominican Order wanted to put what at the center of their study of Christ?	love
What does Christ's love reveal to humanity?	the mercy of God
What does love lead to according to English mystics?	spiritual growth
What is man always seen as?	an image of God
What did the English Dominicans like to concentrate on?	moral implications of image-bearing
What amends humanity to God's life?	The process of Christ's life
The idea of the image of God allows man to do what?	move toward God
How many public schools are regulated by the 1868 Public Schools Act?	ten
Which type of school requires students to live at the school?	boarding school
How many all-male boarding schools exist in the UK?	four
How much does Eton College charge per term?	up to £11,478
How does Eton College rate expense-wise with the other HMC boarding schools in the UK?	sixth most expensive
How many British prime ministers attended Eton?	19
Which college in Newham does Eton College co-sponsor?	London Academy of Excellence
How does London Academy of Excellence vary in cost from Eton College?	free of charge
Where will Holyport College be located?	Maidenhead in Berkshire
How much is construction of Holyport College predicted to cost?	around £15 million
How many students receive financial aid at Eton?	20%
How many students attended Eton free of charge in 2014?	63
What are the goals of the Independent and State School Partnership?	raise pupil achievement, improve pupil self-esteem, raise pupil aspirations and improve professional practice across the schools
What are some courses Eton offers in the summer months?	choral and English language courses
What purpose did Eton Dorney have to the London Olympic games?	training facilities
How many visitors attended Eton Dorney during the 2012 Olympics?	400,000 visitors during the Games period (around 30,000 per day)
What did 2012 Olympic spectators vote Eton Dorney to be?	best 2012 Olympic venue
How much does it cost to attend Eton Dorney throughout the year?	free of charge
Who was Eton's first Headmaster?	William Waynflete
How old are the wall paintings in the Chapel and School Yard?	1480s
Between what years was College Hall built?	1441 and 1460
How many bays was the chapel originially intended to have?	eighteen - or possibly seventeen
How many bays does the chapel have today?	eight
Around what year did construction continue after a period of financial struggle?	1517
Whose name is on the gate-house fronting School Yard?	Roger Lupton
Where are 18th century "leaving portraits" kept at Eton?	Parlour, Election Hall, and Election Chamber
What is the most famous image of Eton College?	the big gate-house in the west range of the cloisters, fronting School Yard
Who was incorrctly quoted in saying "The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing-fields of Eton"?	Duke of Wellington
During what years was the Duke of Wellington at Eton?	1781 to 1784
What "stuff" won Waterloo, according to Wellington?	the manly character induced by games and sport
Which club at Eaton is for motorcyclists?	59 Club
What was the purpose for creating an Eton Mission?	familiarize privileged schoolboys with social conditions in deprived areas
What is Eton's rowing club called?	Eton Manor Boys' Club
Why did construction of Eton Mission cease in 1971?	it was decided that a more local project (at Dorney) would be more realistic
Where was the Eton Mission originally to be located?	district of Hackney Wick in east London
To whom were School Hall and School Library erected in memoriam of?	Etonians who had died in the Boer War
What destroyed part of the Upper School and Chapel in WWII?	A bomb
Who was hired to replace windows in the Chapel from 1949-1952?	Evie Hone
What were new students once called by others?	'Jews'
What stipulation did the school base entrance on in 1945?	applicant's father being British by birth
For what reason as the 1945 entrance stipulation removed?	"suspected a whiff of anti-semitism"
Who decided to remove the 1945 entrance stipulation?	A. J. Ayer
The College boarding house is reserved for whom?	King's Scholars
Where do "King's Scholars" get their name?	the school was founded by King Henry VI
How many original Scholars were there in the original School?	seventy
How many students receive some form of financial aid?	up to a third
What is the term given to students who lived in town, but not on the campus of Eton?	Oppidans
Oppidan residences were generally cared after by women known as what?	"dames"
What is a House Master?	the teacher who lives in the house and manages the pupils in it
About how many students are in a typical Oppidan house?	fifty
If a boy elects to live in an Oppidan house instead of the College house, what are they called?	Oppidan Scholars
Which students are allowed to use the letters OS after their name?	Oppidan Scholar
How many Oppidan houses are at Eaton?	24
Under what circumstances are Oppidan Scholarships awarded?	consistently performing with distinction in School and external examinations
How many distinguishments does a student need for an Oppidan Scholarship?	either three distinctions in a row or four throughout his career
Which Oppidan Houses did not change from their original 1720 names?	Godolphin House, Jourdelay's
Which two houses were built as student population increased 1845?	Hawtrey House, Durnford House
Which two Oppidan Houses are the oldest?	Godolphin House, Jourdelay's
What term was given to juniors who acted as servants to older students?	"fags"
What were common duties of younger servant students?	cleaning, cooking, and running errands
What words were yelled by Librarians that required first year students to come?	"Boy, Up!" or "Boy, Queue!"
Which first year student was given the task yelled for by the Librarian?	The last boy to arrive
What year was "fagging" phased out of most houses?	1970s
There is false belief that the current uniforms were first worn for what event?	mourning for the death of George III
What are Beaks?	Members of the teaching staff
When are Beaks required to wear a form of school dress?	when teaching
What are classes at Eaton known as today?	"divisions", or "divs"
How many current students take Chinese courses at Eaton?	more than 100
Is Chinese a required or non-curriculum course?	non-curriculum
How many computers were at Eaton in the 1970s?	just one
Which subject was only studied by boys with sufficient ability?	Classical Greek
With whom does the primary responsibility for a student's leaning lie?	House Master
Who designed the learning buildings at Eton?	Henry Woodyer
Are living houses and classrooms seperate or conjoined?	separate
What other term is given to the director of studies?	tutor
Which Eton society is dedicated to philosophy?	Wine and Wotton’s
Which Eton society is centered around horses?	Rous
What is the name of the Eton club for musical interests?	Rock
What is the interest of the Savile club at Eton?	Rare Books and Manuscripts
For what is the Huxley prize awarded?	a project on a scientific subject
Which two prizes are dedicated to mathematics?	Tomline and Russell
What artistic accomplishments can earn students a prize?	painting, sculpture, ceramics, playing musical instruments, musical composition, declamation, silverwork, and design
Are trials considered internal or external exams?	internal
What does the Busk Fund support?	individual ventures that show particular initiative
Which Fund is dedicated for travel to non-English speaking countries?	Marsden Fund
Which Fund supports travel to classical lands?	the C.M. Wells Memorial Trust Fund
What action results in something being "Sent Up For Good?"	If any boy produces an outstanding piece of work
What does a student receive when work is Sent Up For Good?	a card
When a student has work Sent Up For Good, who signs the card that they receive?	House Master, tutor and division master
Where is work that has been Sent Up For Good stored?	College Archives
What is the opposite of a Show Up?	a "Rip"
Who must sign a Rip?	the boy's housemaster
Who must sign a White Ticket?	all his teachers
Who must sign an "info"?	the boy's housemaster and tutor
What punishment term is "info" short for?	sign for information
What term is used if a master is more than 15 minutes late to a class?	a "run"
Where is the "Tardy Book" kept?	School Office
How long is the typical punishment for being tardy?	typically three days
When a boy is summoned to the Head Master, what is the experience called?	the "Bill"
What is another term for rustication?	suspension
The birch was abolished and replaced with what?	caning
What was the most severe form of physical punishment at Eton referred to as?	"Pop-Tanning"
Why was a subject ordered to appear to Pop-Tanning in old trousers?	the caning would cut the cloth to shreds
Which Head Master abolished corporal punishment by peers?	Chenevix-Trench
Who administered caning privately in his office?	Anthony Chenevix-Trench
What term is given to the Head of Music?	"Precentor"
What is an example of a lesser-known instrument taught at Eton?	didgeridoo
Who is the current Precentor?	Tim Johnson
How many organs does Eton house?	eight
How many people can sit in the audience at Eton's main theatre?	400
What is the name of Eton's largest theatre?	Farrer
How many house productions does Eton run each year?	about 8 or 9
What are "independent" theatre productions at Eton?	not confined solely to one house, produced, directed and funded by Etonians
Do the plays sport high attendance rates?	fully booked every night
Who are cast in Eton's female roles in their productions?	girls from surrounding schools
Who is responsible for stage hand duties, lighting, sound, and management?	Boys from the School
Which Shakespearean play did the School put on in October 2012?	Macbeth
What are somefemale schools close to Eton?	St George's, Ascot, St Mary's School Ascot, Windsor Girls' School and Heathfield St Mary's School
What is Eton's best-known holiday?	"Fourth of June"
What does the "Fourth of June" celebrate?	the birthday of King George III
When is the Fourth of June celebrated?	the Wednesday before the first weekend of June
Which event is held on the Fourth of June?	Procession of Boats
Why is being a charity beneficial to Eton?	substantial tax breaks
What service does Eton provide to the local community free of charge?	use of its facilities
What was the full price of Eton per student in 2010-2011?	£29,862 (approximately US$48,600 or €35,100
How much did estimated tax breaks save per student in 1992?	£1,945 per pupil per year
Who granted money to Eton for a sports complex in 1995?	the National Lottery
When did the Thames Valley Athletics Centre open?	April 1999
For what did the college pay a substancial sum and donate 4.5 hectres of land?	in return for exclusive use of the facilities during the daytime only
How many cricket squares does Eton have?	30
How many swimming pools are located within Eton?	two
Who claimed she had been unfairly fired by Eton and won her case?	Sarah Forsyth
What did Sarah Forsyth provide as evidence to her unfair termination and job duties?	secretly recorded conversations with both Prince Harry and her Head of Department, Ian Burke
For what was Eton criticized in its handling of the Forsyth case?	failing to produce its capability procedures
Who was criticized for not handling the Forsyth case independently?	the Head Master
The School dismissed claims that Prince Harry was cheating by saying the claims were what?	unfounded and irrelevant
What was potentially considered abuse of teacher-student confidentiality?	Forsyth's decision to record a conversation with Harry
The tribunal denied responsibility for what concerning Harry's recording in the Forsyth case?	determine whether or not it was legitimate
Who defended fifty schools accused of price-sharing, stating they were unaware the laws had changed?	Jean Scott
In what year was a group of independent schools found guilty of price-sharing?	2005
How much did each school have to pay as punishment for price-sharing?	£70,000, totalling around £3.5 million
What did the schools elect to contribute money towards, in light of their allegations?	a new charitable educational fund
How much had Eton received in farming subsidies in 2005?	£2,652
Under what policy was Eton able to receive funds without farming?	Common Agricultural Policy
What did Panorama say was the documented reason Eton was eligible for farming subsidies?	environmental improvements
How many outreach events were held at Eton by Oxford University in 2010?	nine
Which independent school had more hosted outreach events than Eton?	Wellington College
Who described outreach events at Eton as "unfair and indefensible?"	Labour MP David Lammy
In 2010, how many applicants from Eton were accepted to Oxford?	37
When was an accidental email sent to potential students of Eton that warranted a personal apology to each family?	July 2015
How many prospective students received a mistaken email in July 2015?	400
For how many students was the email mistake originally intended?	nine
What was Eton's beagle club accused of in January 2016?	an illegal hare hunt
What evidence was brought forth of a potential hare hunt?	a video
Did Eton's official statement say that they took the matter seriously or frivilously?	extremely seriously
Which male private school in Boston, USA has Eton formed a relationship with?	Roxbury Latin School
Where do Hennessy Scholars typically reside?	Wotton house
In which year was the Hennessy Scholarship founded?	2005
What is the G20 School's Group?	a collection of college preparatory boarding schools from around the world
Which Duke of Gloucester attended Eton?	Prince Richard
Where is Prince Richard's son, Alexander Windsor, Earl of?	Ulster
Which 7th Earl of Harewood attended Eton?	George Lascelles
Who was George Lascelles' mother?	Princess Mary, Princess Royal
Which 2012 Nobel Prize winner attended Eton?	John Gurdon
Which Antarctic explorer attended Eton?	Lawrence Oates
Where did adventurer Bear Grylls attend school?	Eton
Which current BBC Deputy Political Editor attended Eton?	James Landale
Which former Editor of the Daily Telegraph attended Eton?	Charles Moore
Who is a former Eton alumn and current Editor of The Mail on Sunday?	Geordie Greig
According to actor Dominic Wes, would he send his children to Eton?	Yes, I would.
According to actor Tom Hiddleston, that is special about Eton?	They champion the talent of the individual
Which actor states there are widespread misconceptions about Eton?	Tom Hiddleston
Who was thought to have founded Cork?	Saint Finbarr
When was Cork believed to have been founded?	6th century
When did Viking travelers establish a trading post in Cork?	some point between 915 and 922
What kind of settlement was Cork?	ecclesiastical
What did the Norsemen provide to the monastery?	otherwise unobtainable trade goods
Who granted Cork's charter?	Prince John
What kind of protection did Cork have?	fully walled
What parts of Cork's defense remain today?	some wall sections and gates
What would citizens of Cork pay to neighboring lords in order to prevent them from attacking their city?	Black Rent
Where is the present city of Cork located geographically?	between the Barony of Barrymore to the east, Muskerry East to the west and Kerrycurrihy to the south
Who controlled Cork's municipal government?	12–15 merchant families, whose wealth came from overseas trade with continental Europe
How many citizens were origionally in Cork?	about 2,100
What caused the deaths of half of Cork's citizens?	Black Death
When did the plague hit Cork?	1349
Who tried to recruit citizens of Cork to overthrow Henry VII?	Perkin Warbeck
What is the weather like in Cork?	mild and changeable with abundant rainfall and a lack of temperature extremes
Who keeps a weather station in Cork?	Met Éireann
Why can temperatures differ so much between the city of Cork and the weather station maintained at the airport?	the airport is at an altitude of 151 metres (495 ft)
Where are some weather stations near Cork?	UCC and Clover Hill
If you are going to farm in Cork, what should you be aware of?	lies in plant Hardiness zone 9b
How much precipitation does Cork usually receive?	1,227.9 millimetres (4.029 ft)
What is usually the type of precipitation that Cork receives?	rain
How long does snow hang around in Cork?	2 days
What is the atmosphere typically like in Cork?	foggy
How many foggy days does Cork usually have per year?	average of 97
Where is a good place to find dramatic plays all year in Cork?	The Everyman Palace Theatre (capacity c.650) and the Granary Theatre (capacity c.150)
Which Hollywood actress first began in Cork at the Corcadorca Theatre Company?	Cillian Murphy
What is a major dance venue in Cork?	the Firkin Crane (capacity c.240)
What are someplaces that you could study drama and therter in Cork?	Cork Academy of Dramatic Art (CADA) and Graffiti Theatre Company
WHat are some festivals or events of note in Cork?	the Cork Jazz Festival, Cork Film Festival, and Live at the Marquee
Which group members of The High Llamas are from Cork?	Cathal Coughlan and Sean O'Hagan
Which major opera singers were born in Cork?	Cara O'Sullivan, Mary Hegarty, Brendan Collins, and Sam McElroy
Who runs the underground music scene in Cork?	Plugd Records
What are the main attractions in Cork?	Cork Opera House (capacity c.1000), Cyprus Avenue, Triskel Christchurch, the Roundy, the Savoy and Coughlan's
Which famous quartet calls Cork it's home?	RTÉ Vanbrugh Quartet
What are 2 major cultural influences of Cork?	Huguenot communities in the 17th century, through to Eastern European communities
What things show Corks diverse culural background?	multi-cultural restaurants and shops
When did Cork begin to see people from Russia and Lithuania immigrating to their city?	late 19th century
What types of religions can be found in Cork?	various Christian churches, as well as a mosque
How do the Catholic churches handle the diverse languages of Cork?	masses around the city are said in Polish, Filipino, Lithuanian, Romanian and other languages, in addition to the traditional Latin and local Irish and English
What sets the Cork accent apart from other Irish accents?	Patterns of tone and intonation often rise and fall, with the overall tone tending to be more high-pitched
What is the name of the English dialects that are written and spoken in Cork?	rhoticity
Where did Cork get pieces of its language from?	at home and abroad
What is the pronunciation of the Irish "r" called?	rhoticity
Is there a Christian radio station in Cork?	Life 93.1FM
What are some pirate radio stations that were based in Cork?	South Coast Radio and ERI
What nearby radio stations can be picked up in Cork?	Radio Kerry at 97.0 and WLR FM on 95.1
When were South Coast Radio and ERI running their pirate stations out of Cork?	1980s
What did Cork Campus Radio change to?	UCC 98.3FM
WHich Irish newspaper has it's homebase in Cork, Ireland?	the Irish Examiner
What was the Irish Examiner's previous identity?	Cork Examiner
Who are the Echo Boys?	poor and often homeless children who sold the newspaper
What newspaper did the Echo Boys sell?	Evening Echo
What publications are put out by the UCC?	UCC Express and Motley magazine
From which periods are the buildings in Cork from?	Medieval to Modern
What is so special about the Red Abbey in Cork?	only notable remnant of the Medieval era
How many cathedrals does Cork host?	two
What is the Catholic cathedral of Cork?	St Mary's Cathedral
What else is St. Mary's known as?	North Cathedral
What is main street Cork?	St. Patrick's Street
When was St. Patrick's Street remodeled?	mid-2000s
What is St. Patrick's Street curved?	it originally was a channel of the River Lee that was built over on arches
When did the Theatre Royal burn?	1840
What was built on the site of the old Theatre Royal?	General Post Office
What style does most of the city's architecture belong to?	Georgian
WHat is the tallest building in Cork?	The Elysian
What is the longest building in Cork?	Our Lady's Psychiatric Hospital
What has the old Psychiatric Hospital been turned into?	Atkins Hall
What is Atkin's Hall?	a residential housing complex
What is the name of the college in Cork?	University College Cork
Which river runs through the university's campus?	River Lee
How old is the building holding the covered market?	present building dates from 1786
Where is St Mary's Dominican Church?	Popes Quay
Where is the Cork Public Museum?	Fitzgerald's Park
Who takes care of roads and sanitation in Cork?	local government
How many wards make up Cork?	six electoral wards
What is the most well represented ward in Cork?	Fianna Fáil (10 members)
Which party has the least amount of members?	Workers' Party
How is a mayor chosen in Cork?	vote by the elected members of the council under a D'Hondt system count
What types of retail offerings are found in Cork?	state of the art shopping centres and family owned local shops
What happened after the economy dropped off around 2008?	many retail spaces available for let
What major department stores gottheir starts in Cork?	Dunnes Stores and the former Roches Stores
When will work on the Grand Parade begin?	2016
How large is the retail space in the Grand Parade proposed to be?	60,000 square feet (5,600 m2)
What is the main industry in Cork?	pharmaceuticals
Who are the two major industry employers in Cork?	Pfizer Inc. and Swiss company Novartis
What is the most famous pharmaceutical company in Cork?	Viagra
What major computing company calls Cork it's European Headquarters?	Apple
Who are important industrial technology companies in Cork?	Logitech and EMC Corporation
Cork is home to which internationally famous brewery?	Heineken
What is the Ferro Factory known for producing?	45% of the world's Tic Tac sweets
Which car company closed the doors on it's Cork operations in 1984?	Ford Motor Company
What online retail giant has operations at the Cork Airport Business Park?	Amazon.com
Why was it natural to have Ford Motor Company based in Cork?	Henry Ford's grandfather was from West Cork
Who runs the public busses in Cork?	Bus Éireann
Besides busses, what kinds of public transportation are offered in Cork?	shuttles to Cork Airport, and a park and ride facility in the south suburbs only
What do the routes consist of?	connect the city centre to the principal suburbs, colleges, shopping centres and places of interest
When was the Cork South Link dual carriageway built?	1980s
What was the purpose of the dual carriageway?	to link the Kinsale Road roundabout with the city centre
What was the purpose of the Kinsale Road flyover?	remove a bottleneck for traffic heading to Cork Airport or Killarney
What was a beneficial improvement made to Patrick Street?	pedestrian focus
How many rail stations has cork had over the years?	eight
What connects Cobh and Midleton to Cork?	the line through Kent
Where does the main rail originate?	Dublin Heuston
Where was the original end of the line?	Blackpool
What was Ireland's most rail-centric city?	Cork
How many tram systems were in Cork?	two
Who wanted to develop a horse drawn tram system?	George Francis Train
When did the Cork Tramway Company start a horse driven tram system?	1872
Why did the Cork Tramway Company stop operations?	Cork Corporation refused permission to extend the line
Why did the cab operators not like the tracks?	protruded from the road surface
Which line was reopened in 2009?	Glounthaune to Midleton
What new stations were added to the Glounthaune to Midleton line?	Carrigtwohill and Midleton
What station is going to be available to the Northern Suburbs?	Kilbarry Railway Station
Where are the Little Island Railway Station routes?	Cork's Eastern Suburbs
What system are Little Island, Mallow, Midleton, Fota and Cobh stations of?	The Cork Suburban Rail
Where can one study nautical and marine subjects in Cork?	The National Maritime College of Ireland
What liberal arts type colleges are in Cork?	Cork School of Music and Crawford College of Art and Design
Who provides vocational training in Cork?	The Cork College of Commerce
Who offers post-secondary education in Cork?	Griffith College Cork
What is the biggest conglomeration of start-up companies in Cork?	The Rubicon Centre
Where is a good source of marine research in Cork?	IMERC (Marine Energy)
What is a good source for business start-ups in Cork?	the IGNITE Graduate Business Innovation Centre
How many start-ups are associated with the Rubicon Center?	57
What are the biggest sports draws in Cork?	Hurling and football
How many All-Ireland Championships has Cork won?	30
How many All-Ireland Senior Football Championship titles have been won by Cork?	7
What kind of hurling do the women of Cork play?	Camogie
What sport has been gaining steam as more and more women play?	gaelic football
What kinds of sea faring sports are available in Cork?	rowing and sailing
How many rowing clubs are in Cork?	five
Where is the world's oldest yahct club?	The Royal Cork Yacht Club located in Crosshaven
What is one of the more popular sailing events in Cork?	Cork Week
What annual rowing event has been happening in Cork since 2005?	Ocean to City
What's the most famous cricket club in Cork?	Cork County Cricket Club
When was the Cork County Cricket Club established?	1874
Which league does the Cork County Cricket Club belong to?	Leinster Senior League
Which first-class matches were hosted at Mardyke?	1947, 1961 and 1973
Which teams played in the three first class matches?	Ireland playing Scotland
Which Australian Rules Football team is Cork home to?	Leeside Lions
How many times have the Leeside Lions won the Australian Rules Football League of Ireland Premiership?	four
When did the Leeside Lions win the Australian Rules Football League of Ireland Premiership?	2002, 2003, 2005 and 2007
Which inline roller sports translate well to winter in Cork?	hockey and figure skating
What Martial Arts can be found within Cork?	Brazilian jiu-jitsu, Karate, Muay Thai and Taekwondo
What is federalism?	mode of government, combining a general government (the central or 'federal' government) with regional governments
What features are distinctive of federalism?	a relationship of parity between the two levels of government
What is federlism defined as?	a form of government in which there is a division of powers between two levels of government of equal status
What document exemplified modern federalist government?	Constitution of 1789
What distinguishes Federalism from other types of government?	a relationship of parity between the two levels of government established
Is the division of power among different levels of government equal in a Federalist government?	there is a division of powers between two levels of government of equal status.
Federalism combines what two types of government?	general government (the central or 'federal' government) with regional governments
What is federalism?	Federalism refers to the mixed or compound mode of government
In Federalism, are the division of powers equal?	division of powers between two levels of government of equal status
What type of governments are included in federalism?	general government (the central or 'federal' government) with regional governments
How many governments are apart of federalism?	relationship of parity between the two levels of government
What distinguishes Federalism from other multi-level governments?	equality of standing between the two levels of government
What historical event illustrated that dividing sovereignty was not possible?	Civil War
What organization is a leading example of a federal union?	European Union
What form of Federalism is characterized by where sovereignty resides in the whole?	federal state (or federation)
New research has clarified that Federalism has how many distinct forms?	two distinct federal forms
Before new research, what was the definition of federalism?	a division of sovereignty between two levels of government
After new research, what was the final definition of federalism?	final and absolute source of political authority in a political community - is not possible.
When was federalism put into place?	The descent of the United States into Civil War in the mid-nineteenth century
What is the difference between multi-level political forms and federalism?	the characteristic of equality of standing between the two levels of government established
What is an example of a federal union?	the European Union
What is the Latin word for federalism?	foedus
What was federalism and confederalism common meaning in the 18th century?	a simple league or inter-governmental relationship among sovereign states based upon a treaty.
What did James Madison referred to the new United States as?	'neither a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both
Where does the federalist model work best in?	homogeneous states
What are homogeneous states?	United States, Germany or Australia
Where can tensions be found in the federalist countries?	Canada
What countries did the federalist model fail in?	Yugoslavia or Czechoslovakia
What countries dismissed the federalist model?	Ukraine or Syria
In the United States, what was federalism referred to?	belief in a stronger central government.
When the U.S Constitution was being drafted, what did the federalist party support?	stronger central government
What did anti-federalist support?	weaker central government
On the political spectrum, where does federalism stand?	federalism" is situated in the middle of the political spectrum between a confederacy and a unitary state
Who has a greater history of unitary states?	Europe
What does federalism mean in Europe?	weaker central government, relative to a unitary state
What branch does the United States want to limit under the federalist model?	judiciary
What happened on January 1st 1901?	nation-state of Australia officially came into existence as a federation
When did the United Kingdom colonized the Australian continent?	1788
Which model is of federalism is similar to the federalism model in Australia?	United States of America
What was established when Australia was colonized?	six, eventually self-governing, colonies
When was Brazil's fall of the monarchy?	1889
Who caused the fall of the monarchy happened in Brazil?	military coup d'état led to the rise of the presidential system, headed by Deodoro da Fonseca.
When did Brazil adopt federalism?	1891
What other system does Brazil use?	Fonseca system
What is the fonseca system?	regulate interstate trade
What is the government of India based on?	tiered system
What is a tiered system?	the Constitution of India delineates the subjects on which each tier of government has executive powers
What was the constitution originally provided for?	two-tier system of government
When the third tiere was added on, what is it in form of?	Panchayats and Municipalities
What is a distinguishing aspect of Indian federalism?	asymmetric
What does Article 370 say?	special provisions for the state of Jammu and Kashmir as per its Instrument of Accession
What does Article 371 say?	special provisions for the states of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim
What happens with President's Rule?	the central government (through its appointed Governor) takes control of state's administration for certain months
Who is the strongest advocate of the European Federalism?	Germany, Italy, Belgium and Luxembourg
Who opposed the European Federalism?	United Kingdom, Denmark and France
When did the French authorities adopted the pro-European Unification position?	Since the presidency of François Mitterrand (1981-1995
When did the federal war end?	1863
How did the federal war end?	with the signing of the Treaty of Coche by both the centralist government of the time and the Federal Forces
What did the United States of Venezuela incorporate?	"Federation of Sovereign States" upon principles borrowed from the Articles of Confederation of the United States of America
In this type of federation each country had its own what?	President
How many components does the Belgian federalism have?	three components
What passed on July 18, 2007?	Brussels' parliament
What are the Flemish representatives in favor for?	Brussels resolution, with the exception of one party
What is Belgian Federalism?	the federal system passed in the parliaments of Wallonia and Brussels.
Which cities are recognized in the Spanish Democratic Constitution?	Basque Country and Navarre
How did they manage the tensions in the present of Spanish Transition to democracy?	the drafters of the current Spanish constitution avoided giving labels such as 'federal' to the territorial arrangements.
Where are the main taxes taken?	Madrid
What are anarchists against?	State
What are anarchists not against?	not against political organization or "governance"—so long as it is self-governance utilizing direct democracy.
What mode of government does the anarchists prefer?	federalism or confederalism
Who can elect the members of the upper house?	government or legislature
Can the members of the upper house be elected directly or indirectly?	indirectly
Can the members of the lower house be elected directly or indirectly?	directly
What is federalism seen as?	a useful way to structure political systems in order prevent violence among different groups with countries
What does federalism allow?	it allows certain groups to legislate at the subnational level
What do scholars think of federalism?	Some scholars have suggested, however, that federalism can divide countries
What happened to Russia's subdivision of government?	changed towards a generally autonomous model
When was Russia's subdivision liberalized?	in the aftermath of the Soviet Union
Who was in charge when the reforms was going on?	Boris Yeltsin
Who scaled back some reforms from Yeltsin?	Vladimir Putin
What is federalism in the United States?	ederalism in the United States is the evolving relationship between state governments and the federal government of the United States
How has the American government evolved?	American government has evolved from a system of dual federalism to one of associative federalism.
What happened in Federalist No.46?	James Madison asserted that the states and national government
What happened in Federalist No. 28	"Federalist No. 28," suggested that both levels of government would exercise authority to the citizens' benefit
Why did the constitution didn't have to explain federalism?	Because the states were preexisting political entities
What is another word for express powers?	enumerated powers
Where can we find express powers?	in the Constitution
What does the Necessary and Proper Clause do?	gives the federal government the implied power to pass any law "necessary and proper" for the execution of its express powers
What are the expressed powers?	the right to levy taxes, declare war, and regulate interstate and foreign commerce.
What was the federalist party of the United States opposed to?	Democratic-Republicans
What did the democratic-republican party believe in?	the Legislature had too much power (mainly because of the Necessary and Proper Clause) and that they were unchecked
Who decided the rights in specific cases?	the judicial system of courts
What is the meaning of federalism?	as a political movement, and of what constitutes a 'federalist', varies with country and historical context
What types of movements are associated with federalism?	Movements associated with the establishment or development of federations can exhibit either centralising or decentralising trends.
What countries advocate for a strong central government?	United States and Australia
What happened between 1938 to 1995?	the U.S. Supreme Court did not invalidate any federal statute as exceeding Congress' power under the Commerce Clause.
What are most actions in the federal government known as?	Commerce Clause
What did the court reject in 1995?	the Supreme Court rejected the Gun-Free School Zones Act in the Lopez decision
What did the court reject in 1994?	rejected the civil remedy portion of the Violence Against Women Act
What does the commerce clause include?	include marijuana laws in the Gonzales v. Raich decision
How many components does the Belgian political landscape include?	two components
What are the two components in the Belgian political landscape?	the Dutch-speaking population represented by Dutch-language political parties, and the majority populations of Wallonia and Brussels
What component is the Brussel Region?	third component
What happens with the Brussels special position?	consequently has a number of political issues
The US Constitution says what to amendments?	provides that no state may be deprived of equal representation in the senate without its consent
What happens when certain constitutional amendments cannot occur?	cannot occur without the unanimous consent of all states or of a particular state
Any amendment in the Canadian constitution that needs to be modified, needs to do what first?	would require unanimous consent of the provinces.
What is the German basic law?	provides that no amendment is admissible at all that would abolish the federal system.
What does every component state of federation possess?	the same powers
Asymmetric federalism exist when?	where states are granted different powers, or some possess greater autonomy than others do
What cities in Spain are in the historic movement?	Basques and Catalans, as well as the Galicians
Is Spain apart of federalism?	Spain is not a federalism, but a decentralized administrative organization of the state.
What does federations have for amendments of the constitution?	special procedures
What may guarantee the self-governing status of the competent states?	federal structure
What needs to be done in order to amend the Australia and Switzerland Constitution?	required that a proposal be endorsed not just by an overall majority of the electorate in the nation as a whole
What does the structures of the federal government incorporate?	mechanisms to protect the rights of component states
What is one method to protect the rights of the component states?	intrastate federalism
What is intrastate federalism?	is to directly represent the governments of component states in federal political institutions
What is a bicameral legislature?	the upper house is often used to represent the component states while the lower house represents the people of the nation as a whole
What does federations often employ?	union of states
What is federalist paper no. 39?	that the US Constitution "is in strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution; but a composition of both
What is the foundation for federalist paper no. 39?	it is federal, not national; in the sources from which the ordinary powers of the Government are drawn, it is partly federal, and partly national..
What is the 10th Amendment in the United States?	which reserves all powers and rights that are not delegated to the Federal Government as left to the States and to the people.
When is a federation formed?	two levels
What two levels equal a federation?	the central government and the regions
Why is Brazil an exception?	because the 1988 Constitution included the municipalities as autonomous political entities making the federation tripartite
What is each state divided into?	municipalities
What does each state have their own of?	with their own legislative council (câmara de vereadores) and a mayor (prefeito
China is the largest what?	China is the largest unitary state in the world by both population and land area
What are Chinese nationalist suspicious of?	decentralization
Why is China's government similar to unity structure?	Chinese government is far too unwieldy to effectively and equitably manage the country's affairs
How long has China been with centralized power?	centuries
What type of state is the Philippines?	unitary state
What types of powers does the Philippines have?	some powers devolved to Local Government Units (LGUs) under the terms of the Local Government Code
What type of modifications been added to the Philippines Constitution?	possible transition to a federal system as part of a shift to a parliamentary system.
What did President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo establish?	the Consultative Commission
What type of state is Spain?	unitary state
What type of federalism system does Spain have?	unitary state with a high level of decentralisation, often regarded as a federal system in all but name or a "federation without federalism"
What type of government does Spain have?	central government
What does Spain's government accounts for?	8% of public spending, 38% for the regional governments, 13% for the local councils, and the remaining 31% for the social security system
How has United Kingdom been governed?	unitary state
Instead of the UK adopting the federalist model, what did they do?	UK has relied on gradual devolution to decentralise political power
When did devolution in the UK begin?	1914
What is Ireland Act 1914?	which granted home rule to Ireland as a constituent country of the former United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
What is Irish Free State?	eventually evolved into the modern day Republic of Ireland
What has the process of devolution in the UK did?	decentralised power once again
What happened since 1997?	referendums in Scotland and Wales and the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland
Does England have its own Parliament?	England does not have its own parliament and English affairs continue to be decided by the Westminster Parliament
What does the region of England continue to use?	certain governmental administrative functions
What is ecclesiology?	the doctrine of the church
What happens in Presbyterian denominations?	the local church is ruled by elected elders, some of which are ministerial.
In political federalism what does Presbyterian ecclesiology do?	shared sovereignty
What does each greater level of assembly have?	authority over its constituent members
When was the earliest source of political federalism according to Christians?	is the ecclesiastical federalism found in the Bible.
What was the structure that the early Christian church described?	in the New Testament
What happens in the council of Jerusalem?	the Apostles and elders gathered together to govern the Church
Where can the elements of federalism can be found?	can be found in almost every Christian denomination, some more than others.
In nearly all federalism countries, central powers enjoy what?	the powers of foreign policy and national defense as exclusive federal powers
Per the UN definition, what is federalism?	federation would not be a single sovereign state
What is the German Empire?	Germany retain the right to act on their own behalf at an international level,
What is the libson treaty?	powers which are not either exclusively of European competence or shared between EU and state as concurrent powers are retained by the constituent states.
Which country is Galicia in?	Spain
Where is its geographic location?	North-West of the Iberian Peninsula
Which large body of water does Galicia border?	Atlantic Ocean
What is its largest island?	Arousa
During which period did humans first inhabit Galicia?	Middle Paleolithic
Where does its name come from?	Gallaeci, the Celtic peoples
Which empire turned Galicia into one of its provinces the 3rd century AD?	Roman Empire
What was the name of the assembly of representatives that began in the 16th century?	the Cortes or Junta
Which year was the current Statute of Autonomy enacted?	1981
How high does Galicia's mountain ranges rise?	2,000 m (6,600 ft)
What have been its two primary sources of wealth?	animal husbandry and farming
Name its northwestern coastal area.	Ferrol to A Coruña
Name its political capital.	Santiago de Compostela
Which province is this capital in?	A Coruña
What is one variation of Gallicia's name used during the Middle Ages?	Galletia
Which spelling was the most common spelling during the 13th century?	Galiza
When did it get its modern spelling?	15th and 16th centuries
What is the name of the local government?	Xunta de Galicia
Which group regulates the Galician language?	The Royal Galician Academy
Which author wrote that "Galicians are called so, because of their fair skin, as the Gauls"?	Isidore
Which original ethnic name is "Galicia" derived from?	Kallaikói
What does Galicia's name mean?	the land of the Galicians
Where in Galicia has the oldest evidence of humans been found?	Eirós Cave
Which municipality is this in?	Triacastela
What is the oldest culture whose structures have been found?	Megalithic
Which two minerals found in abundance in Galicia were used during Bronze Age?	tin and gold
What does the Castro culture's name mean?	Culture of the Castles
When did the Castro culture flourish?	second half of the first millennium BC.
Who mentioned the ancient Galician's "warlike spirit"?	Appian
Who was it that described people living on the coast as "Celtic"?	Pomponius Mela
What were the forts that the Gallaeci lived in called?	castros
Where were these forts commonly built?	hills
Where is one place where one of the inland forts can be found?	Borneiro
Statues have been made in whose likeness?	warrior
Though the Muslims couldn't take full control of Galicia, when was it that they invaded Spain?	711
Which kingdom did Galicia later become a part of?	Asturias
As a result, what became the religion of Galician society?	Christian
Ancient Galicians took control of which city in northern Portugal?	Coimbra
Under whom did Roman legions first enter Galicia?	Decimus Junius Brutus
Galicia was incorporated into the Roman Empire under whose rule?	Augustus
Which mineral found in Galicia were the Romans interested in?	gold
Which language did the Romans introduce to Galicia?	latin
The Romans used which lighthouse located in Corunna as part of its effort to establish control the area?	Tower of Hercules
At the end of which year did Central Europe tribes invade the Roman Empire?	406
Which tribe did the Romans subsequently make a treaty with?	Suebi
What was the name of the Briton colony formed in Northern Galicia?	Britonia
Which Visigothic king took over control of Galicia from the Suebi?	Leovigild
In which year did this happen?	585
Which cult arose in Galicia during the 9th century?	Apostle James
Where was this cult based in?	Santiago de Compostela
Name the road that lead there.	Way of Saint James
What did Galicians call the Vikings?	Leodemanes or Lordomanes
To stop the Vikings from raiding, what did the Galicians build as a defense system?	Towers of Catoira
Who was it that in 1063 gave rule over Galicia to his son?	Ferdinand I
What was the name of this son?	Garcia II
Who was the brother who later took control for himself?	Alfonso VI
Galicia then became part of which Kingdom?	Kingdom of León
Who standardized Castillan and made it the government's official language?	Alfonso X
Social turmoil led to conflict?	Guerras Irmandiñas
Which two royals were part of the dynastic conflict of the 15th century?	Isabella I of Castile and Joanna La Beltraneja
The subsequent reforms were coined as "doma del Reino de Galicia" by who?	Jeronimo Zurita
What was the name of the local government and tribunal?	Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia
Castillan armies invaded Galicia between which years?	1480 and 1486
Which powerful Galician lords did they murder?	Pedro Madruga, and Rodrigo Henriquez Osorio
Which Castillan ruler then consolidated control over Galicia?	Isabella I
Which government body was formed in 1480?	Santa Hermandad
Which body was formed in 1500?	Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia
What percentage of Castille's total earnings was Galicia responsible for?	10%
Which other countries was Spain at war with during the 16 century?	Netherlands, France and England
In spite of these wars, which exports did Galicia's Atlantic trade consist of?	sardines, wood, and some cattle and wine
Where did Sir Francis Drake attack in 1585 and again in 1589?	Vigo
Who attacked Cangas in 1617?	Barbary pirates
War broke out with which other countries?	Portugal and Catalonia
When did the Galician Junta more often stand up to requests from the monarch?	second half of the 17th century
In what way was the tension between the monarch and Galicia similar to the wars it was fighting?	there were frequent urban mutinies
Which nationalist movement arose in the early 20th century?	Solidaridad Gallega
Which other movement was it modeled after?	Solidaritat Catalana
Which political group arose in 1916?	Irmandades da Fala
Which magazine advocated for Galician nationalism?	Nós
Along with Galicia's, which other two province's autonomy was annulled?	Catalonia and the Basque provinces
Under the control of whose army was Galicia under during this war?	Franco's
Which prominent journalist was victim of the killings?	Manuel Lustres Rivas
Which admiral who hadn't joined the rebellion was also a victim?	Antonio Azarola
Francisco Franco was himself a Galician from which city?	Ferrol
When did his reign end?	1975
What was Guerrilla fighter José Castro Veiga's nickname?	El Piloto
And what was Benigno Andrade's?	Foucellas
Which form of government did Galicia start using in 1975	democracy
Which modern group now works to attain Galicia status as a nation?	Bloque Nacionalista Galego
Which former minister under Franco's rule headed the autonomous government  from 1990 to 2005?	Manuel Fraga
Which political party did he belong to?	Partido Popular
The sinking of which oil tanker precipitated the downfall of that party's rule?	Prestige
Power then passed a political coalition headed by who?	Anxo Quintana
What is Galicia's surface area in sq/km?	29,574
What is its northernmost point?	Estaca de Bares
And its southernmost?	Baixa Limia-Serra do Xurés
What are estuaries called in Galicia?	rías
What does Rías Altas mean?	High Rías
WWhat does Rías Baixas mean?	Low Rías
The Galician coast is estimated to have about how many archipelagos, islets, and freestanding rocks?	316
Which island is part of Atlantic Islands of Galicia National Park?	Cortegada
What is Galicia's main mountain range?	Macizo Galaico
Its southern mountain ranges are on the border with which country?	Portugal
What is Galicia is poetically known as?	country of the thousand rivers
What is its longest river?	Minho
Which tree species has become a problem for Galicia?	eucalyptus tree
What kind of development on rivers are conservationists concerned about?	Hydroelectric
Which cow species is native to Galicia?	Galician Blond
Which fowl species is native to the area?	galiña de Mos
One of the Special Protection Areas for birds is in which area?	Ría de Ribadeo
Where is Galicia's warmest coastal station?	Pontevedra
What about inland?	Ourense
What is the southern area's climate classified as?	Mediterranean
What about the climate of its coastal areas?	Oceanic
What is the political capital city?	Santiago de Compostela
How many rainy days does it typically have?	129
How many days with frosts?	6
A colder city like Lugo has how many days with frosts?	40
Its sunniest city, Pontevedra, gets how may hours of sunlight per year?	2,223
How many comarcas does Galicia consist of?	53
How many municipalities?	315
How many parishes?	3,778
How many of its numerous named locations are communities?	40,000
Which industry is Galicia's main money maker?	fishing
What are the landholdings that the farming industry uses called?	minifundios
Which two coastal regions are now major tourist destinations?	Rías Baixas and Santiago de Compostela
How many tourists visited Galicia in 2007?	5.7 million
What percentage of its GDP is tourism responsible for?	12%
Which port is Galicia's most important?	Vigo
Which Japanese fishing port is Galicia's second to?	Tokyo
Aside from the larger ports, roughly how many other organized ports are there?	120
The Autopista AP-53 was originally built by whom?	Xunta de Galicia
Name another road they responsible for.	AG-41
In which year did Galicia's first railway line open?	1873
What is the name of its only electrified railway?	Ponferrada-Monforte de Lemos-Ourense-Vigo
A rapid population growth after occurred after which war?	Spanish Civil War
What are two reasons for which Galicia's rural areas have been largely abandoned?	Economic development and mechanization of agriculture
For how long was Spanish the official language of Galicia?	more than four centuries
In modern times, from which year have children attended school in Galician?	1983
What was the name of the law that enacted this?	Lei de Normalización Lingüística ("Law of Linguistic Normalization"
Roughly what percentage of the population actually speaks Galician?	91
What percentage read it?	68
What percentage write it?	57
The earliest Galician-Portuguese documents date back to which year?	1228
During what era did Galician literature emerge?	Middle Ages
What is Galicia's most widespread religion?	Christianity
What percentage of Galicians identify with this religion?	73%
Which church has had a large influence over Galicia since the Middle Ages?	Catholic Church
Which five positions are held by church leaders?	one archbishop and four bishops
Which civilization was it that founded some of the first Galician cities?	Romans
Name two of these cities.	Lugo and Ourense
Who is Galicia's patron saint?	Saint James the Greater
Name another saint associated with Galicia.	Saint Senorina
Which metro area is largest in terms of population?	A Coruña-Ferrol
What was it's total population back in 1900?	653,556
What to Galician's call themselves in their language?	galegos
Aside from Spain, where have Galicians emigrated to?	Latin America
Which Spanish city does the Autovía A-6 lead to?	Madrid
The Autovía A-8 enters Galicia on which coast?	Cantabrian
Which old english word does the word "green" originate from?	grene
Other than "grass", what other Germanic root word is similar to green?	grow
Which season is green most commonly associated with?	springtime
Which chemical in plants is the largest contributor to the color green?	chlorophyll
What an is an example of a green mineral?	emerald
What, in nature, is most likely to make things green?	chlorophyll
For what do some animals use the color green?	camouflage
What chemical causes emeralds to be green?	chromium
From which Middle English and Anglo-Saxon word is green derived?	grene
What is green a symbol of in China?	fertility and happiness
In the Middle Ages, which color was associated with merchants, bankers, and the gentry?	green
What does the Mona Lisa wearing green symbolize?	she is not from a noble family
What does the color green represent in the flags of Islamic countries?	lush vegetation of Paradise
Why is green the color of the environmental movement?	its association with nature
Germanic, Romance, Slavic, and Greek all has old terms for "green" which are derived from words for what?	fresh, sprouting vegetation
How were the terms for "green" derived in the Germanic, Romance, Slavic, and Greek languages?	independently
Which language has a word for "green" that is comparable to a Mongolian word for "meadow"?	Turkic
How many terms does Japanese have for the color green?	two
What is the Vietnamese word for both blue and green?	xanh
What are the colors of traffic lights in Japan?	the same colors that other countries have
In which language does the word for "green" also mean "rank" and "smelly"?	Thai
In what range does the color green fall in modern European languages?	520–570 nm
What is the origin of the word "orange"?	the name of a fruit
In which color system is green created by combining yellow and blue?	subtractive
In which color model is green one of the additive primary colors?	RGB
What is the complement of green on the HSV color wheel?	magenta
What is the complement of green on the traditional color wheel?	red
What is produced on a computer display when light from the green primary is mixed with some light from the blue primary?	A unique green
At what wavelength is green on computer displays?	~550 nm
What type of color devices are computer displays and televisions?	additive
Which color of lasers are widely available to the general public?	green
What is the wavelength of inexpensive green lasers?	532 nm
What type of technology is used in the most common green lasers?	diode pumped solid state
What is the range of green wavelengths available when using DPSS technology?	501 nm to 543 nm
What do pigments do with the color green?	reflect
What are green paints and dyes usually made of?	minerals
What is the main chemical that causes emeralds to be green?	chromium
What is the source of the green color in malachite pigments?	Copper
What is the source of amazonite's color?	small quantities of lead and water in the feldspar
What is made by placing a plate of blade of copper, brass, or bronze into vat of fermenting wine for several weeks, then scraping off and drying the green powder?	Verdigris
Who described the process of making verdigris in ancient times?	Pliny
In what city did the Romans use verdigris in murals?	Pompeii
What would verdigris do to other colors that it came in contact with?	ruin
Which famous artist warned other artists not to use verdigris?	Leonardo da Vinci
Which green food coloring is known to cause hyperactivity, asthma, urticaria, and insomnia?	Green S (E142)
What is a commonly used food coloring in the United Kingdom that is banned in Australia, Japan, Norway, and the United States?	Quinoline Yellow
What is the most common green chemical found in nature?	Chlorophyll
How do fireworks create green sparks?	barium salts
Which copper salt can produce green glames?	cupric chloride
What is the ratio of boron to potassium nitrate in green pyrotechnic flares?	75:25
Why are many plants green?	chlorophyll
What does chlorophyll do with long (red) and short (blue) wavelengths of light?	absorbs
Where did chlorophyll first arise?	organisms living in oceans
How do animals typically use the color green?	camouflage
Why do most fish, reptiles, amphibians, and birds appear green?	reflection of blue light coming through an over-layer of yellow pigment
What is a chemical that can cause green hue in birds?	Turacoverdin
What is a protein that carries copper ions in chelation?	ceruloplasmin
What is the green pigment in bile called?	biliverdin
What is the appearance of green in th eyes attributed to?	an optical illusion
Where are green eyes most common?	Northern and Central Europe
Among Icelandic and Dutch adults, which sex more commonly has green eyes?	women
Which color was the symbol to regeneration and rebirth in Ancient Egypt?	green
What did Egyptian artists grind to use to paint on the walls of tombs or on papyrus?	malachite
How did Egyptians dye fabrics yellow?	saffron
What is the ancient Egyptian hieroglyph for green?	a growing papyrus sprout
Who was the ruler of the underworld in ancient Egypt?	Osiris
Why was green facial makeup worn by ancient Egyptians?	to protect them from evil
Which ancient greek philosopher considered green to be located midway between black and white?	Aristotle
Which ancient greek philosopher describe pale green as cloron and leek green as prasinon?	Democritus
Red, yellow, and black are three of the four classis colors of Greek painting. What is the fourth color?	white
What pigment was made by soaking copper plates in fermenting wine?	verdigris
How many different words for the varieties of green exist in Latin?	ten
What color did the Romans attribute to Venus, the goddess of gardens, vegetables, and vineyards?	green
Why were vegetal green dyes less than ideal?	they rapidly faded or changed color
When was a good green vegetal dye finally produced?	16th century
What was known as yellow-weed?	reseda luteola
When was green associated with the romantic movement in literature and art?	18th and 19th century
Who was a French philospher that celebrated the virtues of nature?	Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Which German poet and philospher declared green to be the most restful color?	Goethe
When did the systematic study of color theory begin?	late nineteenth century
Who painted The Night Cafe?	Vincent van Gogh
What type of colors are red and green?	complementary
When were green and red standardized as the colors of international railroad signs?	19th century
When was the first traffic light erected?	1868
Where were the first modern electric traffic lights erected in 1912?	Salt Lake City, Utah
Besides its association with danger, why was red chosen for traffic lights?	high visibility
What was absinthe known as?	the green fairy
Why were popular paints and pigments in the nineteenth century highly toxic?	copper or arsenic
What color is most associated with toxicity and poison?	green
Which country had a flag in 1977 that was only green?	Libya
What does the green in Jamaica's flag represent?	country's lush vegetation
What does the green cedar of Lebanon tree represent on the Flag of Lebanon?	steadiness and tolerance
Which color is considered sacred in Islam?	green
What is the largest green party in Europe?	Alliance '90/The Greens
Why was green chosen for a number of new European political parties in the 1980s?	environmentalism
When was the German green party founded in West Germany?	1980
What color vestments do Roman Catholic and traditional Protestant clergy wear at liturgical celebrations during Ordinary time?	green
What is green the color of in the Eastern Catholic Church?	Pentecost
What does green represent in Ireland and Scotland?	Catholics
What did Romans use as decorations for their winter solstice celebration called Saturnalia?	green holly and evergreen
What was worshipped for their ability to maintain their color through the winter season?	evergreens
What was designed to standardize the connection of computer peripherals?	USB
USB has become what on other devices?	commonplace
What has USB effectively replaced?	a variety of earlier interfaces
What are the different kinds of USB connectors?	Type-A or a Type-B
Why were the designs for different USB connectors made?	to prevent electrical overloads and damaged equipment
The Type-A connector is usually what size?	the Type-A connector is usually the full size
What size is the Type-B connector?	the Type-B side can vary as needed
What size is the most durable from the point of designed insertion lifetime?	the "micro" size
What was designed for less daily connections?	The standard and mini connectors
What has reached 5,000-cycle lifetimes?	Improved mini-B connectors
What was designed with frequent charging of portable devices in mind?	Micro connectors
USB connections come in what?	five data transfer modes
What is High Speed only supported by?	specifically designed USB 2.0 High Speed interfaces
SuperSpeed is only supported by?	USB 3.0 and newer interfaces
When did the seven companies begin developing USB's?	1994
How many companies developed USB's?	seven
What was the goal for USB's?	to make it fundamentally easier to connect external devices to PCs
Who was included in a team that worked on the standard at Intel?	Ajay Bhatt
When was the original USB 1.0 Specification introduced?	January 1996
How fast was the slowest data transfer rate of the USB 1.0?	1.5 Mbit/s "Low Speed"
What was the fastest data transfer rate of the USB 1.0?	12 Mbit/s "Full Speed"
1.1 was the first widely used version of what?	USB
When was the first widely used version of USB released?	September 1998
What provides a fourth transfer mode?	The new SuperSpeed bus
How fast is the new SuperSpeed bus data signaling rate?	5.0 Gbit/s
What is full-duplex in SuperSpeed transfer mode?	Communication
What are the power variants in USB 3.0 ports?	low-power and high-power
What do the power variants provide?	150 mA and 900 mA respectively
What does the Battery Charging Specification do?	increases the power handling capability to 1.5 A
What is a downfall of the Battery Charging Specification?	does not allow concurrent data transmission
When were the plans to update USB 3.0 to 10 Gbit/s revealed?	January 2013
What actually happened whenever USB 3.0 was updated?	The group ended up creating a new USB version
When was USB 3.1 released?	31 July 2013
What does the USB 3.1 standard increase?	the data signaling rate to 10 Gbit/s in the USB 3.1 Gen2 mode
When was the Type-C Specification 1.0 finalized?	August 2014
What defined a new reversible-plug connector for USB devices?	USB Type-C Specification 1.0
What does Type-C connect to?	both hosts and devices
What connector provides four power/ground pairs?	The 24-pin double-sided connector
Electronically marked cables have a chip that contains what?	an ID function based on the configuration data channel and vendor-defined messages
What kind of cables does the fully featured USB Type-C contain?	active, electronically marked cables
What is the shortened version of vendor-defined messages?	(VDMs)
The design of USB is asymmetrical in what?	its topology
How many devices may be connected to a host controller?	127 devices
How are USB devices linked?	in series through hubs
What HUB is built into the host controller?	the root hub
The design of the USB is asymmetrical in its what?	topology
How many devices can be connected to a host controller?	Up to 127 devices
What hub is built into the host controller?	the root hub
A USB host may implement how many host controllers?	multiple
How many USB ports may a host controller provide?	one or more USB ports
What are logical sub-devices referred to as?	device functions
A single device can provide an audio device function such as?	built-in microphone
A single device can provide a video device function such as?	a webcam
What is a pipe?	a connection from the host controller to a logical entity
A USB connection is based on what?	pipes (logical channels)
What is a pipe named at?	an endpoint
Where do pipes correspond?	1-to-1 to endpoints
How many endpoints can a USB device have?	up to 32 endpoints
If the direction of the data transfer is from the device to the host, what does the host send?	the host sends an IN packet
What does a bi-directional endpoint accept?	both IN and OUT packets
What is sent if the direction of the data transfer is from host to endpoint?	an OUT packet
What is started when a USB is first connected to a host?	enumeration process
What id the data rate determined during?	the reset signaling
When is the device assigned a unique 7-bit address?	After reset
What does the enumeration process start by doing?	sending a reset signal to the USB device
What happens whenever a USB host is restarted?	the enumeration process is repeated for all connected devices.
What do transaction translators do?	convert between high-speed USB 2.0 buses and full and low speed buses
When does a USB 2.0 hub operate in high speed mode?	When a high-speed USB 2.0 hub is plugged into a high-speed USB host or hub
What kind of devices do High speed USB 2.0's contain?	transaction translators
What do USB's implement connections to?	storage devices
What are the standards called that implement connections to storage devices?	the USB mass storage device class (MSC or UMS)
What is the process of making a novel device look like a familiar device?	extension
Why is the ability to boot write-locked SD cards with a USB adapter advantageous for?	maintaining the integrity and non-corruptible, pristine state of the booting medium.
Since when can most computers boot from USB mass storage devices?	since mid-2004
What is USB not intended for?	a primary bus for a computer's internal storage
What is an important advantage of USB?	it is possible to install and remove devices without rebooting the computer
Buses such as Parallel ATA fulfill what role in PC computers?	a computer's internal storage
Several manufacturers offer what?	external portable USB hard disk drives
What do external portable USB hard drive disks offer?	performance comparable to internal drives
What is the most recent standard for external drive connectivity?	Thunderbolt
What do the external drives typically include?	a "translating device"
Media Transfer Protocol was designed by who?	Microsoft
Why was Media Transfer Protocol designed?	to give higher-level access to a device's filesystem
What was MTP originally designed for?	use with portable media players
Why has MTP become the primary storage access protocol of the Android operating system?	MTP does not require exclusive access to the storage device the way UMS does
What do older computers have to have in order for USB mice and keyboards to be used?	PS/2 connectors with the aid of a small USB-to-PS/2 adapter
What is the hardware designed to detect in USB mice and keyboards?	whether it is connected to a USB or PS/2 port
USB keyboards and mice may communicate using what?	appropriate protocol
What connects PS/2 keyboards and mice to a USB port?	Converters
What performs bidirectional data translation between two standards?	a microcontroller
What is difficult to do with a USB plug?	to insert a USB plug into its receptacle incorrectly
The USB specification states that the required USB icon must be what?	embossed on the "topside" of the USB plug
How is the USB icon located to each receptacle?	adjacent
Receptacles should be oriented to allow the icon on the plug to what?	to be visible during the mating process
What do Type-A receptacles do on host devices?	supply power
What do Type-b receptacles do on target devices?	draw power
What do the receptacles prevent user from doing?	from accidentally connecting two USB power supplies to each other
What networks do USB not support?	cyclic networks
Standard connectors were designed to be what?	robust
Why were standard connectors designed to be so robust?	the connectors would be used more frequently
What as a drawback of previous connectors?	Many previous connector designs were fragile
How are the electrical contents of a USB connector protected?	by an adjacent plastic tongue
How is the entire connecting assembly of a USB connector protected?	by an enclosing metal sheath
Where is the external metallic sheet connected?	typically connected to system ground
What provides a degree of protection from interference with the USB signal?	This enclosure design
This type of stage make-break timing allows for what?	electrically safe hot-swapping.
What are the newer micro-USB receptacles designed for?	a minimum rated lifetime of 10,000 cycles of insertion
What is the minimum rated lifetime for the standard USB receptacle?	1,500
After a leaf-spring was moved from jack to the plug, the most stressed part was found where?	on the cable side of the connection
Why was the change made for the USB device?	so that the connector on the less expensive cable would bear the most wear
What type of tolerances does the USB standard specify for compliant USB connectors?	loose tolerances
Why were loose tolerances allowed for compliant USB connectors?	to minimize physical incompatibilities in connectors from different vendors
How is a weakness addressed in some other connector standards?	the USB specification also defines limits to the size of a connecting device
Due to size restrictions compliant devices must what?	fit within the size restrictions or support a compliant extension cable that does
USB cables and device have only what on their ends?	plugs
Hosts and devices only have what in terms of connecting to a USB device?	receptacles
Devices usually have what type of receptacle?	one or another Type-B variety
Hosts almost always have what type of receptacle?	Type-A receptacles
What has been used to connect digital cameras. smartphones and other devices to tablet computers?	Various connectors
What was standard for transferring data to and from the earlier type of smartphones?	The mini-B USB connector
How large are both mini-A and mini-B plugs?	approximately 3 by 7 mm
When were the mini-A connector and and the mini-AB receptacle connector depreceated?	23 May 2007
What is the micro connector designed for?	to reduce the mechanical wear on the device
What is the easier-to-replace cable designed for?	to bear the mechanical wear of connection and disconnection
What is the micro-plug rated for?	10,000 connect-disconnect cycles
In 2007 who endorsed micro-USB as the standard connector for data and power on mobile devices?	The cellular phone carrier group Open Mobile Terminal Platform
When did the ITU announce that it had embraced micro-USB as the Universal Charging Solution?	22 October 2009
What has energy-efficient one-charger-fits-all new mobile phone solution?	micro-USB
Who defined a common External Power Supply for use with smartphones sold?	The European Standardisation Bodies CEN, CENELEC and ETSI
How many mobile phone manufacturers signed the EU's common EPS (MoU)?	14
Who was one of the original MoU signers?	Apple
What are all USB On-The-Go devices required to have?	one, and only one, USB connector
Non-OTG compliant devices are not allowed to use what?	the micro-AB receptacle
Why are the Non-OTG compliant devices not allowed to use the micro-AB receptacle?	power supply shorting hazards on the VBUS line
The OTG device with the B-plug inserted is called what?	B-device
What does an OTG device default to with no plug inserted?	to acting as a B-device
What is the A-device responsible for?	powering the USB interface when required
What is USB?	a serial bus
What kind of wires does the USB 2.0 variant use?	four shielded wires
What are the four shielded wires in the USB 2.0 variant used for?	two for power (VBUS and GND), and two for differential data signals
How long is the maximum cable length the USB 2.0 provides?	5 meters for devices running at Hi Speed
What is the maximum acceptable delay per cable?	26 ns
What does theUSB 2.0 specification require?	cable delay be less than 5.2 ns per meter
What is a unit load defined as?	100 mA in USB 1.x and 2.0
How much is a unit load in USB 3.0?	150 mA
What is the maximum amount of load a USB 1. and 2.0 device may draw?	five unit loads
What is the maximum amount of load a USB 3.0 device may draw?	six unit loads
What is an example of a device that requires more than 500 mA of current?	high-speed external disk drives
What is an issue that may occur if a high-speed external disk drive is powered from just one USB 2.0 port.	may have power issues
What does USB compliance specification prohibit?	"use of a 'Y' cable (a cable with two A-plugs)
What defines a new type of USB port, called the charging port?	The USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.1
When was the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.1 released?	in 2007
What was the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.1 called?	the charging port
What does a charging port supply?	up to 500 mA at 5 V
How many types of charging ports exist?	Two types
What can a portable device recognize?	the type of USB port
What are the D+ and D- shortened with?	a resistance not exceeding 200 ohms
What does the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.2 make clear of?	there are safety limits to the rated current at 5 A coming from USB 2.0
What does revision 1.2 remove?	USB ports type detection via resistive detection mechanisms
When was USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.2 released?	in 2010
When did the USB Promoters Group announce the finalization of the USB Power Delivery specification?	In July 2012
What can devices request?	higher currents and supply voltages from compliant hosts
In all cases, both host-to-device and device-to-host configurations are what?	supported
The USB Power Delivery revision 2.0 specification has been released as part of what?	USB 3.1
What does the USB Power Delivery revision 2.0 specification cover?	Type-C cable and connector with four power/ground pairs and a separate configuration channel
Power delivery protocols have been updated to facilitate what?	Type-C features
What can sleep-and-charge USB ports be used to do?	charge electronic devices even when the computer is switched off
What is normally powered off whenever the computer is off?	USB ports
What remain powered even whenever the computer is powered off?	Sleep-and-charge USB ports
On what laptops are the USB ports marked with a USB symbol with an added lightening bolt icon?	On Dell and Toshiba laptops
What does dell call the feature that lets USB drives to remain powered when the computer is off?	PowerShare
On what laptops are the sleep-and-charge marked with a non-standard symbol?	On Acer Inc. and Packard Bell laptops
When did the GSM Association follow suit?	17 February 2009
UCS chargers will also include what?	a 4-star or higher efficiency rating
When was this further endorsed by the CTIA?	22 April 2009
When did many of the largest mobile phone manufacturers sign an EC-sponsored MoU?	June 2009
What did the MoU make the manufacturers agree to do?	to make most data-enabled mobile phones marketed in the European Union compatible with a common External Power Supply
When did the IEC release its version of the common EPS standard as IEC 62684:2011?	January 2011
Some USB devices require what?	more power than is permitted by the specifications for a single port.
Some devices such as an external hard and optical disk drive can use what?	an external power supply
What is another alternative for power for an external hard and optical disk drive?	a dual-input USB cable
What is the purpose of a dual-input USB cable?	one input of which is used for power and data transfer, the other solely for power
What does the USB specification limit?	the inrush current
When is the inrush current affected by the USB specification?	when the device is first connected
What are USB devices required to enter?	ultra low-power suspend mode when the USB host is suspended
Many USB host interfaces do not what?	cut off the power supply to USB devices when they are suspended
What do some non-standard USB devices use?	the 5 V power supply without participating in a proper USB network
What Negotiates power draw with the host interface?	the 5 V power supply
What does the USB specification require prior to the Battery Charging Specification?	that devices connect in a low-power mode (100 mA maximum) and communicate their current requirements to the host
How is the USB data transmitted?	by toggling the data lines between the J state and the opposite K state
What does USB use to encode data?	the NRZI line coding
To ensure a minimum density of signal transitions  remains in the bitsream, what does USB use?	bit stuffing
What is a USB packet's end called?	EOP (end-of-packet)
What can skew due to hubs add?	as much as one bit time before the SE0 of the end of packet
What can this extra bit result in?	"bit stuff violation
What type of protocol is used for USB 2.0 devices during a reset?	a special protocol
What is the special protocol during a USB 2.0 device reset called?	chirping
 A device that is HS capable first connects as a what?	an FS device (D+ pulled high)
Write operations to typical Hi-Speed hard drives can what?	sustain rates of 25–30 MB/s,
 For USB 3.0, typical write speed is what?	70–90 MB/s
What is the read speed for USB 3.0?	90–110 MB/s
After the sync field, all packets are made of how many bit bytes?	8-bit bytes
How are the bit bytes transmitted?	least-significant bit first
The first byte is what?	a packet identifier (PID) byte
Handshake packets consist of only a single what?	PID byte
When are handshake packets generally sent?	in response to data packets
What is provided by transmitting four bits that represent the packet type twice, in a single PID byte using complemented form?	Error detection
IN and OUT tokens contain what?	a seven-bit device number and four-bit function number
An IN token expects what?	a response from a device
An OUT token is followed immediately by a what?	DATAx frame
 a larger three-byte SPLIT token with a seven-bit hub number, 12 bits of control flags, and a five-bit CRC were created to do what?	to perform split transactions
 Rather than tie up the high-bandwidth USB bus sending data to a slower USB device, what happens?	the nearest high-bandwidth capable hub receives a SPLIT token followed by one or two USB packets at high bandwidth
How many bits of control flags did USB 2.0 add?	12 bits
There are two basic forms of data packet, what are they?	DATA0 and DATA1
A data packet must always be preceded by what?	an address token
What is a data packet usually followed by?	a handshake token from the receiver back to the transmitter
Low-bandwidth devices are supported with what?	a special PID value, PRE
All PID bytes include how many 0 bits?	four 0 bits
 Full-bandwidth devices other than hubs can what?	simply ignore the PRE packet and its low-bandwidth contents
These and other differences reflect the differing design goals of what?	two buses
USB was designed for what?	simplicity and low cost
FireWire was designed for what?	high performance, particularly in time-sensitive applications such as audio and video
FireWire 400 is faster than what?	USB 2.0 Hi-Bandwidth in real-use
The IEEE 802.3af Power over Ethernet (PoE) standard specifies a what?	more elaborate power negotiation scheme than powered USB
Is USB cheaper or more expensive than PoE?	cheaper
What keeps USB cheaper than PoE?	the distance is short, and power demand is low.
USB  was designed for peripherals to be what?	closely associated with a host computer
USB connects what?	the peripheral and host grounds
Ethernet standards require what?	isolation between the networked device (computer, phone, etc.) and the network cable up to 1500 V AC or 2250 V DC for 60 seconds
eSATA does not supply power to what?	external devices
Even though USB 3.0's 4.5 W is sometimes insufficient to power external hard drives, technology is what?	advancing and external drives gradually need less power
On a notebook eSATAp usually supplies how much power?	5 V to power a 2.5-inch HDD/SSD
USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip (HSIC) is a what?	chip-to-chip variant of USB 2.0
What does USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip eliminate?	the conventional analog transceivers found in normal USB
When was the USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip adopted as the standard by the USB Implementers Forum	2007
What was Sichuan referred to as by ancient Chinese sources?	Ba-Shu
How far back can civilizations in the Yangtze region be dated?	at least the 15th century BC
Where were the kingdoms of Ba and Shu located?	within the Sichuan Basin
What land was included in the kingdom of Ba?	Chongqing and the land in eastern Sichuan along the Yangtze and some tributary streams
What land was included in the kingdom of Shu?	Chengdu, its surrounding plain and adjacent territories in western Sichuan
What did Emperor  Duyu transform himself into after his death?	a cuckoo
What does the name Shu refer to?	Sichuan in subsequent periods in Chinese history up to the present day.
When was the site believed to be ancient city of Shu discovered, and by whom?	a local farmer in 1929
The Shu were an ally of who, according to the Book of Documents?	the Zhou
When were the Chronicles of Huayang compiled?	the Jin dynasty (265–420)
What surrounds the Sichuan basin to the west?	the Himalayas
What mountains surround the Sichuan basin to the North?	Qin Mountains
What river flows through the Sichuan basin?	Yangtze
Where was the Qin dynasty based?	present-day Gansu and Shaanxi
What surrounds the Sichuan basin to the South?	mountainous areas of Yunnan
By what year did the Qin armies finish their conquest of Shu and Ba?	316 BC
What did Qin administrators introduce to Shu and Ba?	improved agricultural technology.
Who engineered the Dujiangyan irrigation system to control the Min River?	Li Bing
The Min River is a major tributary of what river?	Yangtze
The Dujiangyan irrigation system was used for what purpose?	to either provide irrigation or prevent floods.
During which dynasty did Sichuan regain its political and cultural prominence for which it was known during the Han?	Tang dynasty
Who was known as China's greatest poet and lived in Chengdu?	Du Fu
What was Chengu known to supply the country with?	armies
Which years saw the An Lushan Rebellion?	755-763
Which empire ravished the Chengdu region with constant warfare and economic distress?	the Tibetan Empire
What was the nickname rebel leader Zhang Xianzhong?	Yellow Tiger
Which region did Yellow Tiger conquer in the mid-17th century?	Sichuan
Which dynasty did Yellow Tiger declare himself the emperor of?	Daxi Dynasty
Which province supplied a large amount of people to the Sichuan resettlement, following years of turmoil during the Ming-Qing transition?	Huguang Province
To which city was the Chinese capitol relocated to during Japanese occupation in the 20th century?	Chongqing
What are some major cities occupied by the Chinese during the Second Sino-Japanese War?	Beijing, Shanghai, Nanjing, and Wuhan
What are some inland provinces that began to develop modern, westernized education systems?	Shaanxi, Gansu, and Guizhou
What are some reasons for the lack of accurate Japanese bombing during the Second Sino-Japanese War in the Sichuan Basin?	The difficulty of accessing the region overland from the eastern part of China and the foggy climate
What group was the main antagonist during the Chinese Civil War?	the Communists
Who led the defense of Chongqing in November 1949?	Chiang Kai-Shek
On what date in 1949 did Chengdu fall to the communists?	10 December
Why did Sichuan see some communist activity?	it was one area on the road of the Long March
What Chinese Province had the largest population until 1997?	Sichuan
Why did Sichuan lose its status as the most populous Province in 1997?	Chongqing as well as the three surrounding prefectures of Fuling, Wanxian, and Qianjiang were split off into the new Chongqing Municipality.
Why was the Chongqing Municipality formed?	to spearhead China's effort to economically develop its western provinces
Why did China need to resettle people into Chongqing?	the Three Gorges Dam project.
What was the population of Sichuan in 1982?	99,730,000
How many distinct parts make up Sichuan?	two
What makes up majority of the eastern Sichuan province?	Sichuan basin
Western Sichuan is delineated by what mountain range?	Hengduan Mountains
Which mountain range contains the highest point in the Gongga Shan province?	Daxue Mountains
How many feet above sea level is the highest point of the Saxue Mountains?	24,790 ft
Which river flows through the Sichuan Basin?	Yangtze River
Which tributary of the Yangtze flows through central Sichuan?	Min River
What are the 4 main rivers in Sichuan?	Jaling Jiang, Tuo Jiang, Yalong Jiang, and Jinsha Jiang
Name some cities downstream of the Yangtze river that are to the east of Sichuan.	Chongqing, Wuhan, Nanjing and Shanghai
What climate classification does the Sichuan Basin hold?	humid subtropical climate
What area of China has the least amount of sunlight?	the Sichuan Basin
Garze County and Zoige County in Sichuan experience what kind of climate?	subarctic climate
What is the range of average elevation in the Sichuan Basin?	2,000 to 3,500 meters
What is the range of average temperature in the Sichuan Basin?	0 to 15 °C
What area for the "Province of Abundance" refer to?	Sichuan
What are the major agricultural outputs of Sichuan?	rice and wheat
What kind of meat is Sichuan known to produce in abundance?	pork
How much of China's titanium is houses in Sichuan?	93%
What is often done with Sichuan's natural gas reserves?	transported to more developed eastern regions
What are some major industrial outputs of Sichuan?	coal, energy, iron and steel
What areas are major areas of production for textiles and electronics?	Chengdu and Mianyang
How much of China's wine did Sichuan produce in 2000?	21.9%
Which city in Sichuan is known for its machinery production?	Deyang
Which city in Sichuan is known for its metallurgical industries?	Panzhihua
What is the largest dam ever built in the world?	Three Gorges Dam
On which river is the Three Gorges Dam built?	Yangtze River
What is the purpose of the Three Gorges Dam?	to control flooding in the Sichuan Basin, neighboring Yunnan province, and downstream
What are some reasons for the opposition of the Three Gorges Dam?	massive resettlement of residents in the reservoir areas, loss of archeological sites, and ecological damages.
By how much did foreign trade increase in Sichuan in 2008?	53.3 percent
What was the export level of Sichuan in 2008?	US$13.1 billion
What was the import level of Sichuan in 2008?	US$8.93 billion
What cities saw an increase in foreign trade of more than 40% in 2008?	Chengdu, Suining, Nanchong, Dazhou, Ya'an, Abazhou, and Liangshan
By how much did Sichuan increase minimum wage in December 2007?	12.5 percent
What was the new monthly minimum wage in Sichuan by January 2008?	450 yuan
What was the minimum hourly wage in Sichuan on December 28, 2007?	4.9 yuan
What is the national minimum monthly wage in China?	450 yuan per month
When was the Chengdu Economic and Technological Development Zone approved?	February 2000
What is the planned size of the Chengdu Economic and Technological Development Zone?	CETDZ
How far east of Chengdu is CETDZ?	8.5 mi
What is the capital city of Sichuan?	Chengdu
How many countries are represented by the investors and developers of the CETDZ?	20
When was the Chengdu Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone established?	1988
When was the Chengdu Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone approved?	1991
The Chengdu Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone is what rank of 53 in China terms of comprehensive strength?	5th
Which Parks make up the Chengdu Hi-tech Development Zone?	South Park and the West Park
Which industries does West Park give priority to?	electronic information, biomedicine and precision machinery
What is the focus of the South Park?	creating a modernized industrial park of science and technology
What industry does South Park give priority to?	software industry
What is the planned area of the Mianyang Hi-Tech Industrial Development Zone?	17 sq mi
What is the distance between the Mianyang Hi-Tech Industrial Development Zone and Mianyang Airport?	8 km
How much value has Mianyang Hi-Tech Industrial Development Zone  output since inception?	177.4 billion yuan
How many high-tech enterprises are present in the Mianyang Hi-Tech Industrial Development Zone ?	136
How long did it take to complete the Sui-Yu Expressway?	three years
After the newest expressway was completed, what was the new travel time between Chengdu and Chongqing?	two and a half hours
What is the speed limit on the Sui-Yu Expressway?	80 km/h (50 mph)
What was the total cost of the Sui-Yu Expressway?	1.045 billion yuan
How many lanes make up the Sui-Yu Expressway?	four lane
What race is the majority of Sichuan?	Han Chinese
What is one of the largest minorities in Chengdu?	Tibetan
Which part of Sichuan has the worst weather and subjected to natural disasters?	far western areas.
How many permanent Tibetan people live in Chengdu?	30,000
What are the three most populist provinces in China?	Guangdong, Shandong and Henan
What was the population of Sichuan in 1832?	21 million
What is the tenth most populous sub-national entity in the world?	Sichuan
How many sub-national entities have surpassed 100 million people in total?	six
In what year was the Soviet Union disbanded?	1991
What are the largest minorities of western Sichuan?	Tibetans and Qiang
What languages do Tibetans in Sichuan speak?	Khams and Amdo Tibetan
What language do the Yi people speak?	Nuosu
In what year was the language of the Yi people standardized?	1974
Which University houses one of China's most prominent Tibetology departments?	Southwest University for Nationalities
What was Unicode published as?	The Unicode Standard
What was unicode developed in conjunction with?	Universal Coded Character Set (UCS)
What is the most recent version of Unicode?	Unicode 8.0
Who maintains the Unicode Standard?	Unicode Consortium
Unicode contains how many thousands of characters in its repertoire?	120,000 characters
What are the most commonly used encodings of Unicode?	UTF-8, UTF-16 and the now-obsolete UCS-2
What does UTF-8 use in terms of bytes?	UTF-8 uses one byte for any ASCII character
What does UTF-16 expand?	UCS-2
What type of code does UCS-2 use?	16-bit code unit
How are two 16-bit units used?	(4 × 8 bits
What is the aim of Unicode?	transcending the limitations of traditional character encodings
Traditional character encodings don't allow what type of computer processing?	multilingual computer processing
What is multilingual computer processing?	(computer processing of arbitrary scripts mixed with each other
Bilingual computer processing uses what characters?	usually using Latin characters
What is the major limitation of traditional character encodings?	wide usage in various countries of the world but remain largely incompatible with each other
What were the first 256 code points of Unicode made identical to?	ISO-8859-1
Why were the first 256 code points made identical to ISO-8859-1?	to make it trivial to convert existing western text
What does the "fullwidth forms" section of code points encompass?	a full Latin alphabet that is separate from the main Latin alphabet
What are the CJK languages referenced?	Chinese, Japanese, and Korean
When was a surrogate character mechanism implemented in Unicode 2.0?	1996
Why was a surrogate character mechanism implemented?	so that Unicode was no longer restricted to 16 bits
What are some characters not originally intended for Unicode?	rarely used Kanji or Chinese characters
Why are some foreign characters rarely used?	many of which are part of personal and place names
Why was the Unicode 2.0 codespace increased?	allowed for the encoding of many historic scripts
What are the General Categories of Unicode?	Letter, Mark, Number, Punctuation, Symbol, Separator and Other
What type of use is the General Category not helpful for?	not useful for every use, since legacy encodings have used multiple characteristics per single code point
What is the General Category in Unicode?	Other, Control
How many General Category properties does each code point have?	a single General Category property
What exists within the main Unicode categories?	subdivisions
What are code points in the range U+D800-U+DBFF known as?	high-surrogate code points
What are code points in the range U+DC00-U+DFFF known as?	low-surrogate code points
what is another name for a high-surrogate code point?	leading surrogate
what is another name for a low-surrogate code point?	trailing surrogate
What is known as a character's scalar value?	the range of code points that are available for use as characters
What is an ogonek?	a dot above
How does Unicode encode characters?	associating an abstract character with a particular code point
How are some abstract characters represented in Unicode?	a sequence of two or more characters
What policy guaranteed that characters have a unique and immutable name?	Name Stability policy
What happens when a name is defective or misleading?	a formal alias may be defined
How long has this name immutability been guaranteed?	since Unicode version 2.0
Who was Unicode developed in conjunction with?	International Organization for Standardization
What does Unicode share a character repertoire with?	the Universal Character Set
What includes topics like bitwise encoding, collation, and rendering?	The Unicode Standard
What do the two standards differ in?	slightly different terminology
What does the print on demand, core version not include?	any code charts or standard annexes
When was the Unicode Standard first published?	1991
When was the latest version, Unicode 8.0, released?	June 2015
What was the last major version of Unicode to be published in book form?	Unicode 5.0
What year was it announced that only the core specification for Unicode would be printed in physical form?	2012
Michael Everson, Rick McGowan, and Ken Whistler make up what group?	Unicode Roadmap Committee
What does the Unicode Roadmap Commmittee do?	maintain the list of scripts that are candidates or potential candidates for encoding
What proposal has been made for the Mayan script?	no proposal has yet been made
Where does the Unicode Roadmap Committee post information on these scripts?	Unicode Consortium Web site
How many mapping methods does Unicode define?	two
What are the two mapping methods that Unicode defines?	Unicode Transformation Format (UTF) encodings, and the Universal Coded Character Set (UCS) encodings
What do numbers in the names of the encodings indicate?	the number of bits per code value (for UTF encodings) or the number of bytes per code value
What are the most commonly used encodings?	UTF-8 and UTF-16
What does UCS stand for?	Universal Coded Character Set
What does BOM stand for?	Unicode Byte Order Mark
What specifies the BOM?	UCS-2 and UTF-16
what is the code point of the BOM?	U+FEFF
What is U+UFFE the result of?	byte-swapping U+FEFF
What is the UTF-8 standard?	RFC 3629
Byte order marks are forbidden in protocols using what standard?	UTF-8
Why is it possible to distinguish UTF-8 from other protocols?	the large restriction on possible patterns
How is UTF-32 widely used?	internal representation of text in programs
What programming language uses UTF-32 as internal representation of characters?	Seed7
what version of python can be used with UTF-32?	2.2
What combinations does unicode contain in normal use?	most letter/diacritic combinations
How is the latin small letter e represented in Unicode?	U+0065
How is the accent added to the small latin e?	U+0301
What precomposed character represents the small latin e with an accent?	U+00E9
The CJK ideographs comprise simpler elements called what in English?	radicals
Why have ideographs been unable to be simplified like Hangul?	ideographs do not decompose as simply or as regularly
What would be the benefit of Unicode decomposing  ideographs?	greatly reduced the number of required code points
What does ACE stand for?	Arabic Calligraphic Engine
Who created ACE?	DecoType
When was ACE created?	1980s
Who created OpenType?	Adobe and Microsoft
Who created Graphite?	SIL International
where are instructions embedded to tell fonts how to output sequences?	in fonts
Can real stacking be accomplished?	Real stacking is impossible
what is a solution to the placement of combining marks?	assigning the marks a width of zero and placing the glyph itself to the left or right of the left sidebearing
What subset of Unicode is used by Windows?	WGL-4 with 652 characters
What are MES-1, MES-2, AND MES-3A AND MES-3B part of?	Multilingual European Subsets
What subset includes every character in MES-1 and WGL-4?	MES-2
How long has Microsoft Windows supported WGL-4?	since Windows NT 4.0
MES-1 uses what scripts only?	Latin scripts only
What does rendering software display when it can't process a Unicode character?	open rectangle, or the Unicode "replacement character"
What is the code for the Unicode replacement character?	U+FFFD
What is the name of Apple's font?	Last Resort
What company uses the Unicode Fallback font?	SIL International
What does SIL's Unicode Fallback font display when it can't display a character properly?	a box showing the hexadecimal scalar value of the character
What is the dominant scheme for internal processing?	Unicode
What is Unicode available through Windows on?	Microsoft Layer
What was the two-byte precursor to UTF-16?	UCS-2
What is used almost exclusively for building new information processing systems?	Unicode
What is recommended for email transmission of Unicode?	the UTF-8 character set and the Base64 or the Quoted-printable transfer encoding
Where are the details of the two mechanisms for email transmission specified?	MIME standards
How many different mechanisms does MIME define for encoding Unicode in email?	two different mechanisms
How many fonts support the majority of Unicode's character repertoire?	fewer than a dozen fonts
What are the fonts that support Unicode referred to as?	"pan-Unicode" fonts
Unicode-based fonts are normally focused on supporting what?	basic ASCII and particular scripts or sets of characters or symbols
What is the code for separating lines?	U+2028
What is the code for separating paragraphs?	U+2029
How is newline normalization accomplished in Mac OS X?	Cocoa text system
How does the newliine normallization format work?	every possible newline character is converted internally to a common newline
Why has Unicode been criticized for not separately encoding forms of kanji?	complicates the processing of ancient Japanese and uncommon Japanese names
What is TRON?	alternative encodings that preserve the stylistic differences between Chinese, Japanese, and Korean characters
What perception does the unification of glyphs cause?	the languages themselves, not just the basic character representation, are being merged
what tables of OpenType allow permit the selection of alternative glyph representations?	Advanced Typographic
Where is information provided to designate which character form to select?	plain text
How does modern font technology address the issue of depicting a Han character in alternate glyph representations?	Unicode variation sequences
Unicode was designed for a round trip format conversion to and from what?	preexisting character encodings
How many encoding forms are there for Korean Hangul?	three different encoding forms
Since what version can already existing characters no longer be added to the standard?	version 3.0
What kind of mappings must be provided between characters in existing legacy character sets and those in Unicode?	Injective mappings
A lack of consistency between what earlier Japanese encodings and unicode led to mismatches?	Shift-JIS or EUC-JP
what is the fullwidth tilde character code in Microsoft Windows?	U+FF5E
How many code points are tamil and Devanagari allocated?	128
What is another word for ligatures?	conjuncts
What is the ISCII standard?	128 code points
What standard did Unicode inherit involving a Thai language?	Thai Industrial Standard 620
Why has Thai alphabet support been criticized?	its ordering of Thai characters
How are the Thai characters ordered incorrectly?	Thai characters. The vowels เ, แ, โ, ใ, ไ that are written to the left of the preceding consonant are in visual order instead of phonetic order
How are characters with diacritical marks represented?	either as a single precomposed character or as a decomposed sequence of a base letter plus one or more non-spacing marks
What encoding does Charis SIL use?	Graphite, OpenType, or AAT technologies
What is the issue with underdots and their placement?	often be placed incorrectly
Characters with what marks can be displayed as a single character or a decomposed sequence?	diacritical marks
How should the characters with the macron and acute be displayed?	identically
What city has the biggest population in Michigan?	Detroit
What is the name of the county that Detroit is a part of?	Wayne County
How many people inhabit metro Detroit?	5.3 million
What is the name of the river that runs through Detroit?	Detroit River
In what region of the country is Detroit located?	Midwest
How much of Michigan's population resides in the Detroit metropolitan area?	one-half
How big is the population of the Detroit-Windsor area?	5,700,000
How many square miles is is Detroit's urban area?	1,337 square miles
In which census are these numbers coming from?	2010
By how much has Detroit's population fallen this century?	25
The decline of what industry has hurt Detroit?	auto
What industry has Detroit tried to revitalize in recent years?	entertainment
What is one of the problems that currently effects property values in Detroit?	abandonment of properties
Who is the Governor in Michigan?	Rick Snyder
On which date did Detroit file bankruptcy?	July 18, 2013
How much debt did Detroit have when they declared bankruptcy?	$18.5 billion
On which date was Detroit's bankruptcy plan approved?	November 7, 2014
What type of bankruptcy did Detroit go through?	Chapter 9
What was Detroit's population in 1773?	1,400
What was Detroit's population in 1778?	2,144
What was Detroit's population in 1765?	800
Who was the French Minister of Marine in 1701?	Louis Phélypeaux, comte de Pontchartrain
Which French officer led the 1701 expedition?	Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac
What trade was instrumental to the growth of this region?	fur
By which group were the original French and French Canadians replaced?	Anglo-American settlers
What is the name of the French Canadians in Detroit?	Muskrat French
In which War was Detroit captured by the British?	War of 1812
In which battle did American troops suffer the highest casualties?	Battle of Frenchtown
In which year was Detroit recaptured?	1813
In which county is the park commemorating the Battle of Frenchtown?	Monroe County
What year was the Battle of Gettysburg?	1863
Who led the Wolverine Brigade?	George Armstrong Custer
What Brigade was the 24th Michigan Infantry Regiment a part of?	Iron Brigade
How many casualties did the 24th Michigan Infantry Regiment have in Gettysburg?	82%
What was a nickname for Detroit in the late 19th century?	Paris of the West
On which waterway is Detroit located?	Great Lakes
What is the most famous mansion in Detroit?	David Whitney House
Which street became known for it's mansions?	Woodward Avenue
Who electrified Detroit?	Thomas Edison
Who was the labor leader of the Teamsters?	Jimmy Hoffa
Who was the labor leader of the Autoworkers?	Walter Reuther
How many hours did the unions push for as a maximum for a work day?	8
How many hours did the Unions want the work week to be limited to?	40
What was the name of a vigilante group in Detroit?	The Black Legion
How many people of The Black Legion were convicted of crimes?	49
By which decade had the KKK become very active in Detroit?	1920s
What is the name of the movement of rural blacks in the early 20th century called?	The Great Migration
How many people were killed in the race riot of 1943?	34
How many people came to Detroit between 1941 and 1943?	400,000
After which event did the 1943 race riot happen?	Packard plant protest
What care company promoted black workers to work alongside white workers?	Packard
In which year was the last electric streetcar line removed?	1956
How many seconds did a streetcar run along Woodward Ave in 1941?	60
What made car travel much easier?	highways
In which year did Martin Luther King Jr. give a speech in Detroit?	1963
What is the name of the riot in Detroit in 1967?	Twelfth Street riot
Who was the Governor of Michigan in 1967?	George W. Romney
Who was the President of the United States in 1967?	President Johnson
How many people were killed in the Twelfth Street riots?	43
Who was Governor of Michigan in 1970?	William Milliken
What is the court case that ruled that schools were subject to local control?	Milliken v. Bradley
In which year did the Supreme Court hear Milliken v. Bradley?	1974
What case is cited as a reason for White people leaving Detroit?	Milliken
What school does John Mogk teach at?	Wayne State University
At which school did Myron Orfield teach?	University of Minnesota
Who was the first black mayor of Detroit?	Coleman Young
What did Detroit build after the failure of a larger regional transportation system?	Detroit People Mover
How much did the federal government offer for a rapid transit system?	$600 million
Who did Detroit argue with when trying to plane a regional transit system?	suburban neighbors
What hurt the Auto industry?	gasoline crises
What did Detroit use to build it's tax base?	eminent domain
What was one of the effects of having employers cut jobs and closing plants in Detroit?	eroding the tax base
What group of buildings opened in 1977?	The Renaissance Center
What was Mayor Young criticized for not reducing?	high crime rate
What area did downtown Detroit continue to lose businesses to?	suburbs
In which year did Detroit's population peak?	1950
What was the population of Detroit in 1950?	1.8 million
By how much in percent has the population of Detroit declined since 1950?	40
What was the population of Detroit in 2010?	700,000
In which year was Campus Martius open?	2004
What area has Detroit been trying to redevelop?	riverfront
In which year did Detroit celebrate it's 300th anniversary?	2001
What opened in 2011?	Port Authority Passenger Terminal
Which two areas were connected by the Port Authority Passenger Terminal?	Hart Plaza to the Renaissance Center
How much has been invested in Detroit since 2006?	$9 billion
Which hotel is set to be renovated?	Strathmore
How much money has been invested in Detroit in 2013-2014?	$5.2 billion
How many vacant downtown buildings are there in Detroit?	13
How many stray dogs do studies suggest are in Detroit?	1,000-3,000
How much in unpaid taxes did Detroit fail to collect in 2011?	$246 million
What is the term for when a city falls into disrepair?	urban decay
What is the prominent topographical feature in Detroit?	Detroit Moraine
How tall is the tallest point in Detroit?	675 to 680 feet
What is the lowest point in Detroit along side?	Detroit River
What material is the Detroit Moraine composed of?	clay
What company mines salt in Detroit?	Detroit Salt Company
How many acres is the Windsor Salt Mine?	1,500
How many routes to Canada does Detroit have?	four
What is the railway tunnel to Canada called?	Michigan Central Railway Tunnel
What it the Ferry to Canada called?	Detroit–Windsor Truck Ferry
What body of water affects Detroit's climate?	Great Lakes
How many days a year does the temperature in Detroit drop below 0?	4.4
When is the warm season in Detroit?	May to September
What is the average rainfall for summer months?	33.5 inches
How many inches of snow does Detroit get on average?	42.5
When do thunderstorms usually occur in Detroit?	spring and summer
How many days a year does Detroit get a thick snow pack?	27.5
What architectural style does One Detroit Center boast?	post modern Neo-Gothic spires
What style does the Guardian building use?	Art Deco
What is a famous theater in Detroit?	Fox Theatre
What is a famous opera house in Detroit?	Detroit Opera House
What university is near the New Center?	Wayne State University
What areas of Detroit contain high rises?	Downtown and New Center
What is the neighborhood just west of Woodward?	Palmer Park
What type of neighborhood is Sherwood Forest?	historic
What is the large island park in Detroit?	Belle Isle Park
What is Michigan's first urban park?	Tri-Centennial State Park
How long is the second phase of the riverfront?	two-mile
What is the total length of the Detroit International Riverfront?	five miles
How large is Lafayette Park?	78-acre
In which part of Detroit is Mexicantown International Welcome Center?	Southwest Detroit
What district is Lafayette Park a part of?	Ludwig Mies van der Rohe residential district
Who planned Lafayette Park?	Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig Hilberseimer and Alfred Caldwell
How many of Detroit's residential lots are are underdeveloped?	a quarter
How many of Detroit's housing is unoccupied?	10%
How many home in Detroit need minor repairs?	9%
How many of Detroit's home are in good condition?	86%
Where are most of the low density area of Detroit located?	northeast and on the city's fringes
How much in stimulus money was announced in 2008?	$300-million
Who was the Mayor of Detroit in 2011?	Mayor Bing
What is the plan called that seeks to clear land for neighborhood construction?	Far Eastside Plan
How many acres of land does the Far Eastside Plan seek to clear?	1,200
How was the 2008 stimulus plan payed for?	earmarking about 15% of the wagering tax
What was the median household income in 2009?	$26,098
What was the median household income in 2000?	$29,526
How many residents of Detroit in three live in poverty?	one
Who said that Detroit is one of the poorest big cities in the country?	Luke Bergmann
What is Oakland Counties rank in affluence in 2009?	11th
What city dominates Wayne County?	Detroit
What is Oakland Counties average income?	$62,000
What is Wayne Counties average income?	$38,000
What percentage of Detroit's residents where white in 1940?	90.4
Where did the population of Detroit shift to in the second half of the 20th century?	suburbs
How many blacks lived in Detroit in 1930?	120,000
What was the movement of blacks to northern cities called?	Great Migration
What industry is responsible for a large growth in Detroit's population?	automobile
Why did Blacks move to Detroit in the middle if the 20th century?	Jim Crow
What is an example of economic discrimination?	redlining
What exacerbated segregation in Detroit?	white migration to the suburbs
What generally declines in places that are segregated by race or class?	health
How much of Michigan's population is Black?	13 percent
How much of Detroit's population is Black?	82 percent
What was Detroit ranked as in a 2010 study on segregated cities?	four
Where have many Black people been moving to in recent years?	suburbs
What is the 2009 population of Whites in Detroit?	13.3%
When did Mexicantown start to grow?	1940s
What was Detroit's 2010 Hispanic population?	48,679
What was Detroit's 2010 Mexican population?	36,452
What was it called when many Mexican's were forcibly repatriated?	Mexican Repatriation of the 1930s
Where does most of the Bangladeshi population in Detroit live?	A portion of Detroit next to eastern Hamtramck
What is a word that could describe a lot of the Asian people who work or live in downtown Detroit?	transient
Which company makes timepieces in Midtown?	Shinola
What is the largest employer in Detroit?	Detroit Medical Center
What district is Midtown north of?	central business district
Other than Downtown and Midtown, what area boasts a fast growing restaurant scene?	Corktown
Where is TechTown based?	New Center
What Tech company is based in Detroit?	Compuware
What insurance company is located in downtown Detroit?	Blue Cross Blue Shield
Which company moved it's world headquarters to Detroit in 2010?	Quicken Loans
What is the name Of the U.S. Patent office in Detroit?	Elijah J. McCoy Satellite Office
Which part of Detroit has gotten billions in investment around the turn of the millennium?	downtown
What part of Detroit is Green Alleys located in?	Midtown
What type of vacant buildings have been spared destruction?	historically significant
What part of Detroit still has high population density??	Midtown
Which building's reconstruction cost $82 million?	David Whitney Building
Which Downtown tower was converted to residential use?	David Broderick Tower
What was the former name of the Doubletree?	Fort Shelby Hotel
What was the former name of the Westin?	Book Cadillac Hotel
Which bank announced an investment into Detroit in 2014?	JPMorgan Chase
How much of JPMorgan's investment will go to blight removal?	$25 million
How much of JPMorgan's investment will go to job training?	$12.5 million
How much did JPMorgan announce in additional investment into Detroit in 2015?	$32 million
Which city has a lower than usual drinking age?	Windsor, Ontario
How many suburban residents take in Detroit's entertainment options?	two-thirds
Who conducted a study about Detroit's walk-ability?	Walk Score
What "Arsenal" was Detroit a part of ?	Arsenal of Democracy
What nickname for Detroit recognizes it's musical history?	Motown
What is Detroit's area code?	313
Which hockey team is based in Detroit?	Red Wings
What Kiss song gave Detroit the nickname Rock City?	Detroit Rock City
Which artist resided in Delray?	John Lee Hooker
Which musician attended Cass Tech?	Donald Byrd
Which musician accompanied Donald Byrd on several albums?	Pepper Adams
What is the name of the jazz museum in Detroit?	Graystone International Jazz Museum
What type of music is John Lee Hooker known for?	blues
Who was a big influence on Smokey Robinson?	Nolan Strong
What label operated in Third Avenue?	Fortune
Who was Jack Brown's wife?	Devora Brown
What label became Detroit's most famous?	Motown
Who founded Motown records?	Berry Gordy, Jr.
Who did a documentary on Motown?	Paul Justman
Who wrote a book about Motown?	Allan Slutsky
What music genre was big in Detroit in the 1980s?	hardcore punk rock underground
What year did the movie about Kiss come out?	1999
In which decades did bands like MC5 and Rare Earth become big in Detroit?	1960s and 70s
Which Detroit artist has the highest hip-hop sales?	Eminem
Which band toured with Kid Rock?	Sponge
What genre does The White Stripes fit into?	garage rock
What is J Dilla's occupation?	producer
Techno started in which city?	Detroit
What genre of music featured robotic themes?	Detroit techno
What is the Detroit Electronic Music Festival known as?	Movement
When does "Movement" occur?	Memorial Day Weekend
Where does "Movement" take place?	Hart Plaza
What building does the Detroit Symphony Orchestra play in?	Orchestra Hall
What family purchased the Detroit opera House?	Nederlander
How many seats does the Fisher Theater have?	2,089
Which Detroit theater has 4,404 seats?	Masonic Temple Theatre
In what year was the Detroit Opera House purchased?	1922
What is the name of the art museum in Detroit?	Detroit Institute of Arts
What is the name of the Detroit museum of African American history?	Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History
Where was the birthplace of the Model T?	Ford Piquette Avenue Plant
What does MOCAD stand for?	Museum of Contemporary Art Detroit
What does CAID stand for?	Contemporary Art Institute of Detroit
What is the U.S.'s largest museum complex?	The Henry Ford
Where is the Detroit Zoo?	Royal Oak
What museum is in Bloomfield Hills?	Cranbrook Art Museum
What museum is on Belle Isle?	Anna Scripps Whitcomb Conservatory
What Detroit gallery opened in 2010?	G.R. N'Namdi Gallery
Which market has the largest open air flowerbed in the US?	Eastern Market
How big is Midtown's population?	50,000
Which festival attracts over a quarter million visitors?	Detroit Festival of the Arts
How many casino resorts ore in downtown?	three
On which day does Eastern Market attract the most visitors?	Saturdays
Which parks hosts the Winter Bash?	Campus Martius Park
Which parade started in 1924?	America's Thanksgiving Parade
Which festival spans five days?	River Days
Which festival draws up to 3 million people?	Windsor–Detroit International Freedom Festival
What is the country music festival in Detroit called?	Hoedown
Who sculpted the Spirit of Detroit?	Marshall Fredericks
When was the Joe Louis memorial dedicated?	October 16, 1986
Who commissioned the Joe Luis memorial?	Sports Illustrated
Who sculpted the Joe Louis memorial?	Robert Graham
How long is the Joe Louis memorial?	24-foot
How many metropolitan areas boast teams from all major US sports?	12
What is the name of Detroit Piston's arena?	The Palace of Auburn Hills
Where do the Tigers play?	Comerica Park
Where do the Lions play?	Ford Field
Where do the Red Wings play?	Joe Louis Arena
Which bowl game is held in Detroit?	Little Caesars Pizza Bowl
Where is the MAC Football Championship game played?	Ford Field
Which conference has held many of it's championships games in Detroit?	Mid-American Conference
What is Detroit's sports related nickname?	City of Champions
What is Eddie Tolan's nickname?	The Midnight Express
Who won the boxing title in 1937?	Joe Louis
Who won the Stanley Cup in 1936?	Red Wings
Who won the World Series in 1935?	Tigers
How many people are on the city council?	nine
When was Detroit's charter approved?	1974
Who approves Detroit's budgets?	The council
What is Detroit's charter called?	Home Rule Charter
Where is the Circuit Court located?	Frank Murphy Hall of Justice
Where is Wayne County's Probate Court located?	Coleman A. Young Municipal Center
Which District Court is Detroit home to?	Thirty-Sixth
What was Detroit's murder rate in 2014?	43.4 per 100,000
What was Detroit's murder rate in the mid to late 80s?	58 per 100,000
What city had a higher murder rate than Detroit in 2014?	St. Louis
How many murders did Detroit have in 2014?	299
How many murders did Detroit have in 2015?	295
What fraction of Michigan's homicides occurred in Detroit?	two-thirds
What is Detroit's rate of property crime?	62.18 per 1,000
What was the national rate of violent crimes in 2008?	5 per 1,000
What was Detroit's rate of violent crimes in 2008?	16.73 per 1,000
When was Detroit incorporated?	1802
How many mayors has Detroit had?	74
Who was Detroit's last Republican mayor?	Louis Miriani
Who was Detroit's first black mayor?	Coleman Young
What was Dennis Archer's former occupation?	Supreme Court Justice
Who was Michigan's governor in 2013?	Rick Snyder
What judge declared Detroit bankrupt?	Stephen Rhodes
What type of bankruptcy did Detroit file?	Chapter 9
When did Detroit file for bankruptcy?	July 18, 2013
How much did Detroit owe when it was declared bankrupt?	$18.5 billion
What research university is located in Midtown?	Wayne State University
What Catholic university is in Detroit?	University of Detroit Mercy
In which district is Detroit Mercy's Law School located?	Downtown
Which Catholic society is Detroit Mercy affiliated with?	Society of Jesus
What Seminary is located in Detroit?	Sacred Heart Major Seminary
When was Sacred Heart Major Seminary founded?	1919
What University opened a satellite campus in the Detroit Medical Center?	Michigan State
When was the University of Michigan founded?	1817
When did the University of Michigan leave Detroit?	1837
How many Catholic high schools are in Detroit?	three
How many Catholic grade schools are in Detroit?	four
Two of the three Catholic high schools are operated by which religious group?	Society of Jesus
On which side of the city of the city are all of the Catholic schools located?	west
Under which agreement are Detroit's major newspapers published?	Detroit Newspaper Partnership
When was The Metro Times founded?	1980
In what year did Detroit's two major newspapers reduce home delivery?	2009
What newspaper was founded in 1935?	Michigan Chronicle
How is Detroit's TV market ranked?	11th largest
How often does the Michigan Chronicle publish?	weekly
What province of Canada is a large consumer of Detroit programming?	Ontario
How many major hospitals are in Detroit?	over a dozen
What is the Detroit VA hospital called?	John D. Dingell
How many affiliated physicians does the DMC have?	3,000
How many beds does the DMC have?	2,000
Who is the largest private employer in Detroit?	DMC
Detroit Medical Center has become a part of what Health System?	Vanguard Health Systems
How much does Vanguard plan to invest in DMC?	$1.5 B
What is a name of a Catholic hospital in Detroit?	St. Joseph's
How much will Vanguard spend to retire debt for DMC?	$417 M
How much does Vanguard plan to spend in capital investment?	$500 M
Who is the Transport Minister in Canada?	Lisa Raitt
How much is the U.S. Customs plaza expected to cost?	$250 million
How much is the Gordie Howe International Bridge expected to cost?	$2.1 billion
When is the Gordie Howe International Bridge expected to open?	2020
How much of the Gordie Howe International Bridge is Canada going to pay for?	95 per cent
Which Interstate is the major north-south route?	I-75
Which of the Great Lakes does I-75 pass next to?	Lake Erie
How many major interstates are serve Detroit?	Four
What is I-94 called?	Edsel Ford Freeway
Who built I-94?	Henry Ford
A part of I-94 was an example of what type of highway?	limited-access
During which conflict was I-94 built?	World War II
Which highway is an extension of the Chrysler Freeway?	I-375
What is I-696 called?	Reuther Freeway
Which highway runs through the northern suburbs of Detroit?	I-696
Michigan uses what letter to designate roads that connect major highways?	M
Which highway runs north from I-75 to the junction of I-96 and I-696?	I-275
 How does the Cambridge English Dictionary define "Culture" in short?	the way of life
What is the name of this theory that culture is a series of activities and world views?	Terror Management Theory
What did Homo Sapiens acquire that allowed them to become aware of Culture?	larger brain
Around when were humans able to understand to some degree what culture really meant?	50,000 years ago
Name some cultural universals that exist with humans today.	kinship, gender and marriage
What does the term "concept material culture" cover?	technology, architecture and art
What was sometimes used or worn by early humans to form some type of culture visibly?	body modification, clothing or jewelry
Around what time did Mass Culture emerge?	20th century
What do some schools of philosophy suggest culture is used for?	as a tool of the elites to manipulate the lower classes and create a false consciousness
What does the term "Count Noun" mean?	a culture
What cultural traits fall under the term count noun?	customs, traditions and values of a society or community
What falls within the term "cultural anthropology"?	the ideology and analytical stance of cultural relativism
What is the modern term "culture" based on?	term used by the Ancient Roman orator Cicero
Who took over the metaphor used by Cicero?	Samuel Pufendorf
Samuel changed something that was in the old meaning of the metaphor, what was it?	no longer assuming that philosophy was man's natural perfection
What changes do Social conflicts along with developing of technologies have on culture?	social dynamics and promoting new cultural models
What is this cultural movement called that involves a shift in gender relations mainly involving women?	U.S. feminist movement
Which time period was used in the example of shifts in social dynamics?	ice age
What may impact social dynamics and technical development?	War or competition over resources
In the example given, what seemed exotic when introduced into China but is common in the United States?	fast food
What does the term Stimulus diffusion mean?	the sharing of ideas
Which theory consist of cultured adopting new practices,ideas, and products?	Diffusion of innovations
Who said the following statement? "Enlightenment is man's emergence from his self-incurred immaturity".	Immanuel Kant
What does the term Sapere aude mean?	Dare to be wise
Which German scholar argued that human creativity takes diverse forms and is as important as human rationality?	Johann Gottfried Herder
Which Prussian linguist called for an anthropology?	Wilhelm von Humboldt
During which ere did scholars of Germany developed a more inclusive culture?	Romantic era
What was the German name given for the creation of this culture during the Romantic era?	Weltanschauung
According to Bastian, what did he believe all human societies shared?	elementary ideas
What was the name of the person argued for "The psychic unity of mankind"?	Adolf Bastian
Who trained under Bastian's ideas on culture?	Franz Boas
What did culture refer to in practice?	élite ideal
What was associated with culture during this German practice?	art, classical music, and haute cuisine
Art and music were some of these forms of  cultural related to what type of living?	urban life
The idea of culture in Europe in the 19th century reflected what during this time period?	inequalities within European societies.
How did Matthew Arnold view "Culture" with?	anarchy
Which two philosophers contrasted "culture" with the state of nature?	Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Which race was considered living "in a state of nature" by the Europeans?	Native Americans
"In a state of nature" was divided into two groups, what where they?	"civilized" and "uncivilized."
What type of music did critics associate with corrupt high culture?	folk music
Which type of music seemed superficial and decadent?	classical music
What was another name used for the corrupted high culture of the indigenous people?	noble savages
Who's definition of culture did anthropologist  accept?	Tylor's
What four fields make up American anthropology which play a vital role on its research of culture?	biological anthropology, linguistic anthropology, cultural anthropology, and archaeology.
In which century did "culture" as a central concept of American anthropology emerge?	20th century
Who referred to culture as a cultivation of individuals?	Georg Simmel
What makes up the sociological parts of culture according to Simmel?	ways of thinking, the ways of acting, and the material objects
What does non-material culture refer to?	non physical ideas
The term material culture is only relevant to what?	archeological and anthropological studies
Where did sociology culture stem from?	Weimar Germany
Who was the first to refer to culture as sociology?	Alfred Weber
What do cultural  sociologist tend to reject as key attribute of culture?	scientific methods
Which three early theorist helped shape sociology of culture?	Marx, Durkheim, and Weber
What were the early concerns for the field of Sociology culture?	popular culture, political control, and social class
What is most of the research into sociological culture ?	qualitative
Which scientist was influenced by Marxism in the United Kingdom?	Stuart Hall (1932–2014) and Raymond Williams (1921–1988)
What did Marxist like Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams  they identify culture as?	consumption goods and leisure activities
What made up Leisure activities and goods as viewed by Marxist?	art, music, film, food, sports, and clothing
What led sociologist like Stuart and Raymond to focus on class relations and the organization of production?	saw patterns of consumption and leisure
In the U.S what does "Cultural Studies" focus largely on in this field?	popular culture
Who first coined the term "Cultural Studies" in the United States?	Richard Hoggart
What was the name of the company founded by Hoggart in 1964?	Birmingham Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies or CCCS
The CCCS has since been associated with who?	Stuart Hall
Who did Stuart Hall work along side with?	Paul Willis, Dick Hebdige, Tony Jefferson, and Angela McRobbie
What did Stuart and his colleagues create?	international intellectual movement.
In the field that Stuart was working, what did he and his colleagues often concentrate on?	matters of ideology, nationality, ethnicity, social class, and/or gender
Capitalism can be referred to as what process?	a process called globalization
The idea of text in cultural studies can include what forms other than written language?	films, photographs, fashion or hairstyles
Which two practices have become the main focus in cultural studies?	high culture (the culture of ruling social groups) and popular culture
What makes up cooperative cultural studies?	based on the disciplines of comparative literature and cultural studies
Around when did the United States and United Kingdom began to develop different versions of cultural studies?	late 1970s
When did the British version of cultural studies emerge?	1950s and 1960s
Who had influenced cultural studies in the U.K?	Richard Hoggart, E. P. Thompson, and Raymond Williams, and later that of Stuart Hall
Which University did research of cultural studies take place under CCCS?	the University of Birmingham
Which two wrote Cultural studies [were] grounded in a pragmatic, liberal-pluralist tradition?	Lindlof and Taylor
From a Marxist view, what did they believe had to be controlled  to essentially control a culture?	the economic base
How many ways did Raimon Panikkar believed cultural change can be based on?	29 ways
What is the term used to describe what Modernization could be similar or related to?	enlightenment
What type of society was seen that came from Raimon's 29 ways?	secular society
What is the third hottest desert in the world?	The Sahara
What is the third largest desert in the world?	The Sahara
What is the surface area of the Sahara Desert?	9,400,000 square kilometres (3,600,000 sq mi)
What is the hottest desert in the world?	Sahara
What is the central part of the Sahara Desert?	hyperarid
What does the Sahara have little to none of?	The northern and southern reaches of the desert
The northern and southern reaches of the desert are spare of what items?	grassland and desert shrub
What does the Sahara have little of?	The northern and southern reaches of the desert
How often does the Sahara go without rainfall?	years
What sea is North of the Sahara Desert?	Mediterranean Sea
What is to the south of the Sahara?	Sahel
What kind of climate does the Sahel have?	dry tropical
What is the long term precipitation average of the Sahara?	150 mm
What is the world's largest low latitude hot desert?	Sahara
What ares is the Sahara located in?	horse latitudes
What makes it difficult for clouds to form?	sinking air
What allows unhindered light and thermal radiation?	dissolution of clouds
What weather is virtually non-existent?	rainfall
Where is the air the strongest?	eastern part of the Great Desert
What section of the Sahara's cloud cover are the most   accentuated?	eastern
What is the air mass lying above the Sahara?	hot and dry
What part of the country does the air masses primarily form over?	North-African desert
What is blocked due to local surface low pressure?	air ascent
What mountain helps enhance the aridity of the desert?	Atlas Mountains
Where are the Atlas Mountains located?	Algeria
What is the primary source of rain in the Sahara?	low-pressure systems
What is the reason the Sahara lacks moisture?	lack of a precipitation-generating mechanism
What does the desert have to overcome?	barriers that normally prevent the production of precipitation
What is the temperature like year around in the desert?	high temperatures year-round
What is the largest hottest continuously large area   worldwide?	the Great Desert
What is the value temperature of most of the desert?	25 °C
What percent of time is the sun generally over most of the   desert?	82% of the time
What is the annual average direct solar irradiation?	around 2,800 kWh/(m2 year)
During daytime how high can the temperatures reach?	80 °C (176 °F)
What is the reason the northern fringe receives more   cloudiness and rainfall?	low pressure systems
What is the average rainfall of the Sahara?	less than 1 mm
How much desert land is the Sahara?	9,000,000 km2 of desert land
What causes the southern fringe to receive cloudiness and   rainfall?	Intertropical Convergence Zone
Which directions does the South Saharan run?	east and west
What months do the summer rains happen?	July and August
What is the average rainfall between the months of July and   August?	100 to 200 mm
How much land does the ecoregion cover?	1,101,700 km2 (425,400 mi2)
What is the number of plants in the Central Sahara?	five hundred species
What do plants do in order to avoid water loss?	growing lower
Where do plants store their water to avoid the conditions?	thick stems
What helps plants in order to get as much water as   possible?	long roots that travel horizontally
How many cheetahs remain in the Northwest Africa area?	250
What months do the cheetah's avoid the sun?	April to October
How many many cheetah's are left in the wild?	2,000
What activities from these mammals will likely affect   habitat areas?	human activities
What underground items have lead to soil degradation?	irrigated water pumped
What kind of pressure can be intense in the Sahara?	natural resources
When did people start living on the edge of the desert?	ice age
How many river animals were thought to be found during   the ice age era?	Over 30,000 petroglyphs
What area of the Sahara is full of vegetation?	the Nile Valley
What is believed to have increased temperatures in the   Sahara?	shifts in the Earth's axis
During what era was the central Sudan rich in environment?	Neolithic Era
What kind of rock art was found in the Sudan?	cattle and herdsmen
What are examples of the first known archaeoastronomy   found in Nabta Playa?	Megaliths
What were Egyptians herding in the early BCE period?	cattle
By what time period were the Egyptians constructing  large buildings?	6000 BCE
What items replaced previously items made of stone?	Metal objects
In which direction were the dead facing when they were   buried?	due west
By What time period was the Sahara dry like it is today?	3400 BCE
What was the main reason that the Sahara became so   dry?	reduced precipitation and higher temperatures
What area is known for having the majority of the trade?	the Nile Valley
Where did the Greeks established their trading colonies?	Red Sea
Which coast did the Carthaginians explore for trade?	the Atlantic coast
Who would raid the desert leaving the people in constant   fear?	nomadic Berber
What time period did the Garamantes arrive in?	500 BCE
What did the Garamantes do in order to bring water to   their crops?	digging tunnels
How many towns are believed to be found by   Archaeologists?	eight major towns
What was the reason for the collapse of the Garamantes   civilization?	depleted available water
What group of people ruled the northern shoes of the   Sahara?	Byzantine Empire
What time period did the Muslim conquest of North Africa   take place?	mid-7th to early 8th centuries
What is the estimated number of slaves that were   transported each year?	6,000 to 7,000 slaves
During the 1500 who was a valued part of the Ottoman   Empire?	Egypt
What did the Ottoman Empire provide to its people?	freedom of movement for citizens and goods
What was the local language during this time in Egypt?	Arabic
What time period did the colonialism of the Sahara begin?	19th century
What country conquered the Algiers from the Ottomans in   1830?	France
During what time were good moved through more modern   means?	20th century
What is the most common dialect spoken in the Sahara?	Arabic
What language is mainly spoken in West Africa?	French
What was the traditional language of Bureaucratic affairs?	Arabic
Which Scottish theologian is first credited with using the phrase "rule of law"?	Samuel Rutherford
Which British jurist later made the phrase "rule of law" popular in the 1800s?	A. V. Dicey
What phrase Ariostle also use which is closely related to "the rule of law"?	Law should govern
Samuel Rutherford used the principle of the rule of law to argue what point?	against the divine right of kings
According to the rule of law, what should hold the determination for rules in a land?	law
In what forms of government are leaders not held to the same laws as ordinary citizens?	autocracy, dictatorship, or oligarchy
According to the rule of law, who must obey the laws?	every citizen
What are governments called that are created with the rule of law in mind?	nomocracy
What happens to the rule of law if a government does not have an effective system for maintenance and restoration?	decay
For what reasons might democratic societies not follow the rule of law?	neglect or ignorance of the law
On what principle did the Ancient Greeks first think was best for governance?	rule by the best men
According to Plato, who was above the law?	king
What type of kingdom was purported by Plato?	benevolent monarchy
Under what rule did Aristotle believe a nation should be led?	rule of law
To what did Plato compare a government that follows laws?	slave
In which book of the Bible are limitations on Jewish monarchs outlined?	Deuteronomy
Who was against the divine rights of kings in England during the 1500s?	Bishop John Ponet
What principle did the restrictions on the right of kings, as detailed in Deuteronomy, influence later opposition?	divine right of kings
What historical book may have a significant impact on contemporary law making practices?	Bible
According to the restrictions placed on Jewish kings in Deuteronomy, ownership over what was regulated?	horses
To what did English Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke compare the law?	golden met-wand
According to English Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke, what should Kings follow?	God and the law
When did English Chief Justice Sir Edward Coke speak in the Case of Prohibitions?	1607
How did the king feel about what was said in the Case of Prohibitions?	greatly offended
What was Edward Coke's official title?	Chief Justice Sir
What is another word for a thin definition?	formalist
What is another word for a thick definition?	substantive
Who commonly, or at least attempt to, abide by the rule of law?	politicians, judges and academics
On what do aspects of the rule of law do formalist definitions focus?	specific procedural attributes
What is the third and lesser referred to approach on defining the rule of law?	functional
According to legal theorists, what characteristics must the rule of law have?	generality, equality, and certainty
According to some, what is the rule of law is formed to protect?	individual rights
What system of government is considered as a component of the rule of law?	democracy
According to some legal theorists, for what are there no requirements for something to be considered a law?	content
What are the two approaches to defining the concept of the rule of law?	formal and substantive
Which interpretation of the rule of law is used on a larger scale?	formal
According to the formalist approach, what else, besides democracy, can laws protect?	individual rights
According to the formalist approach, how much notoriety must a law have?	well-known
How many requirements for content are there for the rule of law under the formalist approach?	no requirements
Which interpretation of the rule of law is less commonly used?	substantive
According to the functional interpretation, what principle is opposite of the rule of man?	rule of law
What level of discretion do governments with a high degree of the "rule of law" have?	little
What level of discretion do governments with a low degree of the "rule of law" have?	a great deal
What happens to those that do not follow to the rule of law?	punishment
What fights against the rule of law?	flexibility
For how many countries have rule of law aggregate measurements been developed?	more than 200 countries
What is the term that described a government based on the rule of law?	nomocracy
What is the Greek word for law?	nomos
What is the Greek word for power?	kratos
What is a key qualifier for determining good governance?	rule of law
According to the Constitution, what is superior to the rules of man?	rule of law
What does the President and Supreme Court Justices vow to stand by?	the Constitution
What do the President and Supreme Court justices vow to uphold?	the Constitution
According to the Constitution, to what is the rule of law superior?	the rule of any human leader
What branch of the government has prosecutorial discretion?	executive branch
What branch of government can determine what acts it writes?	legislative branch
Which branch of government has judicial discretion?	judicial branch
Who disagrees with the ideas proposed by John Harrison?	Law Professor Frederick Mark Gedicks
For what body of principles is it debated whether or not it was constructed according to the rule of law?	U.S. Constitution
According to John Harrison, through the Constitution, what is law?	that which is legally binding
According to Frederick Mark Gedicks, who believed that unjust laws were not really laws?	the framers of the U.S. Constitution
When was a compromise reached over administrative procedures for law determination?	1941
Who can determine if a law should be approached differently?	administrators
Who should be able to challenge administrative orders in court?	individuals
Who was Charles Evans Hughes?	a Chief Justice of the United States
When was the Philadelphia Convention?	1787
Who spoke at the Philadelphia Convention about the potential chaos from not having judges be able to enforce laws?	James Wilson
What was John Marshall's title?	Chief Justice
What did George Mason state that judges could do to a law?	declare an unconstitutional law void
What East Asian philosophy emphasized virtuous leadership?	Confucianism
What East Asian philosophy emphasized unwavering rule following?	Legalism
How strong is the rule of law in most Asian countries?	weak or nonexistent
Which Asian countries strictly follow laws?	South Korea, Singapore, Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong
Which two Asian countries have started to adopt the rule of law?	China and Vietnam
What has influenced China and Vietnam to conform to the rule of law?	the transition to a market economy
Who is debating the reliance on the rule of law in China?	legal scholars and politicians
To whom is the rule of law important to in China's trade deals?	foreign investors
What values might adherence to the rule of law subsequently influence in China?	democracy and human rights
Where has the rule of law been more of a theory than a way of life?	Thailand
In Thailand, what branch of government rejected a proposal for senator selection?	executive branch
According to what principles are most laws in Thailand decided?	royalist
When did Thailand first try to overthrow its government run by a king?	1932
What harms the adherence to the Constitution in Thailand?	Ancient prejudices and political bias
What country has the longest version of a constitution?	India
In what year was India's constitution drafted?	1950
What country has the longest Constitution?	India
In Thailand, the length of the constitution impacts the judges chances to exercise what?	judicial review
What is in position to gain control over the rule of law in Thailand?	rule of judges
When did the Declaration of Delhi happen?	1959
How many judges participated in the Declaration of Delhi?	185
According to the Declaration of Delhi, what provides certain rights and freedoms?	rule of law
According to the Declaration of Delhi, what type of conditions are needed for human dignity?	social, economic and cultural
When the rule of law become an agenda item for the General Assembly?	1992
What organization debates the rule of law?	The Security Council
What organization meets to discuss and determine the countries that are considered by the rule of law?	The Peacebuilding Commission
What do the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action require the rule of law to be used in?	human rights education
In what year was interest renewed in the rule of law within the General Assembly?	2006
What organization works to further the understanding and adherence to the rule of law?	The International Development Law Organization
What types of economies does the IDLO focus on helping?	emerging economies and middle-income
With how many countries does the IDLO work?	more than 170
The impact of the rule of law on what is closely studied?	economic development
What doctrine seeks to study rules and their relationship with the economy?	Constitutional economics
In what branch of government is corruption examined?	executive branch
In developing countries, who makes most of the spending decisions?	the executive
What is the term for corruption by individuals?	corruption by private actors
What language is spoken in most rule of law countries?	English
In non English speaking countries, what is the rule of law referred to as?	not yet fully clarified
In what types of countries is the rule of law important to the economy?	developing and transitional
What other countries have successful democracies?	Sweden, Denmark, France, Germany, or Japan
What is critically important for discussion of rules, laws, and the economy?	common language
What is F.A. Hayek's profession?	economist
According to Hayek, with the rule of law in place what will help people make more wise investments?	confidence in a successful return on investment
According to Hayek, limited governemnt power through the rule of law does not do what to people?	frustrate his efforts
According to Hayek, people are free to do what within the rule of law?	pursue his personal ends and desires
What is the highest elevation in Tibet?	Mount Everest
Which continent contains Tibet?	Asia
What is the average elevation of Tibet, in feet?	16,000
How many feet above sea level does earth's highest mountain rise?	29,029
Where is the traditional homeland of Monpa, Qiang, and Lhoba peoples?	Tibet
When were the current borders of Tibet established?	18th century
When did the Tibetan empire emerge?	7th century
Which Chinese provinces used to be the eastern part of Tibet?	Sichuan and Qinghai
Which battle left parts of Tibet under Chinese rule?	Battle of Chamdo
In what year was the Tibetan government abolished?	1959
In what year did Xinhai revolt against the Qing dynasty?	1912
Where is the Tibet Autonomous Region?	western and central Tibet
Which battle led to Tibet's incorporation into the People's Republic of China?	Battle of Chamdo
What is the economy of Tibet dominated by?	subsistence agriculture
What has recently become a growing industry in Tibet?	tourism
What is the dominant religion in Tibet?	Tibetan Buddhism
What is a staple food in Tibet?	yak meat
Which two cultures does Tibetan architecture reflect?	Chinese and Indian
What is the Tibetan name for the area?	Bod
Which ancient people were mentioned in the first written reference to Bod "Tibet"?	Bautai
What area did Bod originally refer to?	central region around Lhasa
How is the ethnic Tibetan region referred to as a modern Standard Chinese exonym?	Zangqu
How do the Chinese refer to Tibetan people, language, and culture?	Zang
During which dynasty was the term Xizang first used?	Qing
Which Chinese suffix means "area, district, region, ward"?	qū
What is the best-known medieval Chinese name for Tibet?	Tubo
When did the name for Tibet, Tubo, first appear in Chinese characters?	7th century
Who reconstructed Middle Chinese spoken from the 7th century to the 10th century?	William H. Baxter
Who is an American Tibetologist?	Elliot Sperling
What name for Tibet most clearly includes the entire Tibetan plateau?	Tubote
What is another pre-modern Chinese name for Tibet?	Wusiguo
How many people across the Tibetan Plateau speak 'greater Tibetan'?	approximately 6 million
How many people who have fled modern-day Tibet are considered to be exile speakers of Tibetan?	approximately 150,000
Why are Dzongkha, Sikkimese, Sherpa, and Ladakhi considered to be separate languages?	political reasons
What is written Tibetan base on?	Classical Tibetan
What influenced the consistency of the written Tibetan language?	Tibetan empire
From what was the Tibetan language's script derived?	ancient Indian Brāhmī script
Where did the Zhang Zhung people migrate from?	Amdo region
Where did the Zhang Zhung people migrate to?	western Tibet
What is considered to be the original home of the Bon religion?	Zhang Zhung
Which Yarlung king attempted to remove the influence of the Zhang Zhung?	Drigum Tsenpo
Who was the first factual king of Tibet?	Songtsän Gampo
Who founded the Tibetan Empire?	Songtsän Gampo
Who did Songtsan Gampo marry in 640?	Princess Wencheng
Who was Songtsan Gampo's first wife?	Princess of Nepal, Bhrikuti
What did Songtsan Gampo unite?	parts of the Yarlung River Valley
When did Tibet and China sign a peace treaty?	821/822 CE
Where does a bilingual account of Tibet and China's peace treaty exist?	Jokhang temple in Lhasa
When did a civil war over succession lead to the collapse of imperial Tibet?	mid-9th century
What followed the collapse of imperial Tibet?	Era of Fragmentation
What was divided between warlords and tribes with no dominant centralized authority?	political control over Tibet
Which dynasty ruled Tibet through a top-level administrative department?	Mongol Yuan
What was a dpon-chen?	great administrator
Who confirmed the dpon-chen?	Mongol emperor
Who was the political authority of the region?	Sakya lama
Who held administrative and military power?	dpon-chen
Who managed religious and regional political affairs?	Tibet
Who managed structural and administrative rule?	Mongols
Who gained temporal power in Tibet in the 1240s?	Mongolian prince Khuden
Who founded the Yuan dynasty?	Imperial Preceptor of Kublai Khan
When was the Phagmodrupa Dynasty founded?	Between 1346 and 1354
Who founded the Gelug school?	disciples of Je Tsongkhapa
Who dominated politics after 1435?	minister family Rinpungpa
What sect did the Tsangpa Dynasty of Shigatse favor?	Karma Kagyu
Who is known for unifying the Tibetan heartland?	5th Dalai Lama
Who helped the 5th Dalai Lama?	Güshi Khan
What did the 5th Dalai Lama and his intimates establish?	Lhasa state
What is the Tibetan goverment referred to as?	Ganden Phodrang
When did the Qing dynasty begin to rule in Tibet?	1720
When did Amdo come under Qing control?	1724
When was Kham incorporated into neighboring Chinese provinces?	1728
Who restored the Dalai Lama as a ruler?	Qing
What was the governing councel called?	Kashag
When did the Qing Qianlong Emperor send a large Chinese army into Tibet?	1792
Why did the Qing Qianlong Emperor send a large Chinese army into Tibet?	push the invading Nepalese out
What was the Qing reorganization of the Tibetan called?	Twenty-Nine Regulations for Better Government in Tibet
When was Tibet dominated by the Manchus?	18th century
When did George Bogle come to Shigatse to investigate prospects of trade.	1774
Who came to Tibet from Europe?	Jesuits and Capuchins
When did the British and Russian empires begin encroaching on Tibet?	19th century
When did a British expedition to Tibet invade the country?	1904
With whom were the British hopeing to negotiate?	13th Dalai Lama
How many Tibetan troops died at the Massacre of Chumik Shenko?	600
How many British troops died at the Massacre of Chumik Shenko?	12
Who imposed the Treaty of Lhasa?	Francis Younghusband
When did the Xinhai Revolution topple the Qing dynasty?	1911–12
Who declared himself ruler of an independent Tibet?	Dalai Lama
When did Tibet and Mongolia conclude a treaty of mutual recognition?	1913
When did the Tibetan government sign the Simla Accord with Britain?	1914
Why did the Chinese goverment denounce the accord?	illegal
Where did the Dalai Lama's government flee to during the 1959 Tibetan Rebellion?	Dharamsala
How many Tibetans died during the Great Leap Forward?	between 200,000 and 1,000,000
How many monasteries were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution?	6,000
When did China and India fight a war over South Tibet and Aksai Chin?	1962
To where did Chinese troops withdraw?	north of the McMahon Line
When did Hu Yaobang visit Tibet?	1980
When did monks in the Drepung and Sera monasteries start protesting for independence?	1989
What did the government do when it halted reforms?	started an anti-separatist campaign
When was the most recent Tibetan unrest?	2008
For what have the Beijing and Lhasa goverments been criticized?	human rights
On which border of Tibet is Mount Everest located?	Nepal
How tall, in feet, is Mount Everest?	29,029
Where is the source of the Yangtze river?	Tibetan Plateau
Which mountain is a holy pilgrimage for both Hindus and Tibetans?	Mount Kailash
Who do Hindus believe lives in Mount Kailash?	Lord Shiva
What is the Tibetan name for Mount Kailash?	Khang Rinpoche
Which lake is the largest in China?	Qinghai Lake
What is the average annual snowfall in Tibet?	18 inches
What weather pattern exerts some influence on eastern TIbet?	Indian monsoon
What are winters like in Tibet?	intense cold
Where is Tibet ranked among China's 31 provinces on the UN's Human Development Index?	lowest
What has increased tourism to Tibet in recent years?	increased interest in Tibetan Buddhism
What is Tibet exempt from?	all taxation
From which area does tourism bring the most income?	sale of handicrafts
In what year was a national conference on Tibet held in China?	2010
Members of which committee attended the conference?	CPC Politburo Standing Committee
By when does the plan call for improvement of rural Tibetan income?	2020
What does the plan call for all rural Tibetan children to receive for free?	education
How much, in US dollars, has China invested in Tibet since 2001?	about 45.6 billion
How are the original ancestors of the Tibetan people represented?	six red bands in the Tibetan flag
What has the population of Tibet primarily consisted of?	ethnic Tibetans
Which country has a disputed area with Tibet?	India
What has a strong influence over all aspect of Tibetans lives?	Religion
What is the ancient religion of Tibet?	Bön
When were nearly all of Tibet's monasteries destroyed by the Red Guard?	During China's Cultural Revolution
When were 10 to 20% of Tibets males monks?	Before the 1950s
What are Tibetan Muslims known as?	Kachee
Where did Islamic influence in Tibet come from?	Persia
In what year were all Tibetan Muslims declared Indiana citizens?	1959
What is the Chinese Muslim community called?	gya kachee
When did Roman Catholic Jesuits and Capuchins arrive in Tibet from Europe?	17th and 18th centuries
When did Portuguese missionaries first arrive in western Tibet?	1624
When was Christianity introduced to Rudok, Ladakh, and Tsang?	1626
When did Johann Grueber cross Tibet on the way to Nepal?	1661
When did Jesuit Father Ippolito Desideri spend time in Tibet?	1716–1721
How was Christianity used by some Tibetan monarchs?	counterbalance the influence of the Gelugpa sect
When did Protestant James Cameron bring the Gospel to the Tibetan people?	1877
When did a large number of Lisu people convert to Christianity?	Beginning in the 20th century
How were James O. Fraser, Alfred James Broomhall, and Isobel Kuhn involved with Tibet?	Famous earlier missionaries
Who used to reside in the Potala Palace?	the Dalai Lama
How many stories does the Potala Palace contain?	thirteen
How many shrines exist in the Potala Palace?	10,000
What is Norbulingka?	former summer residence of the Dalai Lama
In what languages is Tibetan music often chanted in?	Tibetan or Sanskrit
What do the chants often contain?	recitations of sacred texts
What type of chanting is performed without metrical timing?	Yang
What type of music comes from the popular Gelugpa school?	classical
What is worshipped during Tibet's various festibals?	Buddha
What is the Tibetan New Year Festival called?	Losar
What do Tibetan's eat on New Year's Eve?	Guthuk
When is the Monlam Prayer Festival?	between the fourth and the eleventh days of the first Tibetan month
Who established the Monlam Prayer Festival in 1049?	Tsong Khapa
What is the most important crop in Tibet?	barley
What is dough made from barley flour called?	tsampa
What are steamed dumplings called?	momos
What is a popular drink in Tibet?	Butter tea
What seed is cultivated in Tibet?	Mustard
What is 'a friendly' another term for?	exhibition game
What is 'a scrimmage' another term for?	exhibition game
What is 'a demonstration' another term for?	exhibition game
What is 'a preseason game' another term for?	exhibition game
What is 'a warmup match' another term for?	exhibition game
What type of exhibition game showcases the best players?	all-star games
What are exhibition games in the Olympics?	a demonstration sport
What can an exhibition game raise money for?	charities
What can an exhibition game settle?	a challenge
What were the most common type of matches in the early days of soccer?	friendly matches (or "friendlies")
When did the Football League begin in England?	1888
By what year had national football leagues been formed in nearly every country?	2000
What did the growth of national leagues cause a serious decline in?	the significance of friendlies
When do football clubs still play friendlies?	before the start of each season
What type of football matches are non-competitive?	friendlies
What do some friendlies change the rules to make unlimited?	substitutions
What are some examples of friendly short football tournaments?	the Emirates Cup, Teresa Herrera Trophy and the Amsterdam Tournament
What do friendly short football tournaments have little of?	prestige
What do friendlies help international teams prepare for?	the qualifying or final stages of major tournaments
Which type of team lacks time to prepare for tournaments?	national squads
What do international leagues' friendlies happen in the middle of?	club league seasons
What concern has caused national associations and clubs to disagree about friendlies?	availability of players, who could become injured or fatigued
What do friendlies allow managers to experiment with?	team selection and tactics
What can happen to players who get red or yellow cards in friendlies?	suspended from future international matches
What kind of record do players' goals in friendlies count for?	career
When did FIFA decide to limit substitutions in international friendlies?	2004
What absurd number of substitutions had some international teams been making in friendlies before 2004?	11
Where are "exhibition match" and "friendly match" not synonymous?	the UK and Ireland
What are two examples of leagues holding all-star exhibition matches?	US Major League Soccer or Japan's Japanese League
What are 'friendlies' for charity usually called in the UK?	charity matches
What are 'friendlies' to honor a player usually called in the UK?	testimonial matches
When did the NFL limit teams to 9 preseason games?	1995–2004
What country's teams did US teams sometimes play exhibition games against in the 1980s?	Soviet Union
In what year did the NHL play against World Hockey Association teams?	1978
Where is Time Warner Cable Arena?	Charlotte
What hockey arena is in Ontario, California?	Citizens Business Bank Arena
What nationality is the Flying Fathers team?	Canadian
What religion is the Flying Fathers team?	Catholic
Who founded the Flying Fathers?	Les Costello
What league were most members of the Buffalo Sabres Alumni Hockey Team from?	NHL
Where are the Saores based?	Buffalo
Which states do MLB teams do spring training in?	Arizona or Florida
What is the MLB preseason league in Arizona called?	Cactus League
What is the MLB preseason league in Florida called?	Grapefruit League
How many preseason games does each MLB team play?	about 30
What is it called when an MLB team plays two preseason games in one day with different rosters?	"split-squad" games
What development has made it unnecessary for MLB teams to play exhibition games with teams from other leagues?	regular-season interleague play
What league are the Toronto Bluejays in?	American League
What league are the Montreal Expos in?	National League
What game do the Bluejays play against the Expos?	the Pearson Cup
When did the Mayor's Trophy Game end?	1983
What concerns have reduced Minor League exhibition games?	worries of injuries to players, along with travel issues
What inter-city exhibition game did Chicago have?	Crosstown Classic
What inter-city exhibition game did New York have?	Subway Series
In what month is the MLB All-Star Game held?	July
What did the MLB All-Star winning team gain in the World Series?	home field advantage
How many preseason games do NBA teams play?	eight
Where are the TImberwolves based?	Minnesota
Where are the Suns based?	Phoenix
The Suns' exhibition game in Indian Wells, CA is the only time an NBA game is played in what setting?	an outdoor venue
What venue do the Suns play at in Indian Wells?	Indian Wells Tennis Garden
When did the NBA play preseason games against the ABA?	1971 to 1975
What legendary team did the NBA sometimes formerly play against?	Harlem Globetrotters
On what continents have NBA teams played preseason games outside the US?	Europe and Asia
How many preseason games were NBA teams limited to in the 2011-12 season?	two
What is the main European basketball club?	the Euroleague
What is an example of a corporate sponsor of a basketball team?	Marathon Oil
What is an example of a team of former college players?	Athletes in Action
When did the FIBA stop allowing pros on foreign national teams?	1992
When did the NCAA decide college teams could only play other college teams?	2003
How often does the NCAA allow college teams to go overseas?	one foreign tour every four years
How many preseason exhibition games does an NFL team play?	four
What is the one exception to the NFL's 4-preseason-game limit?	the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game
What month are most NFL preseason games in?	August
How many players can an NFL team have in the off-season?	90
How many players can an NFL team have in the regular season?	53
How many exhibition games did the Arena Football League have per year in the early 2000s?	two
What type of league commonly plays unstructured exhibition games?	indoor American football leagues
What is a team called that is in the process of joining a league?	a probational franchise
Indoor league teams sometimes play against what type of outdoor league team?	semi-pro
What consideration is more important for college teams than exhibition games?	opinion polling
What is a game called in which a team plays against itself?	Intramural
Championships are decided by formulas for college teams below what level?	Football Bowl Subdivision
Major FBS teams can have lopsided victories against what kinds of lesser opponents?	lower-tier FBS, Football Championship, or Division II schools
Why do smaller schools want to play against major FBS teams?	a large appearance fee and at least one guaranteed television appearance
How many wins are required for an FBS team to be eligible for the bowl?	seven
How many games between FBS and FCS teams count towards the FBS's bowl eligibility?	one
When did the College Football Playoff System begin?	2014
When is the usual high school academic term?	September–June
What is the most common type of high school football exhibition game?	all-star
What year of players are in high school football all-star games?	graduating seniors
What are two examples of high school football all-star games?	U.S. Army All-American Bowl and Under Armour All-America Game
What do high school all-star players hope to be seen by?	colleges
How many exhibition events per year does the NASCAR Sprint Cup have?	two
Where is the Sprint Unlimited held?	Daytona International Speedway
Where is the Sprint All-Star Race held?	Charlotte Motor Speedway
What does the winner of the Sprint Unlimited get?	over USD $1,000,000
Where is Calder Park Thunderdome?	Australia
What is the population of Strasbourg in 2012?	768,868
What is the population of the transnational Eurodistrict Strasbourg-Ortenau in 2014?	915,000
What is the predominant language in the region of Alace?	Alemannic
What is the largest city in the ACAL region of France?	Straßburg
Strasbourg has an official seat in what parliament?	European
Strasbourg has an official seat in what Parliament?	European
What is the predominant language in Asace?	Alemannic
What kind of name is Strasbourg?	Germanic
What year was Grande Ile classified as a World Heritage site?	1988
What is the culture in Strasbourg?	Franco-German
What is the largest Islamic place of worship in France?	Strasbourg Grand Mosque
When was the Strasbourg Grand Mosque inaugurated?	27 September 2012
What is the second largest university in France?	University of Strasbourg
What river is on the border of France and Germany?	River Rhine
The River Ill flows parallel with what river for 4 kilometres?	Rhine
What kind of waterways connect the River Ill and River Rhine within Strasbourg?	artificial
Strasbourg is situated on what border of France and Germany?	eastern
What was Strasbourg called in 12 BC?	Argentoratum
What was the Roman camp destroyed by?	fire
Who was leading the Romans at Argentoratum?	Nero Claudius Drusus
After what year was the Legio VIII Augusta permanently stationed in Argentoratum?	year 90
How many times was Argentoratum rebuilt during the first and fifth centuries AD?	six times
What has been found along the current Route des Romains?	Roman artifacts
Where was the centre of Argentoratum situated?	Grande Île
Who shattered the fragments of a grand Mithraeum?	Christians
When was the Bishopric of Strasbourg made an Archbishopric?	1988
What Empire split to create France and Germany?	Carolingian Empire
What language called Strasbourg Strossburi?	Alsatian
What is the German spelling for Strasbourg?	Straßburg
What was Strasbourg known as in the local language in the ninth century?	Strazburg
In what century was Strasbourg occupied successively by Alemanni, Huns, and Franks?	fifth century
In what year did Strasbourg declare itself a free republic?	1332
What year was the deadly bubonic plague in Strasbourg?	1348
How many Jews were burned to death in 1349?	over a thousand
What time were the Jews forbidden to be in town after?	10 pm
What did the Jews need to pay to ride a horse into town?	special tax
Who was the political guide during the Protestant Reformation?	Jacob Sturm von Sturmeck
Who was the spiritual guide during the Protestant Reformation?	Martin Bucer
Who spent several years as a political refugee in the city?	John Calvin
How many other cities joined Strasbourg at the Imperial Diet of Augsburg in 1530?	four
How many times was the Rhines bridge used during the Franco-Dutch War?	three
When did Louis surround the city with considerable force?	September 1681
When did Louis march into the city unopposed and proclaimed its annexation?	30 September 1681
What was one of the causes of the War of the Reunions?	annexation
When was the French annexation recognized by the Treaty of Ryswick?	1697
What church was taken from the Lutherans and returned to the Catholics?	Strasbourg Cathedral
Who were the famous students that attended German Lutheran University?	Goethe and Herder
What revoked Strasbourg's status as a free city?	French Revolution
Who ruled the city with an iron hand?	Eulogius Schneider
What did the cathedrals lose in April 1794?	statues
What was the giant Phrygian cap made out of?	tin
Who destroyed the Phrygian cap in 1870?	Germans
Who bombarded the city of Strasbourg?	Prussian army
What date was the Museum of Fine Arts destroyed by fire?	24 and 26 August 1870
What cathedral was damaged along with the medieval church of Temple Neuf?	gothic
How many inhabitants were left without shelter after the siege?	10,000
How many civilians died during the siege?	261
In what year was the city annexed to the German Empire?	1871
What was the Treaty in 1871 called?	Treaty of Frankfurt
What year was the university founded?	1567
What Historian was in charge of rebuilding the municipal archives?	Rodolphe Reuss
 What was the new name of the university when it reopened in 1872?	Kaiser-Wilhelms-Universität
What was established around the city?	fortifications
Where is Fort Podbielski located?	Mundolsheim
Where is Fort Bismark located?	Wolfisheim
Where is for Kronprinz von Sachsen located?	Holtzheim
Where is Fort Roon Located?	Mundolsheim
In what war was the German Empire defeated?	World War I
What kind of Republic did some insurgents declare Alsace-Lorraine?	independent
What date was Strasbourg declared a soviet government by insurgents?	11 November 1918
Who commanded the French troops on November 22?	French general Henri Gouraud
What French President said "the plebiscite is done"?	Raymond Poincaré
What year was it restituted to France?	1919
What autonomists were pro French?	Alsatian
In what year did Bismarck fall?	1890
Who won the last election at Reichstag?	Social Democrats
Who had vivid memories of the Saverne Affair?	Alsatians
Who invaded Poland on 1 September 1939?	German
How many people were evacuated during the invasion?	120,000
What troops arrived in mid-June 1940?	Wehrmacht troops
How long was the city completely empty?	ten months
Where was the University evacuated?	Clermont-Ferrand
In what year was the Fall of France?	1940
What country was Alsace annexed to?	Germany
Who imposed the rigorous policy of Germanisation?	Gauleiter Robert Heinrich Wagner
When were the first evacuees allowed to return?	July 1940
 How high was the dome at the Romanesque revival building?	54-metre
Who led the first Alsatian resistance movement?	Marcel Weinum
Who was the highest commander that is under Hitler?	Gauleiter Robert Wagner
How was Marcel Weinum executed?	beheaded
What was the city attacked by in 1943?	Allied aircraft
On what date was the city liberated?	23 November 1944
What were the men and women sent to the eastern front against their will called?	Malgré-nous
Who sent deserters families to concentration camps?	Germans
Where were the freed soviet captives sent?	Algiers
When did the liberation of Strasbourg take place?	23 November 1944
What council was the city given a seat for in 1949?	Council of Europe
When did the European Parliament begin meeting in Strasbourg?	1952
When was Louise Weiss inaugurated?	1999
What was partly destroyed by Allied bombings in 1944?	Romanesque Église Saint-Étienne
What organ did Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart play on?	Silbermann organ
Where is the Silbermann organ located?	Église Saint-Thomas
What is the Neo-Gothic church called?	Saint-Pierre-le-Vieux Catholique
How many museums does the Palais Rohan hold?	three
What did the city hall used to be known as?	Hôtel de Hanau
What is the largest baroque building in Strasbourg?	Hôpital civil
What did the military governors residence used to be called?	Hôtel des Deux-Ponts
Where is the Opera House located?	Place Broglie
What kind of high class building does Strasbourg offer?	eclecticist
What war caused severe damage to Germany?	World War II
What was the former imperial palace called?	Palais du Rhin
What was the former girls college called?	Höhere Mädchenschule
How high were some of the buildings in urban Germany?	seven stories
What is the fine Art Nouveau villa called?	Villa Schutzenberger
Who lost the architectural contest?	Le Corbusier
Who built the European Court of Human Rights building?	Richard Rogers
What did Zaha Hadid design?	Hoenheim-Nord
What is considered to be the finest building?	European Court of Human Rights
Who designed the Parc de l'Orangerie?	André le Nôtre
What park has a small zoo in it?	Parc de l'Orangerie
What park is built close to the Rhine by Vauban?	Parc de la Citadelle
What year was the Observatory of Strasbourg built?	1881
What is the oldest park in the city?	Parc des Contades
Where are old master paintings from the Germanic Rhenish territories until 1681 held?	Musée de l'Œuvre Notre-Dame
Where are old master graphic arts until 1871 displayed?	Cabinet des estampes et dessins
Where are decorative arts until 1681 displayed?	Musée de l'Œuvre Notre-Dame
Where is the city's photographic library?	Musée d'art moderne et contemporain
Where is the international art since 1871 displayed?	Musée d'art moderne et contemporain
What is Strasbourg known as?	centre of humanism
When was Strasbourg annexed by the Kingdom of France?	1683
What did Montgelas study?	law
 From what empire did students come from to attend university?	Holy Roman Empire
What is the second largest library in France?	Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire
How many titles does the library have?	3,000,000
Who founded the library?	German administration
When was the previous library destroyed?	1871
What was the library marked as on the map?	City Hall
What are incunabula's?	documents printed before 1500
When was the library destroyed?	1870
What kind of building holds incunabula's today?	public and institutional libraries
What year did the Strasbourg tramway open?	1994
Who operates the Strasbourg tramway?	regional transit company Compagnie des Transports Strasbourgeois
How many lines does the Strasbourg tramway have?	6
What is the length of the Strasbourg tramway in total?	55.8 km
How far do bike paths stretch in Strasbourg?	500 km
What year was the Canal de la Bruche added?	1682
What kind of tourism attracts tourists yearly?	Water tourism
What river is Strasbourg by?	Rhine
What system also complements walking and biking?	tram
What kind of priority zone has the city centre been transformed into?	pedestrian
What do bike paths go through to add enjoyment to the trip?	public squares
What is the layout of the neighbourhoods called?	Fused Grid
What route parallels the Rhine?	A35 autoroute
What year did the Grand contournement ouest project open?	1999
How far is the connection between junctions A4 and the A35?	24 km
The traffic coming west of the city is from where?	unité urbaine
What is the Cherokee name for Oklahoma?	Asgaya gigageyi
What is the Pawnee name for Oklahoma?	Uukuhuúwa
What is the Cayuga name for Oklahoma?	Gahnawiyoˀgeh
Where does Oklahoma rank by population?	28th
What is Oklahoma's nickname?	The Sooner State
What language does the name Oklahoma come from?	Choctaw
What does Oklahoma mean?	red people
When was the name Oklahoma suggested?	1866
Who suggested the name Oklahoma?	Choctaw Chief Allen Wright
When was the name Oklahoma made official?	1890
Where does Oklahoma rank by land area?	20th
How many square miles is Oklahoma?	69,898
How many square miles of water is in Oklahoma?	1,281
How many states are on the Frontier Strip?	six
Which state is north of Oklahoma?	Kansas
How far out of alignment is Oklahoma's western edge from Texas's border?	2.1 to 2.2 miles
When was the border between TX and NM first determined?	1819
When was Oklahoma's border determined?	1890s
Where is the NM border of both Oklahoma and Texas supposed to line up with?	the 103rd Meridian
Which one is more accurately placed, the TX/NM border or the OK/NM border?	Oklahoma/New Mexico border
What plateau is Oklahoma near?	Ozark Plateau
What watershed is Oklahoma in?	Gulf of Mexico
What is Oklahoma's tallest mountain?	Black Mesa
How many feet above sea level is Oklahoma's highest point?	4,973
How many feet above sea level is Oklahoma's lowest point?	289
How many major mountain ranges are in Oklahoma?	four
Which of Oklahoma's mountain ranges are in the US Interior Highlands?	the Ozark and Ouachita Mountains
What part of Oklahoma does the Flint Hills reach into?	north-central
What is the world's tallest hill?	Cavanal Hill
How high is Cavanal Hill?	1,999 feet
What is an example of a mesa range?	Glass Mountains
What part of Oklahoma is the Antelope Hills in?	southwestern
What part of Oklahoma has oak savannahs?	central
What mountains are in Oklahoma's eastern third?	The Ozark and Ouachita Mountains
In which direction do the Ozark mountains get higher?	eastward
How much of Oklahoma is covered in forests?	24 percent
What types of prairie grasslands does Oklahoma have?	shortgrass, mixed-grass, and tallgrass prairie
What part of Oklahoma has low rainfall?	western
What types of trees grow near rivers in western Oklahoma?	pinyon pines, red cedar (junipers), and ponderosa pines
What rare types of maples grow in southwest Oklahoma?	sugar maple, bigtooth maple
What types of birds does Oklahoma have a lot of?	quail, doves, cardinals, bald eagles, red-tailed hawks, and pheasants
What types of deer does Oklahoma have a lot of?	white-tailed deer, mule deer
What does Oklahoma have the country's largest towns of?	prairie dog
What part of Oklahoma is Cross Timbers in?	Central
What part of Oklahoma does the American alligator live in?	southeastern
How large is the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve?	39,000 acres
What part of Oklahoma is the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve in?	north-central
The Tallgrass Prairie Preserve is the largest protected tallgrass prairie in what area?	the world
How many states were originally covered by the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve?	14
How many national wildlife refuges are in Oklahoma?	nine
What is Oklahoma's main climate region?	humid subtropical
What natural-disaster-based nickname does Oklahoma's region have?	Tornado Alley
How many tornadoes hit Oklahoma each year?	average 62
What types of severe weather does Oklahoma get?	severe thunderstorms, damaging thunderstorm winds, large hail and tornadoes
Where does Oklahoma receive hot dry air from?	Mexico
What is Oklahoma's record high temperature for Nov 11?	83 °F
What is Oklahoma's record low temperature for Nov 11?	17 °F
What caused Oklahoma's temperature to plummet 66 degrees on Nov 11, 1911?	an Arctic cold front
How fast did the 1912 tornado outbreak make tornadoes?	one tornado per hour
How long did the 1912 tornado outbreak last?	a day
What parts of Oklahoma are in a humid subtropical climate?	central, southern and eastern
Where do Oklahoma's winds bring moisture from?	Gulf of Mexico
What is Oklahoma's western climate type?	semi-arid
Where in Oklahoma does the semi-arid zone begin?	Lawton
What is the average annual temperature in southeast Oklahoma?	62 °F
Which season is the most dry in Oklahoma?	winter
When does Oklahoma get the most rain?	May
When is the second-driest season in Oklahoma?	Mid-summer
What years were Oklahoma's hottest summers?	1934, 1954, 1980 and 2011
How hot were Oklahoma's hottest summers?	well over 100 °F
What parts of Oklahoma rarely see below-zero temperatures?	south-central and southeastern
What is the average snowfall in southern Oklahoma?	less than 4 inches
What is the average snowfall in Oklahoma near the Colorado border?	over 20 inches
Where is the Storm Prediction Center located?	Norman
What was Oklahoma's record high temperature?	120 °F
Ancestors of which tribes lived in Oklahoma?	Wichita and Caddo
What was Spiro, Oklahoma named for?	Spiro Mounds
When did Spiro Mounds flourish?	between AD 850 and 1450
What Spanish explorer visited Oklahoma in 1541?	Francisco Vásquez de Coronado
When did France sell Oklahoma's land to the US?	1803
What was the "Oil Capital of the World"?	Tulsa
What type of investments were important in early Oklahoma?	oil
Who was the "Father of Route 66"?	Cyrus Avery
Where was the Highway 66 Association based?	Tulsa
When did Route 66 begin?	1927
When did the Dust Bowl begin?	1930s
What mistake led to the Dust Bowl?	poor farming practices
What states were affected by the Dust Bowl?	Kansas, Texas, New Mexico and northwestern Oklahoma
How many farmers had to relocate because of the Dust Bowl?	thousands
How much did Oklahoma's population decline from 1930 to 1950?	6.9 percent
When was the Oklahoma City Bombing?	April 19, 1995
Who committed the Oklahoma City Bombing?	Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols
How many people died in the Oklahoma City Bombing?	168
How many children died in the Oklahoma City Bombing?	19
When was McVeigh executed?	June 11, 2001
When did Oklahoma declare an official language?	2010
How many Oklahomans speak only English at home, as of 2000?	2,977,187
What percent of Oklahomans speak only English at home, as of 2000?	92.6%
What is the second-most-prevalent language in Oklahoma?	Spanish
What is the third-most-prevalent language in Oklahoma?	Cherokee
What is Oklahoma's fourth most popular language?	German
How many Oklahomans speak German?	13,444
How many Native American languages are used in Oklahoma?	more than 25
What is Oklahoma's fifth most popular language?	Vietnamese
How many Oklahomans speak Vietnamese?	11,330
What is the conservative Evangelical Christian region called?	the "Bible Belt"
What parts of the US are covered by the 'Bible Belt'?	southern and eastern
What political party has the most members in Oklahoma?	Democratic
What is Oklahoma's 2nd-largest city?	Tulsa
How much of Oklahoma's population is Christian?	80 percent
How does Oklahoma rank among US states for producing natural gas?	third
How does Oklahoma rank among US states for agriculture?	27th
How does Oklahoma rank among US states for producing wheat?	5th
How many Fortune 500 companies are based in Oklahoma?	Four
How many Fortune 1000 companies are based in Oklahoma?	six
What is Oklahoma's rank among states producing crude oil?	fifth
What is Oklahoma's rank among states by active drilling rigs?	second
How does Oklahoma's crude oil reserves rank among states?	fifth
How much of Oklahoma's electricity comes from non-renewable sources?	94 percent
How much of Oklahoma's electricity comes from coal?	25 percent
Which largest private oil companies are based in Oklahoma City?	Devon Energy Corporation, Chesapeake Energy Corporation, and SandRidge Energy Corporation
What industry are all of the Oklahoma-based Fortune 500 companies in?	energy
What is the largest company in Oklahoma?	ONEOK
What is the 2nd-largest company in Oklahoma?	Williams Companies
Where is ONEOK based?	Tulsa
How many famous Native American ballerinas came from Oklahoma?	five
What are Oklahoma's Native American ballerinas called?	the Five Moons
What ballerina started the Oklahoma City Ballet?	Yvonne Chouteau
When did the University of Oklahoma's dance program begin?	1962
Which sisters were in the Five Moons?	Marjorie and Maria Tallchief
Where is 'Discoveryland!'?	Sand Springs
Who starred in the Broadway production of 'Oklahoma!'?	Ridge Bond
Where is Ridge Bond from?	McAlester, Oklahoma
Who did Ridge Bond play?	Curly McClain
How many performances of Oklahoma! was Ridge Bond in?	more than 2,600
What major theater groups are in Oklahoma City?	Oklahoma City Theatre Company, Carpenter Square Theatre, Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park, and CityRep
What is the oldest community theater group west of the Mississippi River?	Theatre Tulsa
Where is the American Theatre Company based?	Tulsa
What is the oldest resident professional theater company in Oklahoma?	American Theatre Company
Where is Heller Theatre?	Tulsa
How many museums are in Oklahoma?	more than 300
How does Oklahoma's per-capita arts spending rank?	17th
Where is the Philbrook Museum?	Tulsa
What kind of museum is the Philbrook?	fine art
Where are Thomas Gilcrease's collections housed?	Gilcrease Museum of Tulsa
Where does Oklahoma have a fine Egyptian art collection?	Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art in Shawnee
Where is the largest collection of Dale Chinuly's work?	Oklahoma City Museum of Art
What kind of art did Dale Chinuly make?	glass sculptures
Where is the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum?	Oklahoma City
Where is the largest Jewish art collection in the southwest?	Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art of Tulsa
When was Oklahoma's centennial year?	2007
When was the exact hundredth anniversary of Oklahoma's statehood?	November 16, 2007
What organization said Oklahoma's centennial was the top event in the US that year?	American Bus Association
What do ethnic festivals depict?	cultural heritage or traditions
How long is the State Fair of Oklahoma?	10-day
Where is the State Fair of Oklahoma?	Oklahoma City
How many people attend the State Fair of Oklahoma each year?	roughly one million
How long is the Tulsa State Fair?	10-day
How many people attend the Tulsa State Fair each year?	over one million
When did the Medieval Fair of Norman begin?	1976
Where was Oklahoma's first medieval fair?	Norman
Where was the Medieval Fair of Norman held for its first 2 years?	the south oval of the University of Oklahoma campus
Where was the Medieval Fair of Norman held from 1978 to 2002?	Duck Pond in Norman
Where has the Medieval Fair of Norman been held since 2003?	Reaves Park
How many students were in Oklahoma's public schools in 2008?	638,817
How many school districts are in Oklahoma?	533
How many Native American students are in Oklahoma's public schools?	126,078
What does Oklahoma spend per student in public schools as of 2008?	$7,755
How many public schools does Oklahoma have?	1,845
Who said Oklahoma's pre-K program is the best in the US?	National Institute for Early Education Research
When was Oklahoma's pre-K called 'a model for early childhood schooling'?	2004
What was Oklahoma's high school dropout rate in 2007?	3.1
What was Oklahoma's high school dropout rate in 2008?	2.5 percent
What percent of Oklahomans have graduated high school?	85.2 percent
How many public universities does Oklahoma have?	eleven
What is the second-oldest university west of the MS River?	Northeastern State University
Within what university is Oklahoma's only optometry college?	Northeastern State University
What university has the largest Native American enrollment in the US?	Northeastern State University
What is Oklahoma's only HBCU?	Langston University
How many undergrad students were in Oklahoma in 2007?	181,973
How many grad students were in Oklahoma in 2007?	20,014
How many professional degree college students were in Oklahoma in 2007?	4,395
How many of Oklahoma's 2007 undergrads completed their degree?	18,892
How many of Oklahoma's 2007 grad students completed their degree?	5,386
Which Native American group is involved in a language preservation project?	Cherokee Nation
What percent of Cherokee people are desired to be fluent in Cherokee?	80% or more
What group runs the Cherokee language preservation project?	Cherokee Preservation Foundation
How much has the Cherokee Preservation Foundation spent on schools?	$3 million
Where is there a Cherokee immersion school?	Tahlequah, Oklahoma
What is the only major league sports team in Oklahoma?	Oklahoma City Thunder
What league is the Thunder in?	National Basketball Association
What had Oklahoma's WNBA team been?	Tulsa Shock
Where did Oklahoma's WNBA team move to?	Dallas–Fort Worth
What was Oklahoma's WNBA team renamed to when it moved?	Dallas Wings
Which NBA team temporarily relocated to Oklahoma?	New Orleans Hornets
Where did the temporary NBA team play in Oklahoma?	Oklahoma City's Ford Center
What caused the temporary NBA team to relocate to Oklahoma?	Hurricane Katrina
What was the Thunder's previous name?	Seattle SuperSonics
Who owns the Thunder?	Professional Basketball Club LLC
How many NCAA Division I colleges does Oklahoma have?	four
How many colleges does Oklahoma have in the Big 12?	two
How many fans attend an average Oklahoma State University football game?	over 50,000
What is the rivalry between OSU and University of Oklahoma called?	Bedlam Series
Where is Oral Roberts University?	Tulsa
What kind of tournaments does Cedar Ridge Country Club host?	LPGA
Where is Southern Hills Country Club?	Tulsa
Where is Oak Tree Country Club?	Oklahoma City
Where is Cedar Ridge Country Club?	Tulsa
How many PGA championships has Southern Hills held?	four
How many major newspapers does Oklahoma have?	two
What is the largest Oklahoma newspaper?	The Oklahoman
How many people read the Sunday issue of The Oklahoman?	202,690
What is the 2nd-largest Oklahoma newspaper?	The Tulsa World
How many people read the Sunday issue of The Tulsa World?	132,969
How many miles of highways are in Oklahoma?	More than 12,000
Oklahoma has the longest drivable stretch of what famous highway?	Route 66
What is the busiest highway in Oklahoma?	Interstate 44
How many bridges in Oklahoma were found to be deficient in 2010?	5,212
How many national highway bridges in Oklahoma were found to be deficient in 2010?	235
What is the largest commercial airport in Oklahoma?	Will Rogers World Airport
Where is Oklahoma's largest airport?	Oklahoma City
How many people boarded in Will Rogers World Airport in 2010?	1.7 million
How many different airlines operate in Oklahoma?	six
How many public airports does Oklahoma have?	over 150
How many ports does Oklahoma have?	Two
Which port in Oklahoma handles international cargo?	Tulsa Port of Catoosa
Where is the furthest-inland oceangoing port in the US?	Tulsa
How many tons of cargo does the Tulsa Port of Catoosa ship annually?	over two million
What connects the two Oklahoma ports?	the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System
How many district courts does Oklahoma have?	77
How many counties does Oklahoma have?	77
What is the civil court of last resort in Oklahoma?	the state Supreme Court
What is the only other state with two courts of last resort?	Texas
What is the criminal court of last resort in Oklahoma?	the state Court of Criminal Appeals
Who is in the executive branch?	the Governor, their staff, and other elected officials
Who commands the Oklahoma National Guard?	the Governor
Who is responsible for submitting a state budget in Oklahoma?	the Executive branch
Who is responsible for enforcing Oklahoma's laws?	the Executive branch
How many county commissioners does each Oklahoma county have?	three
What are the major county offices in Oklahoma?	commissioners, a tax assessor, clerk, court clerk, treasurer, and sheriff
How many counties are in Oklahoma?	77
Who can collect taxes in Oklahoma?	Both county and municipal governments
Who can hold elections in Oklahoma?	Both county and municipal governments
How many tribal governments are in Oklahoma?	Thirty-nine
Tribes hold land in Oklahoma, but what isn't it called?	reservations
What powers do tribal governments have?	executive, judicial, and legislative powers over tribal members and functions
Who can overrule the tribal governments?	the United States Congress
Who must approve tribal constitutions?	the United States Congress
What political party rose to power in Oklahoma in 1948?	Republican
When did registered Republicans become a majority in Oklahoma?	2015
What is the one election since 1952 where a Republican presidential candidate didn't win in Oklahoma?	1964
Oklahoma was the only state where which presidential candidate won no counties twice?	Barack Obama
Who was the last Democratic presidential candidate to win any counties in Oklahoma?	Al Gore
How many US House reps did Oklahoma have before the 2000 census?	six
How many US House reps did Oklahoma have after the 2000 census?	five
How many of Oklahoma's House reps were Republican in 2012?	four
Who are Oklahoma's US Senators?	Jim Inhofe and Tom Coburn
What political party are Oklahoma's US Senators?	Republicans
How many incorporated cities are in Oklahoma?	598
How many Oklahoma cities have over 100,000 people?	four
How many of the 50 largest US cities are in Oklahoma?	Oklahoma
What is the largest metro area in Oklahoma as of 2010?	Oklahoma City
How many people live in the Tulsa metro area?	937,478
What is Oklahoma's largest city?	Oklahoma City
How much did Oklahoma City's population grow from 2000 to 2010?	14.6%
How many people lived in Lawton in 2010?	96,867
How many people lived in Stillwater in 2010?	45,688
What Arkansas city's metro area extends into Oklahoma?	Fort Smith
What state House bill would change Oklahoma's motto to 'Oklahoma - In God We Trust'?	HCR 1024
What was Oklahoma's state motto, before the state House bill might change it?	Labor Omnia Vincit
Why did the state House think they could change Oklahoma's motto?	no "official" vote regarding "Labor Omnia Vincit"
In what geographic area was the country of India established?	Indian subcontinent
What did the joining of the Indus Valley and Indo-Aryan cultures produce?	Vedic Civilization
Of what is Hinduism a combination?	Indian cultures and traditions
How long was the succession of powerful dynasties in the Indian subcontinent?	two millennia
What movement lead to the founding of the Republic of India?	independence movement
For how long have modern humans lived on the Indian subcontinent?	75,000 years
How long ago did earlier hominids live on the Indian subcontinent?	500,000 years ago
When did the Indus Valley Civilization thrive on the Indian subcontinent?	c. 3200 to 1300 BCE
What was the first major civilization in South Asia?	Indus Valley Civilization
What was the span of the Mature Harappan period?	2600 to 1900 BCE
What empire conquered most of the subcontinent in the 3rd and 4th centuries BC?	Maurya Empire
After the 3rd century BC, what style of literature grew in northern area of the subcontinent?	Prakrit and Pali
What form of metal was developed and  exported from southern India?	Wootz steel
What was the period following 3rd century BC and extending 1500 years called?	Golden Age of India
What was the foremost dynasty of the the Golden Age period?	Gupta
Between what centuries was the Tripartite struggle focused on Kannauj?	7th and 11th
How long did the Tripartite struggle last?	two centuries
When did Islam begin to become a political power in India?	seventh century
What dynasty conquered southern India and parts of southeast Asia?	Chola dynasty
What facet of Indian mathematics was introduced into the Arab areas in the early Medieval period?	Hindu numerals
What group founded the Delhi Sultanate in the 13th century?	Central Asian Turks
When did the Delhi Sultanate decline in its rule of northern India?	late 14th century
What belief system began in the 15th century?	Sikhism
What empire covered most of India in the 16th century?	Mughal Empire
During what century did the Mughal empire decline?	early 18th century
What company annexed large areas of India in the 18th and 19th centuries?	British East India Company
What effect did Company rule in India produce in 1857?	Indian Rebellion
After the Rebellion who administered the British provinces of India?	British Crown
The rapid development of what did British rule cause in India?	infrastructure
What party was the leader in the Indian independence movement of the 20th century?	Indian National Congress
Who remarked Indian history is too devoted to the ranking of dynasties and invasions?	Romila Thapar
What type of history period is often neglected in Indian histories?	social-economic
What facet of social and economic conditions are displayed by Indian history?	strong continuity
What type of conquests were gradual in nature?	Muslim conquests
What part of India was never completely conquered?	south
By what era was India inhabited by humans of some form?	Middle Pleistocene
What type of remains were found in the Narmada Valley?	Homo erectus
From how long ago do tools date in India?	two million years
Where in the subcontinent is the oldest archaeological site?	Soan River valley
What type of resident lived at the site in Soan River Valley?	palaeolithic hominid
What geologic period came after the Mesolithic period in India?	Neolithic
What happened in India during the Neolithic period?	extensive settlement
How long ago did the last ice age happen in India?	12,000 years
When did settlements appear in Madhya Pradesh?	9,000 years ago
During what time span were there findings of habitation in India and Pakistan?	7000–9000 BCE
When did the Mature Indus Civilization thrive?	2600 to 1900 BCE
What stage of civilization did the Mature Indus represent?	urban
What kind of organization did the Mature Indus have?	municipal
Of what were the early cities of the Mature Indus civilization built?	brick
How high were the buildings in the Mature Indus ?	multistoreyed
For what culture is the Vedic period named?	Indo-Aryan
Where was the Indo-Aryan culture located?	north-west India
In what language did  the Vedic culture speak?	Vedic Sanskrit
What sacred texts are some of the oldest in India?	The Vedas
What was the duration of the Vedic culture?	1750 to 500 BCE
When did the Aryan culture begin its expansion?	Rigvedic period
Into what area did the Aryan culture expand?	western Ganges plain
What were the Aryan social classes called?	varnas
What did the Aryans label as impure in the indigenous peoples in order to exclude them from certain social classes?	occupations
What groupings formed up into larger monarchical groups?	small tribal units
What was the first state size society in the Vedic period?	Kuru kingdom
What is the dating of the Kuru kingdom?	1200 – 800 BCE
At the beginning of what age are the dates of the Kuru kingdom?	Iron Age
What is the first Indian text to mention iron?	Atharvaveda
When the Kuru kingdom declined, to what kingdom did Vedic culture go?	Panchala
What were the principle texts of Hinduism?	Vedas
In what language were the Vedas ?	Sanskrit
What were the core epics of the Vedas?	Ramayana and Mahabharata
Which Vedic text is the longest single poem on Earth?	Mahabharata
On what type of clash is the Mahabharata thought to have been based?	small-scale conflict
What philosophical movement appeared during 800-200 BCE?	Shramana-movement
What was the origins of the Shramana movement?	Jainism and Buddhism
During what time were the first Upanishads written?	between 800 and 200 BCE
What period started after 500 BCE?	Second urbanization
Where was the central location of the Muayan Empire?	Central Ganges Plain
By what age had many small states covered the subcontinent?	later Vedic Age
How many small states covered the Ganges Plain of India?	sixteen monarchies
What were the sixteen kingdoms called?	Mahajanapadas
What second period did the rise of the small kingdoms show?	urbanism
What was the first major urbanization in India?	Indus Valley Civilisation
Where was the Vajji confederation located?	Vaishali
How early did the small republic states exist in India?	6th century BCE
Until what century did the republic states endure in India?	4th century CE
In what language did the educated Indian speak?	Sanskrit
What was the general population's common language ?	Prakrits
When were the earliest Upanishads composed?	7th and 6th centuries BC
Of what philosophical system do the Upanishads form the basis?	Hinduism
What are the Upanishads called in Hinduism?	Vedanta
What part of the Hinduism belief system did the Upanishads attack?	ritual
What worship system is central to Hinduism?	Self
What did the shramana movements challenge?	orthodoxy of rituals
Who was the founder of Jainism?	Mahavira
What prominent icon founded Buddhism?	Buddha
What path did Buddha find to soothe the strictness of Sramana religions?	Middle Way
What belief system taught the idea of samsara?	Shramana
Of what was Magadha one of sixteen?	Mahā-Janapadas
How does the Sanskrit translate Maha-Janapadas?	Great Countries
Where was the center of Magadha?	Bihar
Where were there early records of the Magadha kingdom?	Vedic texts
What time do the texts locating Magadha kingdom predate?	600 BC.
Where is the earliest mention of Magadha people?	Atharva-Veda
In the development of which religions did Magadha participate?	Jainism and Buddhism
Where was the location origin of the Maurya and Gupta empires?	Magadha
Due to advances in science and culture, what are the Magadha region empires considered to represent?	Golden Age
What were local villages' assemblies called in the Magadha kingdoms?	Gramakas
What Persian king wanted tribute from the tribes of northern India?	Cyrus the Great
By 520 BC what empire ruled the northwestern Indian subcontinent?	Persian Achaemenid Empire
What king ruled Persia in 520 BC?	Darius I of Persia
How long did the Persian empire control the northern India subcontinent?	two centuries
What did India supply to the Persian war efforts against Greece?	mercenaries
When did Alexander the Great reach India?	326 BC
Who did Alexander defeat in the area now Pakistan?	King Porus
At what battle did Alexander beat King Porus?	Battle of the Hydaspes
Where did Alexander's army finally mutiny?	Hyphasis
The strength of what empire's army pushed Alexander to retreat?	Nanda Empire
What was the first empire to unify India?	Maurya Empire
What was the time span of the Mauryan Empire?	322–185 BCE
Who formed the Maurya Empire in Magadha?	Chandragupta Maurya
What dynasty did Chandragupta Maurya defeat?	Nanda Dynasty
In what year did Chandraguta's son come to the throne?	297 BC
What are the basic written records of the Mauryans?	Arthashastra and the Edicts of Ashoka
What is the archaeological period of the Mauryan Empire?	Northern Black Polished Ware
What metal was developed in south India during the time of the Mauryan Empire?	Wootz steel
To where was wootz steel exported?	China and Arabia
What organization closely monitored business dealings in the Mauryan Empire?	government
During what period did Tamil literature thrive?	Sangam period
How many Tamil dynasties ruled during the Sangam period?	3
What was the extent of the Sangam period?	3rd century BCE to the 4th century CE
In what part of India did the Tamil dynasties rule?	southern India
How were Tamil writers different from earlier Sanskrit writers?	non-Brahmins
What empire covered most of India from 230 BCE?	Śātavāhana Empire
Of what were the Satavahanas patrons?	Hinduism and Buddhism
What did the Satavahanas issue embossed with their king's head?	coins
When was the Satavahana Empire divided into smaller states?	3rd century CE
From what did the Satavahana Empire protect much of India?	foreign invaders
What was the time span of the Shunga Empire?	187 to 78 BCE
Who founded the Shuga empire after the fall of the Maurya empire?	Pushyamitra Shunga
How long did Pushyamitra Shunga rule?	36 years
What script variant was used to write the Sanskrit language?	Brahmi
What tradition did Shunga rulers help begin?	sponsorship of learning and art
What Kalingan ruler brought the Chedi dynasty back into power?	Khārabēḷa
What power had previously defeated the Kalingans?	Ashoka
In what arena was Kalinga a formidable power?	maritime
What maritime advantage did the Kalingans have?	trade routes
What militaristic leader restored might to the Kalinga empire?	Khārabēḷa
From what area did the Kushan Empire come?	Afghanistan
Who was the first ruler of the Kushan empire?	Kujula Kadphises
In the middle o what century did the Kushan empire begin?	1st century CE
What was the language base of the Kushans?	Indo-European
What had the Kushans conquered much of by the time of Kanishka	northern India
By what is India under the Gupta Empire referered?	Classical India
What was the time span of the Gupta Empire?	c. 320–550 CE
What is the period of the Gupta Empire called?	Golden Age of India
What philosophy  formed at the time of the Gupta Empire?	Hindu culture
What numeral system originated in India?	Hindu-Arabic
What did the Guptas promote in their reigns?	Indian culture
Besides the Vedic practices, what other religion did the Guptas patronize?	Buddhism
What Guptas brought much of India under Gupta rule?	first three rulers
What business activity made the Gupta Empire prominent in India?	Strong trade ties
What did the Gupta Empires trade ties influence?	nearby kingdoms
During what time did Kadamba rule northern Karnataka?	345 – 525 CE
Where did the Kadamba dynasty originate?	Karnataka, India
What ruler ruled at the peak of Kadamba power?	King Kakushtavarma
Who founded the Kamdamba dynasty?	Mayurasharma
What dynasty made military alliances with the Kamdamba?	Gupta Dynasty
What type of trib were the Hephthalites?	nomadic confederation
Where did the White Huns roam?	Central Asia
In what country did the White Huns settle?	Afghanistan
What lands did the White Huns take in the 5th century?	Pakistan and North India
In which century did the Gupta Empire fall?	middle of the 6th century
To what type of states did the former Gupta Empire revert?	small
After uniting the area, what title was Harsha given?	Maharaja
When was Harsha crowned by the states he united?	April 606
To what religion had Harsha been converted?	Buddhism
What declined from the 5th to the 13th centuries	Śrauta sacrifices
What philosophical traditions developed during the period of the 5th to the 13th centuries?	Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism
In what century was Harsha's rule?	7th century
What happened to Harsha's empire after his death?	collapsed
What area did Harsha unite during his reign?	northern India
What cults weakened Buddhism in India?	Vishnu and Shiva
What replaced Buddha in ruling centers?	Hindu gods
What kind of temples were built for Hindu Gods?	monumental
What was the style of worship of Hindu Gods?	elaborate
By what dentury did Buddhism disappear form much of India?	eighth
How many dynasties fought for control from the 8th to the 10th century?	three
When did the first Rajput kingdoms emerge in India?	6th century
What Rajput ruler was known for his conflicts with the Turkic sultanates?	Prithvi Raj Chauhan
In what century did the Chola Empire emerge?	11th century
Who was emperor of the Kashmiri  Karkota dynasty?	Lalitaditya Muktapida
When did the Chalukya Empire rule?	6th and the 12th centuries
What portion of India did the Chalukya Empire rule?	southern and central
What style of architecture developed during the Chaluka reigns?	Chalukyan architecture
When did the Chalukyans rule from Badami?	550 and 750
When was the second reign of Chalukyans?	970 and 1190
When was the Rastrakuta Empire started?	753
In what location was the capital of the Rashtrakuta Empire?	Manyakheta
What was the faith of the early rulers of the Rastrakuta Empire?	Hindu
By what were the later kings of the Rastrakuta Empire influenced?	Jainism
What Rastrakuta king ruler for 64 years?	Amoghavarsha
During what span of time did the Pala Empire thrive?	750–1174 CE
What style of belief system did the Pala Empire favor?	Buddhist
What is the term used to describe the Pala Empire?	golden era of Bengal
What educational center reached it height during the Pala rule?	Nalanda
What ruler founded the Pala dynasty?	Gopala I
What area did the Cholas unite in the 9th century?	South India
What kind of power did the Chola dynasty become in south India?	military, economic and cultural
In what area did the Chola Empire establish political unity?	whole of Southern India
In what type of architecture did the Cholas excel?	Monumental
From their contacts and conquests in surrounding sea areas, what did this establish the Chola empire as?	sea power
During waht centuries did the Western Chalukya rule?	10th and 12th
What was the architectural style of the Chalukyas?	transitional
Where did the Chalukyas build most of their monuments?	central Karnataka
What did the Chalukya kings encourage writers to use?	native language
Besides the language of Kannada, what other old language was used during the western Chalukya dynasty?	Sanskrit
What group wanted to conquer India from earliest times?	Muslims
What empire took over parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan in 720?	Arab Umayyad Caliphate
Who was the final Hindu monarch of Sindh?	Raja Dahir
What Arab leader completed the early ambitions of Arabs by conquering parts of northern India?	Muhammad bin Qasim
How did the early Muslims view the possibility of conquering India?	difficult
In what year did Muslim general Muhammad bin Qasim take over most of the Indus area?	712
Who eventually defeated the Arabs at Rajasthan?	Hindu kings
In what area did the Indian Kings contain the Arabs?	Sindh in Pakistan
When was the Arab invasion repulsed?	early 8th century
Where did the Arabs establish as the capital of the newly conquered territory?	Al-Mansurah
In what areas of India were Islamic kingdoms formed over a period of centuries?	Afghanistan and Pakistan
What Muslim endeavors thrived on the coastal areas of south India?	trading communities
Which south Indian coast was favored by Muslim traders?	western coast
From where did the Arab traders come in order to trade on the west coast of India?	Arabian peninsula
Besides the newly introduced Islamic religion, what other Abrahamic religions were practiced in India?	Judaism and Christianity
Until what century did the Kabul Shahi dynasties rule the Kabul Valley?	9th century
The decline of what empire allowed the rule of the Kabul Shahi empire?	Kushan
How many eras are the Shahis divided into?	two
When did the Shahis switch from Buddhist to Hindu?	870
What was the kingdom of the Shahis called?	Kabul Shahan
In what id Jayapala see a danger to his dynasty?	consolidation of the Ghaznavids
What city did Jayapala invade at least twice?	Ghazni
Who defeated Jayapala and required an indemnity payment?	Sebuk Tigin
What part of the area did Jayapala lose?	Kabul Valley and Indus River
What was Jayapala's response to the indemnity payment?	defaulted
In what year was Jaipal again soundly defeated by the Muslims?	1001
Where was the location of the Shahi defeat by the Muslims?	Battle of Peshawar
What was Jaipal action after his last defeat?	committed suicide
Upon what did Jaipal's subjects think he brought disaster?	Shahi dynasty
Who was the ruler of Ghazni?	Mahmud of Ghazni
From where did raiders come to attack the agrarian Indians?	Central Asia
After a history of raiding groups, what is not remarkable in the history of the subcontinent?	Muslim intrusions
Before the Muslim invasions, what did previous invaders do in the local cultures?	assimilated
What did the Muslim invaders staunchly keep after invading?	Islamic identity
What type of new Indian culture was formed from this mixture of cultures?	mixed
What conquered large areas of northern India?	Slave dynasty of Delhi
What dynasty captured most of central India?	Khilji dynasty
What language was created during the Delhi Sultanate?	Urdu
Who was the only female sultana to be enthroned in a Indo-Islamic empire?	Razia Sultana
By what is the fusion of Islamic and Indian cultures called?	Indo-Muslim
What Turko-Mongol attacked and defeated the Sultan of Tughlaq dynasty?	Timur
On what date did Timur beat the Delhi Sultan?	17 December 1398
In what shape did Timur leave the city of Delhi?	in ruins
How many prisoners of war were executed in the sack of Delhi?	100,000
What were exempted from death by Timur when ordering Delhi sacked?	sayyids
In what year was Sangama Dynasty formed?	1336
At what location are the best known monuments in the south of India?	Hampi
What mathematician founded the Kerala school of astronomy?	Madhava of Sangamagrama
When was the Kerala school established?	14th century
What did the Vijayanagara Empire promote to unify Indian culture?	Hinduism
From the mid 13th century, what dominated politics in northern India?	Delhi Sultanate
What empire dominated in the south of India in the 13th century?	Vijayanagar Empire
What group dominated in western and central India at the start of the 13th century?	Rajputs
Gajapati Kingdom was powerful in the east for how many centuries?	six centuries
What empire beat the last Bahmani Sultanate?	Vijayanagara Empire
What kingdom came to power in Assam?	Ahom Kingdom
What was the span of time fro the Ahom Kingdom?	1228–1826
What event caused the end of Ahom rule in Assam?	British rule
With what religion did the Ahom merge?	Hindu
What group repeatedly tried and failed to conquer the Ahom?	Muslim rulers of Delhi
What empire did Babur found in northern India?	Mughal Empire
Who defeated Babur's son in 1540?	Sher Shah Suri
Of what nationality was Sher Shah Suri?	Afghan
At what place did Akbar's army defeat Hemu in 1556?	Second Battle of Panipat
By what route did Babur enter India?	Khyber Pass
By what date did the Mughal dynasty rule most of India?	1600
What famous monument did Shah Jahan build at Agra?	Taj Mahal
What reached it height during the reign of Shah Jehan?	Mughal architecture
What actions caused the decline of the Mughal Empire?	Maratha military resurgence
During whose reign did the Mughal Empire reach its greatest expanse?	Aurangzeb
What groups invaded and damaged the Mughals?	Marathas and Afghans
Who attacked and plundered Delhi in 1737?	Maratha general Bajirao
Who was the final Commander-in-chief of the Mughal army?	Nizam-ul-mulk
What was the site of the final battle for the Mughals?	Bhopal
What was the Indian Rebellion of 1857 also called?	1857 War of Independence
What was the richest of all the dynasties?	The Mughals
What policy made the Mughals a successful dynasty?	integration with Indian culture
Which Mughal ruler tried to form a good relationship with non-Muslims?	emperor Akbar
Which Mughal ruler tried to establish complete dominance over the Hindu populace?	Aurangazeb
With what styles did Mughal Rulers merge their Tuko-Persian culture?	ancient Indian
The rise of what dynasty followed the era of the Mughals?	Maratha suzerainty
What founding was of importance in the  decline of the Mughals?	Maratha confederacy
Who consolidated the Maratha kingdom?	Chatrapati Shivaji
What did J.N. Sarkar say of Shivaji's nation building?	great constructive genius
Who made the Marathas a strong power?	Peshwa Bajirao I
By when had the Maratha kingdom become an empire?	early 18th century
Who ruled the Maratha Empire?	Peshwas
What were Peshwas?	prime ministers
By what year had the Maratha Empire covered most of the subcontinent?	1760
In the end, what empire defeated the Maratha Empire?	British
Followers what religion were the rulers of the Punjabi Kingdom?	Sikh religion
What was the time span of the Punjabi Kingdom?	1799 to 1849
Who was the leader of the Punjabis?	Maharaja Ranjit Singh
On what was the disciplined force Singh relied?	Sikh army
Who finally was able to conquer the Sikh Empire?	British
To what Kingdom did many small kingdoms pay tribute?	Marathas
What kingdom was founded in Mysore in 1400 CE?	Wodeyar
What groups was Mysore fighting in the later half of the 18th century?	British and Marathas
What country promised aid to Mysore to fight the British?	the French
Who took over rule of Mysore in the 18th century?	Hyder Ali
In what country was the trading base for the Dutch?	Ceylon
Where did the British initially establish a trading base?	port of Surat
What was the third European country to establish trading with India?	French
What actions by the Indian kingdoms gave the European traders the opportunity to acquire lands and influence?	internal conflicts
To whom did the foreigners lose most of their acquired lands?	British
What ruler opposed the British use of permits and ended up at war?	Nawab of Bengal Siraj Ud Daulah
What British company was heavily involved in the defeat of the Nawab's forces?	East India Company
Who did the East India Company appoint as Governor of Bengal?	Robert Clive
What type of land taxation system did the East India Company instigate in Bengal?	feudal
How did the East India Company handle trade in Bengal?	monopolized
What whole region did the East India company get control over after the Carnatic Wars?	Carnatic
During what time were the Anglo-Mysore Wars?	1766–1799
When were the Anglo-Maratha Wars fought?	1772–1818
To what dynasty was Kashmir sold in 1849?	Dogra Dynasty of Jammu
After the sale of Kashmir, what did the area become?	princely state
What did the soldiers rebel against in the Indian Rebellion of 1857?	Company's rule
What happened to the rebels of the Rebellion?	brutally suppressed
What force took control of the company and the situation?	British government
What did the British government intend to keep in regards to India?	full control
What did the British government remove that had caused the Rebellion?	grievances
To what entity was all the power of the East India Company transferred?	British Crown
How did Britain govern the vast area of India?	provinces
Over what did Britain have direct control?	Company's lands
What kind of influence did the British Crown have over the rest of India that was not under Company rule?	indirect influence
How many princely states were there in India in 1947?	565
What did the Colonial government expand by legal means?	infrastructure
What new law was created?	Indian Penal Code
Who insisted that schooling be a priority in India?	Thomas Babington Macaulay
When did India build the forth largest rail system in the world?	late 19th century
In what feature of management did the British invest heavily?	infrastructure
What administer divided the province of Bengal in half?	Lord Curzon
What was the majority of the population of the western half of Bengal?	Hindu
What was the religion of the western half of Bengal?	Muslim
What movement did the division of Bengal start?	anti-colonial
What was the biggest and oldest political party in India?	Indian National Congress
What was the social reform movement centered in Bengal in the 19th to early 20th century?	Bengali Renaissance
What group lead the Bengali Renaissance?	English educated Bengali Hindus
With whom did the Renaissance movement begin?	Raja Ram Mohan Roy
With whom was it said the the movement ended?	Rabindranath Tagore
From what did the Renaissance Movement mark the change?	medieval' to the 'modern
What did the Bengali Renaissance resemble?	Renaissance in Europe
What did the Movement question?	existing orthodoxies
What early social movement occurred during this time of awakening?	Young Bengal
What factors did the Young Bengal movement  say were needed for civil conduct?	rationalism and atheism
What did the movements in Bengal serve to awaken in Indians?	minds and intellect
What were said to have been caused by government policy failures?	famines
How many people were said to have died in the Great Famine?	6.1 million to 10.3 million
When did the Great Famine happen?	1876–78
How many people died in the Indian Famine of 1899-1900?	1.25 to 10 million
What killed 10 million people in India?	Third Plague Pandemic
What movement rose in the 19th century?	Indian nationalism
What did Indian first want as government?	self-rule
What did Indians finally begin to demand?	complete independence
What feature of the nationalism movement is unknown?	causes
What can only be listed without absolute firmness in the nationalism movement?	Probable reasons
What appointments were  the first step in Indian self-rule?	councillors
When was the first Indian appointed as a Councillor?	1909
What more local councils were set up?	Provincial Councils
Of what nationality were the officers in the Indian Army?	British
What were the troops in the British Indian Army?	minority groups
What Indian leader said that Swaraj was his birthright?	Bal Gangadhar Tilak
What parts of India shaped the demands of the people for nationalism?	three big provinces
How was the Congress split in 1907?	two factions
Which faction of the Congress did Tilak lead?	The radicals
Which faction wanted reform within British rule?	The moderates
What leader started a mass movement against British rule?	Mahatma Gandhi
What means did Gandhi espouse to gain self-rule?	peaceful
What group wanted to use violent means to over throw the British rule?	Indian National Army
On what date did India gain its independence?	15 August 1947
What action did the movements combine to produce?	Government of India Act 1935
What position did Muslims have in the Indian population?	minority
What effect of independence did Muslims distrust?	Hindu rule
What did the British form in preparation to leaving India?	interim government
How many people died in the rioting over divisions of Bengal and Punjab?	500,000
How many people migrated between the newly created countries of India and Pakistan?	12 million
What number president of Egypt was Nasser?	second
What organization attempted to assassinate Nasser?	Muslim Brotherhood
In what year did Nasser become president?	1956
In what year did Nasser die?	1970
What type of government did Nasser overthrow?	monarchy
How many mourners attended Nasser's funeral?	five million
What landmark water route did Nasser nationalize?	Suez Canal
What organization did Nasser create with Syria?	United Arab Republic
What civil war did Nasser become entangled in?	North Yemen Civil War
In what year did Nasser start his second term as President?	1965
Name two infrastructure projects Nasser spearheaded.	Aswan Dam and Helwan City
What century did Nasser rule in?	20th
What was nasser's position toward imperialism?	anti-imperialist
How did Nasser's government deal with human rights?	human rights violations
What was Nasser's father's occupation?	postal worker
In what city was Nasser raised?	Alexandria
What year was Nasser born?	1918
What does Nasser's brother's name translate to?	Glory of the Arabs
What siblings did Nasser have?	two more boys
What elementary school did Nasser attend?	Attarin
Where did Nasser go to boarding school?	Helwan
What secondary school did Nasser attend?	Ras el-Tin
Where did young Nasser witness demonstrations?	Manshia Square
What organization organized the protests Nasser witnessed?	Young Egypt Society
What school did Nasser attend in Cairo?	al-Nahda al-Masria
What was the title of the article Nasser wrote for his school paper?	Voltaire, the Man of Freedom
What was the issue Nasser led a protest against?	British rule
How many protestors were killed in the demonstration?	Two
What did King Farouk restore after the demonstrations?	constitution
How many days did Nasser attend classes in his senior year?	45
What treaty did Nasser object to?	Anglo-Egyptian Treaty
What did Nasser not want to have in Egypt?	British military bases
What was the trajectory of political unrest after the treaty?	declined significantly
From where did Nasser graduate?	al-Nahda
What did Nasser do in his spare time?	reading
What institution did Nasser live close to in 1933?	National Library of Egypt
What did Nasser observe from moving around frequently as a youth?	Egyptian society's class divisions
What was Nasser's position in Egypt's society?	well below the wealthy Egyptian elite
What kind of biographies did Nasser read?	nationalist leaders
What political theory fascinated Nasser?	Egyptian nationalism
What politician did Nasser admire?	Mustafa Kamel
What poet did Nasser read?	Ahmed Shawqi
What novel influenced Nasser greatly?	Return of the Spirit
Where did Nasser meet his anti-colonialist teacher?	Royal Military Academy
What was Nasser's goal?	a military career
Where did Nasser apply in 1937?	Royal Military Academy
Why was Nasser rejected from the Academy?	record of anti-government protest
Where did Nasser attend law school?	King Fuad University
How long did Nasser attend law school?	one semester
What's another term for influential intermediary?	wasta
Who sponsored Nasser's second application to the Military Academy?	Khairy Pasha
What allies did Nasser meet at the Academy?	Sadat and Amer
What were the students dissatisfied by in Egypt?	widespread corruption
What Egyptian institution did Nasser and his friends want to end?	monarchy
In what year was Nasser posted to Sudan?	1941
Whas was Nasser's position at the military academy in 1943?	instructor
Who ordered the King to dismiss the Prime Minister?	British Ambassador Miles Lampson
What political group was Nasser associated with?	nationalist
Who was Nasser's contact in the armed forces, giving Nasser dossiers?	Amer
Where was the Egyptian army sent in 1948?	Palestine
In what unit did Nasser serve?	6th Infantry Battalion
How badly was Nasser wounded?	lightly
What army surrounded Nasser's brigade?	Israeli
What territory was given to Israel?	Faluja
What Egyptian singer performed at the return of Nasser's brigade?	Umm Kulthum
What book did Nasser start writing?	Philosophy of the Revolution
What group opposed the celebration of Nasser's brigade's return?	royal government
Who has pressured the government to cancel the reception?	British
What was Nasser increasingly convinced he should topple?	monarchy
What did Nasser do after the war ended?	instructor at the Royal Military Academy
What group did Nasser try to allign himself with?	Muslim Brotherhood
What was the reason Nasser rejected the Muslim Brotherhood?	religious agenda
How did Nasser view the terms of the armisitce with Israel?	humiliating
What region did the Israelis occupy during the talks?	Eilat
What people had a coup around the time Nasser returned to Egypt?	Syrian
Who questioned Nasser?	Prime Minister Ibrahim Abdel
What was Nasser's reaction to the questions he was asked?	convincingly denied the allegations
What did the interrogation provoke Nasser to do?	speed up his group's activities
What group boycotted the 1950 elections?	Muslim Brotherhood
What party advanced in the 1950 elections?	Wafd
What were Wafd members accused of?	corruption
What group became prominent in Egyptian politics?	Free Officers
How long did Nasser swell the ranks of his Free Officers?	nearly two years
What treaty did the Wafd government abrogate?	Anglo-Egyptian Treaty
Who did Nasser's group try to assassinate?	Hussein Sirri Amer
Who helped Nasser with the assassination attempt?	Hassan Ibrahim
What was general Amer's political affiliation?	royalist
Who was wounded in the assassination attempt?	an innocent female passerby
Who was nominated to the presidency of the Officer's Club?	Sirri Amer
Who was Nassir's choice to represent the Free Officers?	Muhammad Naguib
How many times was Naguib wounded?	three
What media outlet advanced the Free Officer's agenda?	al-Misri
In what war was Naguib wounded?	Palestine War
In what year did riots cause the political situation in Egypt to rapidly deteriorate?	1952
Where did British forces and Egyptian police clash?	Ismailia
How many people were killed in the Cairo riots?	76
Who did Nasser enlist to plan the Free Officer's coup?	Zakaria Mohieddin
What did Nasser want to end in Egypt?	feudalism
What type of government did the Free Officer's want to establish?	parliamentary democracy
Who did Nasser choose to lead his coup?	General Naguib
What was teh fate of King Farouk after the coup?	exile
What did Nasser wear during the coup?	civilian clothing
What day did the revolution begin?	22 July
Who was the first president of the Republic of Egypt?	Naguib
Who did Nasser want to handle the day-to-day operations of the government?	civilians
Who did Nasser recruit to be Prime Minister?	Ali Maher
What new name did the Free Officers take?	Revolutionary Command Council
What law did Nasser view as the culmination of his revolutionary efforts?	Agrarian Reform Law
What group rioted at the textile factories?	communist
How many people died in the textile factory riots?	nine
What group supported the RCC?	Muslim Brotherhood
How many posts did the Muslim Brotherhood get in Naguib's cabinet?	two
What was Nasser's position on executing the rioter's leaders?	opposed
What was Nasser's first title in the Liberation Rally?	secretary-general
What did Nasser and naguib ban in 1953?	all political parties
What was Nasser alone in supporting?	parliamentary elections
What was Nasser negotiating in 1953?	British withdrawal from the Suez Canal
Who resigned in 1954?	Naguib
What two positions did Nasser assume?	RCC chairman and prime minister
What group protested for Naguib's reinstatement?	Brotherhood
What did the Muslim Brotherhood want to happen to Nasser?	imprisonment
Who did Nasser promote to armed forces commander?	Amer
What group went on strike as a result of the turmoil?	transport workers
What group claimed to be leaving the political scene?	Free Officers
Who was sent to Switzerland?	Mohieddin
What nation tried to mediate between Nasser and Naguib?	Saudi Arabia
What event did Nasser exploit to his advantage?	assassination attempt
To what group did many of the arrested dissenters belong?	Brotherhood
Who avoided a death sentence in favor of 15 years in jail?	Sayyid Qutb
Where did Naguib end up after the turmoil?	house arrest
Who assumed total control of Egypt?	Nasser
What was too small to keep Nasser in power?	street following
What institution did Nasser closely control to prevent sedition?	press
What phrases did Nasser use in many of his speeches?	"Arab homeland" and "Arab nation"
Who were Umm Kulthum and Abdel Hafez?	singers
In what year did the RCC appoint Nasser as president?	1955
What country did Nasser make secret agreements with?	Israel
What territory did Israel attack in 1955?	Gaza Strip
What was Nasser's reaction to the attack?	did not retaliate militarily
How did the Egyptian people feel about Nasser's response to the attack?	a blow to his growing popularity
What did Nasser eventually do in the Straights of Titan?	blockade on Israeli shipping
What agreement ran contrary to Nasser's efforts?	Baghdad Pact
What did Nasser feel his military needed to oppose the West?	modern weaponry
From what country did Nasser buy arms?	Czechoslovakia
How much money did Nasser spend on weapons?	US$320,000,000
How did the military relationship between Egypt and Israel change?	equalized
What document was meant to resolve lingering issues of colonialism?	Final Communique
From what nation did Nasser support the independence of Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco?	French
What did Nasser pursue for Palestinians?	right of return
What organization offered possible solutions Arab-Israeli conflict, which Nasser supported?	UN
What political philosophy did Nasser adopt?	positive neutralism
What global period was Positive Neutralism meant to deal with?	Cold War
How did the Egyptian people react to Nasser after the conference?	welcomed by large crowds
How did the Egyptian press react to Nasser's accomplishments?	heralded
In what year did Egypt get a new constitution?	1956
What was the political party arrangement of the new constitution?	single-party system
What was the dominant political party?	National Union
From what group did the National Union originate?	Liberation Rally
Who did Nasser want more involved in his new political order?	citizens
Who could approve or reject candidates for the National Assembly?	Nasser
Who received new and special protections in the new constitution?	women
What group dissolved when the new constitution was enacted?	RCC
Among the original Free Officers, what did Nasser do to his opponents?	sidelining
What did Nasser's allies receive in the new arrangement?	high-ranking positions in the cabinet
With what two nations did Nasser's foreign policy clash?	UK and France
What construction project suffered from foreign political retaliation against Nasser?	Aswan Dam
What communist country did Nasser and Egypt recognize?	China
France was angered by Nasser's support of the independence of what people?	Algerian
The UK was chafed by Nasser's opposition to what agreement?	Baghdad Pact
How did Nasser react to the news the the US and UK had blocked construction of th Aswan Dam?	took great offense
What piece of infrastructure did Nasser propose to nationalize?	Suez Canal
What was Nasser's cabinet's knowledge of the nationalization scheme before Nasser announced it?	unaware
When did the last British troops leave Egypt?	1956
What did Nasser propose to do with funds from the nationalized Suez Canal?	fund the Aswan Dam
How many Egyptians did Nasser claim died building the Suez canal?	120,000
Who did Nasser claim would still be paid despite nationalization of the canal?	existing stockholders
What country had signed an agreement with Nasser in 1954?	UK
How did the Arab world react to news of the nationalization of the Suez Canal?	support
What nation's shipping was forbidden from using the Suez Canal?	Israeli
What US ambassador spoke about the widespread support for Nasser's nationalization of the canal?	Henry A. Byroade
Where was Nasser believed to be a spokesman for the poor and oppressed?	not only in Egypt, but all over the Third World
What nations were outraged by the nationalization scheme?	France and the UK
What nation did Nasser judge impossible to become militarially involved?	Israel
What entity drew up an agreement that drastically reduced the threat of military action against Egypt?	UN Security Council
What did the UK, France and Israel intend to do to Nasser?	topple
In what year did battle over the Suez Canal commence?	1956
What did the British and French air forces bomb?	Egyptian airfields in the canal zone
What city did Nasser want to keep the French and British out of?	Port Said
Who wanted the Egyptian armored units to fight the Israelis?	Amer
What did Nasser do to the canal?	blockage
How many Egyptian soldiers died during the fighting?	2,000
How many Egyptian soldiers did the Israeli army capture?	5,000
To whom did Nasser authorize distribution of small arms?	civilian volunteers
Who recommended Nasser surrender himself to the British?	Salah Salem
What was the consequence to Nassir's admiration among the Arab world for Egypt's military failure?	undamaged
How many Egyptians died in the battle for Port Said?	Between 750 and 1,000
What did Nasser think was the most importatnt location in the battle for the canal?	Port Said
In what state was the Egyptian army after fighting the French and UK?	shattered
Who was ultimately able to claim victoy in Port Said?	British-French forces
What country was opposed to the invasion of the canal?	U.S.
What leader did Nasser applaud?	Eisenhower
What military force was brought in to calm the situation?	United Nations Emergency Force
What did Nasser impose as a result of the conflict?	rigorous requirements for residency
What radio station furthered Nasser's agenda?	Voice of the Arabs
What were Arab admirers of Nasser called?	Nasserites
What did the admirers of Nasser lack?	structure and organization
Who said that Nasser conquered the Arab workd with radio?	Eugene Rogan
What would have Nasser prefferred his admirers call themselves?	Arab nationalists
What was the policy meant to contain communism in the middle east?	Eisenhower Doctrine
When was the Eisenhower Doctrine adopted?	1957
What leader did the US prop up to foil Nasser?	King Saud
What country joined an alliance with Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia?	Jordan
Although not communist, what about Nasser concerned pro-western groups?	pan-Arabism
What leader accused Nasser of trying to overthrow him?	King Hussein
What did Nasser call King Hussein?	a tool of the imperialists
What non-Egyptian leader was concerned about Nasser's popularity outside of Egypt?	King Saud
Despite conflicts with Arab governments, who continued to support Nasser?	citizens
What nations' assets did Nasser nationalize in 1957?	British and French
How much of the economy was not controlled by Nassir's government?	two-thirds
What entity did Nasser spearhead that was a boon for Egypt's economy?	Helwan steelworks
What nation did Nasser join economic forces with?	Soviet Union
What project did Nasser cooperate with the Soviet Union on?	Aswan Dam
What country wanted to join with Egypt?	Syria
What Syrian group did Nasser crack down on?	communists
What was the Egyptian-Syrian alliance called?	United Arab Republic
What year was the UAR formed?	1958
Who tried to assassinate Nasser?	King Saud
How was the assassination supposed to have been carried out?	shoot down Nasser's plane
Who assumed power in Saudi Arabia after the failed assassination attempt?	King Faisal
What was King Faisal's position toward Nasser?	opponent
How many members were in the National Assembly?	600
How many members of the National Assembly were from Egypt?	400
What Soviet leader did Nasser spar with?	Khrushchev
What did Khrushchev want Nasser to remove the ban on?	Communist Party
Who were the two National Assembly vice-presidents in Egypt?	Boghdadi and Amer
Who was Nasser's opponent in Lebanon?	Camille Chamoun
What did Lebanese pro-Nasser groups want?	to unite with the UAR
What did Nasser want to deny Chamoun?	a second presidential term
Who was in charge of dealing with the Lebanon situation?	Sarraj
What degree of support did pro-Nasser factions in Lebanon receive?	limited
What two men overthrew the Iraqi monarchy?	Abdel Karim Qasim and Abdel Salam Aref
What anti-Nasser Iraqi was assassinated?	Nuri al-Said
Where did US Marines land?	Lebanon
Why did Jordan and Lebanon seek outside aid?	to prevent them from falling to pro-Nasser forces
How did Nasser see the prospects for Arab unity?	unblocked
Who did Nasser appoint to run Syria?	Sarraj
What was Syria like under Sarraj?	police state
Who did Lebanon elect in 1958?	Fuad Chehab
How did relations between Lebanon and the UAR change with Chehab's election?	improved considerably
In what year did Nasser and Chehab agree to end the Lebanon crisis?	1959
What Iraqi leader clashed with Nasser?	Qasim
What did Quasm do to anger Nasser?	suppressed a rebellion in Mosul
What did Nasser suppress as a result?	Egyptian communist activity
What old ally did Nasser turn against?	Khaled Mohieddin
What Syrian social group opposed the UAR?	elites
How was Syria's economy fairing under the arrangement?	worsening
How did Nasser respond to economic problems in Syria?	nationalized wide-ranging sectors of the Syrian economy
What did Nasser do to Sarraj to try and help the political situation?	dismissed
What industry did Nassir nationalize in 1960?	press
What Syrian anti-Nasser group lauched a coup?	secessionist army units
In what year did Syria leave the UAR?	1961
Where did Nasser send Egyptian special forces?	Latakia
What happened to Nasser after the breakup of the UAR?	nervous breakdown
How was Nasser's health after the breakup of the UAR?	his health began to deteriorate
What country experienced a coup in 1962?	North Yemen
What country agreed to help suppress the Yemeni rebellion?	Saudi Arabia
Which side of the civil war did Nasser side with?	the new government
In what year did Egypt leave Yemen's civil war?	1967
How did Nasser characterize Egypt's involvement in Yemen's civil war?	miscalculation
What groups completed a coup in Iraq?	Ba'athist–Nasserist alliance
Who became the new Iraqi president after the coup?	Abdel Salam Aref
What caused the agreement to fail?	Syria's Ba'athists purged Nasser's supporters
How did Nasser describe the Ba'athists?	fascists
What river did the Israelis want to divert?	Jordan River
How did Syria and Jordan see Israel's plans?	act of war
What leader did Nasser bond with durin gthe negotiations?	King Hussein
What organization was formed as a result of the talks?	Palestine Liberation Organization
Who was set to lead the PLO?	Ahmad Shukeiri
In what year was the Non-Aligned Movment formed?	1961
Who was named leader of the NAM in 1964?	Nasser
What global conflict was the NAM made to counter?	Cold War
What continent did Nasser help to attain political stability?	African
Who did Nasser give asylum to?	anti-colonial leaders from several African countries
What type of programming was broadcast from Cairo?	anti-colonial propaganda
What African group did Nasser help to form?	Organisation of African Unity
What year was the OAU formed?	1963
What country did Nasser want to be the leader of the Arab world?	Egypt
What two disparate ideologies was Nasser trying to unite?	Islamic and socialist
What religious group did Nasser endeavor to reform?	al-Azhar
What religious group was Nasser seeking to marginalize?	Muslim Brotherhood
What military entity did Nasser create in 1961?	Presidential Council
As opposed to personal loyalty, what basis should military promotions be given, according to Nasser?	merit
Why did Nasser abandon the Presidential Council?	Amer's allies in the officers corps threatened to mobilize against him
What leader was sidelined by the Presidential Council?	Amer
What was the Presidential Council meant to do?	approve all senior military appointments
From whom did Nasser want to seize control of Egypt's military?	Amer
Who blinked in the confrontation between Nasser and Amer?	Nasser
How did Amer respond to Nasser's attempts to marginalize him?	directly confronting Nasser
How did Nasser deal with the stress of the UAR's collapse and Amer's intransigence?	painkillers
From what chronic illness was Nasser suffering?	diabetes
What political ideology did Nasser wholeheartedly back in 1961?	socialism
What was the document Nasser backed to push his socialist reforms?	National Charter
What infrastructure project was part of the National Charter?	widening the Suez Canal
What year was the National Charter released?	1962
What type of health care program was put forth in the National Charter?	universal
What percentage of business did the Egyptian government own in 1962?	51
What was the new name for the National Union?	Arab Socialist Union
What was the expression of Nasser's reforms on the street?	repression
What group was targeted with imprisonment?	Islamists
How did two of Nasser's top aids respond to the new measures?	submit their resignations in protest
What was Nasser's political opposition like in the 1965 election?	He was the only candidate
The leader of what organization was imprisoned by Nasser?	Muslim Brotherhood
What was Qutb's sentence?	executed
What economic element did Nasser try to encourage with bank loans?	private sector
How did Egypt's economy do during the 1960s?	from sluggishness to the verge of collapse
What country warned Nasser that Israel wanted to attack Syria?	Soviet Union
What did Amer do without Nasser's approval?	dispatch troops to Sinai
What nations were trying to drag Egypt into a war, according to King Hussein?	Israeli-American
What territory was King Hussein afraid Israel would obtain?	West Bank
Who did Nasser think would prevent Israel from launching an offensive?	US
What thoroughfare did Amir want Nasser to block?	Straits of Tiran
Who was Nassir's vice president?	Zakaria Mohieddin
How would Nassir deal with an Israeli invasion, if it happened?	diplomacy towards a ceasefire
What country joined Egypt and Syria against Israel?	Jordan
What defeat opened Nasser's eyes to the desperation of Egypt's situation?	Sharm el-Sheikh
What two Egyptian leaders personal conflicts played a large part in Egypt's poor showing  in the war?	Nasser–Amer
What did Nasser dismiss during the war?	rational analysis
What propaganda were Arab media broadcasting at the beginning of the war?	imminent Arab victory
What day did Nasser announce Egypt's defeat?	9 June
What did Nasser do about his position as President?	announced his resignation
Who rejected Nasser's offer to become the new president?	Zakaria Mohieddin
What did Nasser do after mass demonstrations?	retracted his decision
Who did Nasser appoint as the new head of Egypt's armed forces?	Mohamed Fawzi
How did Amer react to being confronted about planning a coup?	suicide
How did Nasser try to deal with the military following the coup attempt?	depoliticizing the armed forces
What loyalists did Nasser target?	figures loyal to Amer
Where was the Arab League summit held?	Khartoum
What leader assumed a more prominent position due to Nasser's difficulites?	King Faisal
What agreement ended the Yemeni civil war?	Khartoum Resolution
What nation granted military aid to Egypt?	Soviet Union
What document called for Israel to abandon land it obtained during the war?	UN Resolution 242
What new positions did Nasser give himself ?	prime minister and supreme commander of the armed forces
When did students protest for political reforms?	1968
What type of people were ousted from Nasser's cabinet?	Arab Socialist Union
What type of spying did Nasser want to concentrate on?	external
What organization was to undergo a big overhaul?	ASU
What trend was Nasser trying to cause?	liberalization
How did Nasser's promises of increased freedoms turn out?	unfulfilled
How did Nasser want to change the relationship between parliament and the executive?	independence
What was the endeavor to reclaim territory from Israel called?	War of Attrition
In what year did the War of Attrition begin?	1968
Who led the Fatah movement?	Yasser Arafat
In what battle had the Fatah movement distinguished itself?	Battle of Karameh
To whom did Nasser give authority to deal with Israel?	Arafat
What did Nasser do to respond to Israeli attacks?	build a network of internal defenses
When did the war start up again?	March 1969
What groups did Nasser broker an agreement with?	PLO and the Lebanese military
Who would get to attack Israel from Lebanon?	Palestinian guerrillas
What was the American plan to end conflict with Israel?	Rogers Plan
What did Nasser want to use the agreement to do?	recapturing the Suez Canal
Who pressured Nasser to accept the Rogers Plan?	Soviet Union
How did Nasser equate peace with Israel?	surrender
What did Nasser move to the canal zone?	SAM missiles
When did Nasser die?	28 September 1970
How did Nasser die?	heart attack
Who was with Nasser when he died?	Heikal, Sadat, and Nasser's wife Tahia
What health events had Nasser suffered in 1966 and 1969?	heart attacks
How old were Nasser's brothers when they died?	in their fifties
How many people attended Nasser's funeral?	at least five million
At what landmark did the funeral procession begin?	the old RCC headquarters
Who was the only Arab leader not to attend Nasser's funeral?	Saudi King Faisal
What leader twice fainted during the funeral?	Muammar Gaddafi
Who was the Soviet leader who attended Nasser's funeral?	Alexei Kosygin
How many eople died in Breuit because of unrest caused by Nasser's death?	Over a dozen
How many people marched in Jerusalem?	75,000
Who said, "The world will never again see five million people crying together?"	Sherif Hetata
What did a Lebanese publication call the Arabs following Nasser's death?	orphans
What did Nasser completely eliminate from Egypt?	British influence
What did Nasser work to put into place in Egypt?	social justice
How were working conditions and employment at the end of Nasser's presidency?	improved considerably
What had drained resources from Nasser's social programs?	war effort
What reform, initiated by Nasser, caused the Egyptian economy to grow?	agrarian
What are two infrastructure projects Nasser embarked on?	Helwan steel works and the Aswan Dam
How was Egyptian culture under Nasser refered to?	golden age
What was the most prominent thing Nasser nationalized?	Suez Canal
What type of political parties came about when Mubarek was president?	Nasserist
What was the first Nasserist political party?	Arab Democratic Nasserist Party
What party came in third in the 2013 election?	Sabahi
What consolated party was formed from several Nasserist groups?	United Nasserist Party
What was Nasser known for in regard to ordinary citizens?	availability to the public
How many speeches did Nasser give?	1,359
Who gave the most speeches of any Egyptian leader?	Nasser
What institution helped cultivate Nasser's positive public image?	press
Who was most critical of Nasser's rule?	Egyptian intellectuals
What event generated criticism of Nasser from Egypt's elite?	Six-Day War
During whose presidency were Egyptians nostalgic for Nasser?	Mubarak
What ideals are associated with Nasser's time as prsident?	national purpose, hope, social cohesion, and vibrant culture
Whad did Nasser's enemies call him?	dictator
Who did Nasser imprison thousands of?	dissidents
What did Tawfiq al-Hakim call Nasser?	confused Sultan
What Egyptian party dismissed Nasser's popular appeal?	New Wafd Party
Who blamed the 1952 revolution's failings on Nasser?	Alaa al-Din Desouki
To what did critics attribute Nasser's popular appeal?	successful manipulation and demagoguery
What did Nasser's political style render unnecessary?	intermediaries
What was needed under Nasser, the absence of which guaranteed instability?	strong political institutions
Who called Nasser an irrational and irresponsible leader?	Abd al-Azim Ramadan
Who was Nasser's closest Western advisor?	Miles Copeland, Jr
Who was Nasser's vice president?	Zakaria Mohieddin
What gambit did Nasser fail at in his bluster with Israel?	bluffing
What did Nasser do over the years of his rule?	gradually changed
What did Mohieddin attribute Nassir's mistakes in 1967 to?	diabetes
What did other Arab leaders have to do to gain admiration of their populations?	seek good relations with Egypt
What did Nasser cause in the wider Arab world?	several nationalist revolutions
What have other Arab leaders been unable to do that Nasser was?	communicated directly with the public masses
What did Nasser symbolize?	the popular Arab will
Who was Algeria's first president, a fervent Nasserist?	Ben Bella
What Nasserist usurped the King of Yemen?	Abdullah al-Sallal
Which leader considered Nasser his hero?	Muammar Gaddafi
What leader took power in Sudan and was inspired by Nasser?	Colonel Gaafar Nimeiry
What organization continued Nasser's philosophies?	Arab Nationalist Movement
What 1963 film compared Nasser to Saladin?	El Nasser Salah El Dine
What 1996 Nasser-related film set a box office record?	Nasser 56
What was Nasser 56 about?	Suez Crisis
What was the famous biopic about Nasser?	Gamal Abdel Nasser
Who did Nasser marry in 1944?	Tahia Kazem
Who introduced Nasser and his wife?	Abdel Hamid Kazim
Where did Nasser and his wife live after they were married?	Manshiyat al-Bakri
What job of Nasser's offered him a comparably comfortable lifestyle?	officer corps
What was Nasser's principle vice?	chain smoking
How long was a typical workday for Nasser?	18-hour
What illness was Nasser diagnosed with in 1960?	diabetes
What year did Nasser die?	1970
What did Egyptian state media claim was the reason for Nasser's absence after his second heart attack?	influenza
What was Pope Saint John XXIII's birth name?	Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli
When was Pope Saint John XXIII born?	25 November 1881
When did Pope Saint XXIII die?	3 June 1963
How long did he reign as Pope?	28 October 1958 to his death in 1963
When was he ordained to the priesthood?	10 August 1904
How old was Roncalli when elected pope?	76
When was Roncalli elected pope?	28 October 1958
He was the first pope to take the pontifical name of "John" upon election in how long?	500 years
Pope John XXIII surprised those who expected him to be a caretaker pope by calling what?	Second Vatican Council
When did he call the Second Vatican Council?	11 October 1962
When did the pope die?	3 June 1963
What did the pope die of?	stomach cancer
Where was he buried?	the Vatican grottoes beneath Saint Peter's Basilica
When was he beatified?	3 September 2000
He is still known today as what?	the "Good Pope"
When is his feast day celebrated?	11 October
What is October 11?	the day of the first session of the Second Vatican Council
When did Pope Francis added his optional memorial to the worldwide General Roman Calendar of saints' feast days?	11 September 2014
Where did Pope Francis commemorate his death on 3 June?	by the Evangelical Lutheran Church
Where did Pope Francis commemorate his death on 4 June?	by the Anglican Church of Canada and the Episcopal Church (United States)
When did Pietro Gasparri summon him to the Vatican?	February 1925
Who was the Cardinal Secretary of State in 1925?	Pietro Gasparri
When was he the Apostolic Visitor to Bulgaria?	1925–35
When was his nomination as apostolic visitor made official?	19 March
Who was he consecrated by?	Giovanni Tacci Porcelli
When was he appointed Apostolic Delegate to Turkey and Greece?	30 November 1934
He was appointed titular archbishop of where?	Mesembria, Bulgaria
What ws he known by in the Turkish community?	the Turcophile Pope
When did he take that position?	1935
Who did he introduce Bulgarian pilgrims to?	Pope Pius XI
When did he hear that his mother was dying?	February 1939
When did Pope Pius XI die?	10 February 1939
When did his mother die?	20 February 1939
Who sent him the letter informing him of his mother's death?	Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli
When was Pope Pius XII elected?	2 March 1939
When was he appointed Patriarch of Venice?	12 January 1953
Pope Pius XII raised him to what rank?	Cardinal-Priest of Santa Prisca
When did he leave France for Venice?	23 February 1953
When did he take up his new diocese in Venice?	15 March 1953
Who was the President of France in 1953?	Vincent Auriol
When was his sister Ancilla diagnosed with stomach cancer?	the early 1950s
When did he send his last letter to his dying sister?	8 November 1953
When did Ancilla die?	11 November 1953
Where did he want to be buried?	the crypt of Saint Mark's in Venice
When did Pope Pius XII die?	9 October 1958
When was his last full day in Venice?	11 October
Why did Roncalli leave Venice?	for the conclave in Rome
He was elected pope after how many ballots?	eleven ballots
Who was the Archbishop of Milan?	Giovanni Battista Montini
New pontiffs are chosen from Cardinals who head what?	archdioceses or departments of the Roman Curia
When was Montini absent from the conclave?	1958
When was the final ballot of the conclave?	4:00 pm
How many votes did he have?	38 votes
What name did Roncalli choose?	John
John had not been a chosen name in how long?	over 500 years
Who was the last to choose the name John?	Antipope John XXIII
What did John XXIII call for?	an ecumenical council
When was the decision made for this council?	29 January 1959
Where was the decision made for this council?	the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls
Who did Cardinal Giovanni Battista Montini later become?	Pope Paul VI
John XXIII was an advocate for what?	human rights
What did he write about human rights in?	his Pacem in terris
His advocacy from human rights included whom?	the unborn and the elderly
John XXIII continued the gradual reform of what?	the Roman liturgy
He published changes that resulted in what?	the 1962 Roman Missal
What did Pope Pius V establish in 1570?	the Tridentine Mass
Pope Benedict XVI authorized continued use of the Roman Missal in what year?	2007
When was the Roman Rite created?	1970
Where was the first session of the Second Vatican Council held?	in the Vatican
When was the first session of the Second Vatican Council held?	11 October 1962
What speech did he give?	Gaudet Mater Ecclesia speech
Why were the people in Saint Peter's Square chanting and yelling?	the sole objective of getting John XXIII to appear at the window to address them
A solemn ceremony ended the first session on what day?	8 December 1962
When was the next session scheduled?	1963 from 12 May to 29 June
When was the next session announced?	12 November 1962
Who did John XXIII wish to see canonized?	Pope Pius IX
John XXIII offered to mediate between who?	US President John F. Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev
When was the Cuban Missile Crisis?	October 1962
Who expressed best wishes for the pope's health?	Nikita Khrushchev
John XXIII became the first pope to receive what title?	Time magazine's 'Man of the Year'
Who was the latest pope to hold the title of 'Man of the Year?'	Francis
John XXIII received what prize on 10 May 1963?	Balzan Prize
When did John XXIII receive the Balzan Prize?	10 May 1963
Who officially awarded the pope the Balzan Prize?	Italian President Antonio Segni
Where did he receive the Balzan Prize?	the Quirinal Palace
What did the pope suffer on 25 May 1963?	haemorrhage
Who broke the news to John XXIII about his cancer?	Loris F. Capovilla
When was it clear that the cancer had overcome the resistance of John XXIII?	31 May
Who was at the dying pope's bedside?	Petrus Canisius Van Lierde
Who was the Papal Sacristan for John XXIII?	Petrus Canisius Van Lierde
When did the pope bid farewell?	11 am
What did John XXIII die of?	peritonitis
What day did he die?	3 June 1963
How old was John XXIII upon his death?	81
Who celebrated his Mass for him in the square below?	Luigi Traglia
What day was he buried?	6 June
Who posthumously awarded his the Presidential Medal of Freedom?	US President Lyndon B. Johnson
When did President Johnson award him?	3 December 1963
What is the Presidential Medal Freedom?	the United States' highest civilian award
When was President Johnson's speech for John XXIII?	6 December 1963
What was he also known as?	Good Pope John
Who opened his cause for canonization?	Pope Paul VI
When was Pope John XXIII considered "blessed?"	3 September 2000
Who declared him "blessed?"	Pope John Paul II
Who was the last pope before John XXIII to receive the title?	Pope Pius X
When was the 50th anniversary of his death?	3 June 2013
Who celebrated his 50th anniversary?	Pope Francis
Where were the people gathered at his tomb from?	Bergamo
When did Francis approve John XXIII for canonization?	5 July 2013
On what date was John XXIII and Pope John Paul II declared saints?	Sunday, 27 April 2014
Time has long been a major point of study in which fields?	religion, philosophy, and science
Fields such as business, industry, sports, science, and performing arts incorporate some notion of what into their measuring systems?	time
What is an example of a simple definition of time?	time is what clocks measure
According to one of the main viewpoints of time, time is part of the fundamental structure of what?	the universe
The realist view of time is sometimes referred to as what?	Newtonian time
What does the opposing view of time believe time is a part of?	a fundamental intellectual structure
Time is one of how many fundamental physical quantities?	seven
Time is one of the fundamental physical quantities in which two systems?	the International System of Units and International System of Quantities
What is an example of a quantity that time is used to define, mentioned in the paragraph?	velocity
Investigations of what brought questions of space into questions about time?	a single continuum called spacetime
What has been a prime motivation in astronomy and navigation?	Temporal measurement
Periodic events and periodic motion have served as standards for what?	Periodic events and periodic motion
What is the current international unit of time?	the second
The electronic transition frequency of which element defines the second?	caesium atoms
Time has personal value due to awareness of it's limited nature in what?	each day and in human life spans
What is a mathematical tool used for organizing intervals of time?	the calendar
What is a physical tool that tracks the passage of time?	the clock
Which tool is used in day to day life?	the clock
Which tool is used in periods longer than a day?	the calendar
How is the number that marks the occurrence of an event obtained?	by counting from a fiducial epoch—a central reference point
Artifacts from which era suggest that the moon was used to reckon time around 6,000 years ago?	the Paleolithic
Which calendars were among the first to appear?	Lunar calendars
How long were the original lunar calendars?	either 12 or 13 lunar months (either 354 or 384 days)
Where did some of the other early forms of calendars originate?	Mesoamerica
How many months were in a year in the original Mayan calendars?	18
What was the most accurate clock-like device in the ancient world?	the water clock, or clepsydra
A clepsyrda was found in the tomb of which Pharaoh?	Egyptian pharaoh Amenhotep
Which inventors made significant improvements on the water clock up until the Middle Ages?	Arab inventors
Which engineers came up with the first mechanical clocks?	Chinese
When were the first mechanical clocks created?	the 11th century
Which device uses the flow of sand to measure time?	The hourglass
How many hourglasses did Magellan use on each ship during his famous voyage across the globe?	18
What method did temples and churches use to measure time?	Incense sticks and candles
Which abbot of St. Alban's abbey built a mechanical clock around 1330?	Richard of Wallingford
Who is credited with the invention of the minute hand?	Jost Burgi.
Which timekeeping devices are the most accurate?	atomic clocks
What method do atomic clocks use to measure seconds?	the frequency of electronic transitions in certain atoms
Which system bases its unit of time on the properties of caesium?	the International System of Measurements
How long has the International System of Measurements based the second on caesium?	Since 1967
Which standard of time started with British Railways?	Greenwich Mean Time
When was GMT adopted by British Railways?	1847
GMT used what instead of atomic clocks?	telescopes
When did observations at the Greenwich Observatory cease?	1954
The terms GMT and Greenwich Mean Time are also used informally to refer to what?	UT or UTC
How many main viewpoints divide many philosophers?	Two
The realist view states that time is part of the fundamental structure of what?	the universe
The realist view is sometimes referred to as what?	Newtonian time
The opposing view states that time is an intellectual concept that allows people to what?	to sequence and compare events
What are the earliest texts of Indian/Hindu philosophy?	The Vedas
How long ago are the earliest texts of Indian/Hindu philosophy dated?	back to the late 2nd millennium BC
How long does each cycle of birth and destruction of the universe last according to Ancient Hindu texts?	4,320 million years
Which ancient Greek philosophers wrote essays on the concept of time?	Parmenides and Heraclitus
Aristotle defined time as "number of movement in respect of the before and after" in which book?	Book IV of his Physica
Who commented on the nature of time in Book 11 of his confessions?	St. Augustine of Hippo
By what does St. Augustine of Hippo begin to define time?	by what it is not rather than what it is
What does Augustine call time in Confessions 11.26?	a “distention” of the mind
In what did Immanuel Kant describe time as a priori intuition that allows humankind to understand sense experience?	the Critique of Pure Reason
What did Kant portray space and time to be?	both are elements of a systematic mental framework
Kant thought of time as a fundamental part of what?	an abstract conceptual framework
What type of measurements are used to quantify the duration of events?	temporal measurements
What type of measurements are used to quantify the distances between objects?	Spatial measurements
Who suggested that humankind does not exist inside time, but is time?	Martin Heidegger
The relationship to the future is the state of anticipating what?	a potential possibility, task, or engagement
What is considered a qualitative experience rather than a quantitative one?	The present
According to Heidegger, what can we do, in our thoughts?	step out of (ecstasis) sequential time.
Minkowski spacetime combines the three dimensions of space with what?	a single dimension of time
In Minkowski spacetime, how can distances in space be measured?	by how long light takes to travel that distance
What are two events in Minkowski spacetime separated by?	by an invariant interval
The invariant interval between events is independent of what?	of the observer (and his velocity)
The invariant interval that separates two events in Minkowski spacetime can either be what?	space-like, light-like, or time-like
What Newtonian concept can be used in the formulation of an idea for the synchronization of clocks?	concept of "relative, apparent, and common time"
In which century did physicists encounter problems with the understanding of time?	the late nineteenth century
The behavior of which two phenomena caused physicists to encounter problems with their understanding of time in the late 19th century?	the behavior of electricity and magnetism
Which famous scientist resolved these issues?	Einstein
Historically, time has been closely related with what?	space
In which of Einstein's two theories do time and space merge into spacetime?	special relativity and general relativity
According to Einsteins two relativity theories, the concept of time depends on what?	the spatial reference frame of the observer, and the human perception
A crew in a spaceship travelling nearly the speed of light will not notice the change in what?	in the speed of time on board their vessel
How will the above mentioned spaceship appear to a stationary observer?	the spaceship appears flattened in the direction it is traveling
How does the crew on board the spaceship perceive the stationary observer?	slowed down and flattened along the spaceship's direction of travel
The crew's perception of what is different from a stationary observer?	time
What the crew perceives as seconds might be seen as how long to a stationary observer?	hundreds of years
What remains unchanged in both the cases of the spaceship crew and of the stationary observer?	causality
Who showed, in his thought experiments, that people travelling at different speeds measured time differently?	Einstein
In what case do these effects become much more noticeable?	for objects moving at speeds approaching the speed of light.
How long do most subatomic particles exist for in a lab?	a fixed fraction of a second
Einstein showed how what could be altered by high speed motion?	both temporal and spatial dimensions
What laws do not specify an arrow of time?	the laws of physics
The standard description of measurement in quantum mechanics is what?	time asymmetric
The direction of the arrow of time is sometimes what?	arbitrary
Which law states that entropy must increase over time?	the Second law of thermodynamics,
The violation of what implies that there should be a small counterbalancing time asymmetry?	CP symmetry
In which publication does Hawking say that any events that existed before the Big Bang would not be accessible to us?	A Brief History of Time
Stephen Hawking makes a connection between time and what?	the Big Bang
What does Hawking suggest started with the big bang?	time
Hawking also states that questions about what happened before the Big Bang are what?	meaningless
Which philosopher has criticized Hawking's formulation?	Aristotelian philosopher Mortimer J. Adler
The Big Bang model is solidly established in what?	cosmology
How much is known about the early states of the universe?	i
Which theorems require the existence of a singularity at the beginning of time?	The Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems
These theorems have to assume what theory is correct?	general relativity
These theorems state that general relatively must break down before what?	before the universe reaches the Planck temperature
How long has time travel been a topic in science fiction?	since the 19th century
Traveling which direction in time has never been verified and presents many problems?	backwards
A time machine is known as any technological devise that is used for what purpose?	to achieve time travel
What is another solution to the problem of temporal paradoxes?	paradoxes cannot arise simply because they have not arisen
In several works of fiction, what ceases to exist in the past which causes paradoxes not to arise?	free will
What paradox cannot be enacted because it is a fact that your grandfather was not killed before your parent was conceived?	the grandfather paradox
What principle elaborates more on the view described?	the Novikov self-consistency principle.
What type of drugs can impair the judgement of time?	Psychoactive drugs
Stimulants lead humans to overestimate what?	time intervals
What causes humans to underestimate time intervals?	depressants
The level of what is the reason stimulants and depressants change human perceptions of time?	The level of activity in the brain of neurotransmitters
Such chemicals do what to the firing of the brain's neurons?	either excite or inhibit the firing of neurons
The use of time is important in understanding what?	human behavior, education, and travel behavior
What is a developing field of time related study?	Time-use research
Time use is always changing with advances in what?	technology
Travelling to work has been observed to be about how long for a large number of cities over a long period?	20–30 minutes one-way
What may the description of events include?	a timestamp
What never precedes cause because of causality?	effect
A sequence of events used to describe a sequential path can be referred to as what?	a world line
In what ways can a sequence of events be presented?	in text, tables, charts, or timelines
What is another way of phrasing "time order"?	chronological order
Uses of sequences of events include what?	stories, historical events (chronology), directions and steps in procedures, and timetables
What may a sequence of events be used to describe?	processes in science, technology, and medicine
The use of what occurs in fields as diverse as machines, documentaries, or computer simulation?	a sequence of events
What is a specific example of a sequence of events?	the timeline of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster
What former managing director od Goldman Sachs international division is president of The European Central Bank?	Mario Draghi
What is the official, central bank for the euro?	The European Central Bank
What is the Eurozone?	consists of 19 EU member states and is one of the largest currency areas in the world
Who owns the capital stock of The European Central Bank?	the central banks of all 28 EU member states
What established The European Central Bank?	The Treaty of Amsterdam
What is the main mission of the ECB?	maintain price stability within the Eurozone
What gives the ECB the right to authorise the issuance of euro banknotes?	Article 16 of its Statute
How can a member state use euro coins?	the amount must be authorised by the ECB beforehand
Where is the mission for the European Central Bank found?	Article 2 of the Statute of the ECB
Where can the basic tasks of the European Central Bank be found?	Article 3 of the Statute
Who was the first president of the ECB?	Wim Duisenberg
What was Duisenberg's previous business experience?	former president of the Dutch central bank and the European Monetary Institute
Who did the French government think was best candidate for President of the ECB?	Jean-Claude Trichet
Why did the French want a French bank president?	since the ECB was to be located in Germany, its president should be French
What did the French, German, Dutch and Belgian governments finally compromise on with regards to managing the ECB?	Duisenberg would stand down before the end of his mandate, to be replaced by Trichet
What is price stability defined as?	inflation of under 2%
What did the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices state that price stability had to be maintained at?	over the medium term
When did the Governing Council define price stability?	October 1998
What is the primary goal of the ECB?	maintain price stability within the Eurozone
Where is the primary mission of the European Central Bank listed?	Article 127(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
What happens when a lot of repo notes come due?	increase in liquidity in the economy
What happens whe not as many repo notes are coming due?	contrary effect
What happens when members increase their deposits?	more money has been put into the economy
What is a good way to boost the economy?	increase in deposits in member banks
Where are contracts recorded?	on the asset side of the European Central Bank's balance sheet
How does a bank make sure that they can participate in auctions?	must be able to offer proof of appropriate collateral in the form of loans to other entities
What kind of proof is acceptable for participation in auctions?	public debt of member states, but a fairly wide range of private banking securities are also accepted
What should all assets offered up as collateral be?	all equally good, and all equally protected from the risk of inflation
What must be a part of a states Gross Domestic Product in order for them to be considered for particpation in auctions?	sovereign debt
Who is responsible for overseeing all monetary policy?	The Executive Board
Who is the current president of the ECB?	Mario Draghi
Who is the Vice-President of The European Central Bank?	Vitor Constâncio
Along with the President and Vice President, how many other members make up the Executive Board?	four
For how long are the other members of the Executive Board appointed?	non-renewable terms of eight years
Who did the Spanish want to take José Manuel González-Páramo's seat on the board?	Antonio Sáinz de Vicuña
Who was ulitmately named as González-Páramo's replacement?	Luxembourg's Yves Mersch
When was González-Páramo's supposed to leave his seat on the board?	June 2012
When did González-Páramo take his seat on the Executive Board?	June 2004
Why did the Spanish think that Vicuña would be a suitable replacement for González-Páramo?	ECB veteran who heads its legal department
What does the Supervisory Board discuss at it's meetings?	discuss, plan and carry out the ECB’s supervisory tasks
How long is the term for the Chairman of the Supervisory Board?	appointed for a non-renewable term of five years
How long is the term for Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board?	chosen from among the members of the ECB's Executive Board
Besides the Chair and Vice-Chair, who else is on the Supervisory Board?	four ECB representatives and representatives of national supervisors
What happens if the national supervisory authority designated by a Member State is not a national central bank?	the representative of the competent authority can be accompanied by a representative from their NCB
What governs the ECB?	European law
How does the ECB mimic a corporation?	shareholders and stock capital
How much does the ECB have as capital?	five billion euros
Who holds the ECB's capital?	the national central banks of the member states as shareholders
What determined the ECB's initial capital?	the basis of the states' population and GDP
What language does the ECB generally use?	English
When in communication with other nationalities, what language is generally used?	normally in their respective language
What language is the ECB website run in?	English
How are the languages of official documents handled?	the official languages of the EU
WHat is the biggest factor in the ECB maintaining price stability?	independence
Who gets to interview and question prospective board members?	The European Parliament
Why do EU institutions and national governments have to respect the independence of the ECB?	bound by the treaties
How is the ECB held accountable for it's actions?	bound to publish reports on its activities and has to address its annual report to the European Parliament
When did the European debt Crisis begin?	2009
What did the eurozone states that were thought to not be able to repay their debt face as a consequence?	the ability of these states to borrow new money to further finance their budget deficits or to refinance existing unsustainable debt levels was strongly reduced
Which country was the first to be at risk for soverign default?	Greece
Who brought Greece's financial crisis to the forefront?	new elected government
What had Greece's previous government been hiding?	its true indebtedness and budget deficit
Which countries didn't want to go around the bail-out clause and have to shoulder the burden of backing the defaulters debts.	financially stable eurozone states like Germany
What do most see raising the debt celing as doing?	discourage the crisis states to implement necessary reforms to regain their competitiveness
What could keep the crisis states from trying to stand on their own?	giving much more financial support to continuously cover the debt crisis or allow even higher budget deficits or debt levels
What term was coined when Greece left the eurozone?	Grexit
What is Germany's position on wether or not Greece should be in the eurozone?	If the worst comes to the worst, priority should be given to the euro's stability.
As one of the financial powers, has Germany ever tried to force the crisis states into leaving the eurozone?	never pushed those exits
Which eurozone country has the biggest need for financial reform?	Greece
What would cause the private banking system to weaken?	if the debt rescheduling causes losses on loans held by European banks
Who purchases the debt of countries that cannot repay and are in danger of default?	wealthy member countries
What happens when the private banking system is weakened?	pressure on the central bank to come to the aid of those banks
What is to be used to guarantee the debtors repayment, by the banks assuming their debt?	tax revenues and credit of the wealthy member countries
Is using the tax revenues and credit of the more stable banks to bail out the ones in danger of default an accepted practice?	is politically controversial
Who retains ownership of the collateral until the debt is paid?	ECB
Since the ECB doesn't buy bonds outright, how are they used?	refinancing facilities
What is the manner in which bonds are used at refinancing facilities?	repurchase agreements, or collateralised loans
Who buys the bonds instead of using them in reverse transactions?	the Fed
What debt did the ECB focus on abtaining?	Spanish and Italian
What risk is assumed when the ECB purchases bonds from weaker states?	a deteriorating balance sheet
Why were italian bonds purchased by the ECB?	intended to dampen international speculation and strengthen portfolios in the private sector and also the central bank
What was something used to minimize the impact of the soverign-debt crisis?	Purchases of Italian bonds by the central bank
How does sterilisation help to keep the money flow even?	highly valued assets are sold at the same time that the weaker assets are purchased
What can a state do with bad assets, rather than cashing them in directly?	long-term collateral
How can weaker states improve the surface value of their assets?	adjustments in taxation and expenditure in the economies
By 2012, how much did the ECB spend in covering bad debt?	€212.1bn
How does the ECB plan to increase the available credit for businesses?	Outright Monetary Transactions
What is the duration of the Outright Monetary Transactions program?	no ex-ante time or size limit
When was the new idea for the purchasing of eurozone bonds announced?	6 September 2012
How long was the duration of the Securities Markets Programme to last?	temporary
What can be shuffeled around during a soverign debt crisis to mitigate the damage?	temporarily moving bad or weak assets
Where do bad and weak assets get moved in times of soverign debt crisis?	the balance sheets of the European Central Bank
What is shuffling around bad or weak debts from a weaker eurozone member to the ECB known as?	monetisation
What is monetisation usually viewed as?	inflationary threat
If the central banks can come to an agreement with the eurozone member about the continued repayment of the debt, what happens to the bad or weak debt?	move weak assets off their balance sheets
What is being caused by links between soverign debt and failing national banks?	the sickness of the euro
Which country has been resistant to attempts to make the soverign debt assets more like the U.S. Treasury?	the German government
Who began to increase their coverage of weaker debts?	The European Central Bank
What would have to happen to make European sovereign debt assets more like what is found in the U.S. Treasury?	a collective guarantee of the member states' solvency
Why did propsals about making the European sovereign debt assets more like the US Treasury?	the crisis of 2010
What did the ECB do to help stabilise the financial system during the subprime mortgage crisis?	loaned billions of euros to banks
Why did the ECB intervene during the subprime mortgage crisis?	to stabilise the financial system
Who decided, along with the ECB, to use Term auction to help stabilize the financial crisis and improve dollar liquidity?	Federal Reserve System
Besides cooperating with other financial institutions, how does the ECB help to maintain stability?	contributes to maintaining a stable financial system and monitoring the banking sector
When did the ECB and Federal Rserve decide to collaborate on Term auction facility?	December 2007
What is a perk of the central bank?	it can make as much money as it deems needed
What kinds of assets does the US Federal Reserve buy?	bonds issued by the Federal government
What kind of asset will the Federal Reserve purchase in mass quantities at a time of crisis?	commercial paper
What is the purpose of buying commercial paper in a time of financial crisis?	to ensure that adequate liquidity is available for functioning
Which agencies have became the authority on assessing the risk of financial institutions?	Moody's and S&P
When was Basel II adopted?	2005
What said that agencies had to start using Moody's and S&P to assess financial institutions?	the Basel II recommendations
Since when have the Basel II recommendations been in effect?	2008
Where is the European Central bank located?	Frankfurt
What decided where the bank was to be located?	Amsterdam Treaty
When did the bank move to it's new headquarters?	2014
What previously stood where the bank is now?	the former wholesale market
When did construction of the new bank begin?	October 2008
After the loan program was announced, which countries borrowed the most?	Greece, Ireland, Italy and Spain
What would happen if some of the banks were to begin buying govenrment bonds?	easing the debt crisis
How much does the ECB have to have to pay off it's own debts?	€200bn
How do you prevent a credit bottleneck?	keep operating and loaning to businesses
What is an LTRO?	longer-term refinancing operation
How long was the time to maturity on an LTRO?	six-month
When were the first supplemental LTRO's offered?	March 2008
How long had the time to maturity been previously?	three months
How many bids were recorded at the auction for the first 12 month LRTO?	close to 1100 bidders
In what country is St. John's located?	Canada
What is the name of the island that St. John's is located?	Newfoundland
What city is ranked 20th in largest metropolitan area for Canada?	St. John's
Where on the Avalon Peninsula is St. John's located?	eastern tip
In what year did St. John's have a population of 214,285?	2015
Which city is considered one of the oldest settlements in North America?	St. John's
Around what year did settlement begin to occur in St. John's?	1630
When was Cuper's Cove colony founded?	1610
 What year was Bristol's Hope colony founded?	1618
Who forbade the  english fisherman to setup seasonal camps in Newfoundland?	British government
What was John Cabot's sons first name?	Sebastian
What was the occupation of John Cabot?	explorer
Where did the French, Spanish and Portuguese start to travel to fish yearly in 1540?	Avalon Peninsula
Where is the Bay of Pasaia located?	Basque Country
In what language did Sebastian Cabot write his map from 1545?	Latin
What year did John Rut visit St. John's?	1527
Who sent the first known letter from North America?	John Rut
What three countries ships did John Rut find in 1527?	Norman, Breton and Portuguese
Who did John Rut write a letter to in 1527?	King Henry
Who referred St. John's as St. "the principal prime and chief lot in all the whole country" ?	William Payne
When did censuses start being conducted in St. John's?	1675
When did Irish men begin to operate inshore fishing boats in St. John's?	1680
What grew during the summers in St. John's?	population
Who controlled most of Newfoundland's east coast by 1620?	fishermen
Who briefly seized St. John's in 1665?	Michiel de Ruyter
In what year did the dutch attack St. John for a second time?	1673
How many men defended the attack from the Dutch in 1673?	twenty-three
Who destroyed Fort William in 1696?	Pierre Le Moyne
How many Dutch warships were fended of by Christopher Martin in 1673?	three
Who flew the first non-stop transatlantic aircraft flight?	Alcock and Brown
What aircraft did Alcock and Brown use in 1919 for their flight?	Vickers Vimy IV bomber
Where in St. John's did Alcock and Brown depart from in June 1919?	Lester's Field
Who duplicated Alcock and Brown flight in 2005?	Steve Fossett
What aircraft did Steve Fossett use for his flight in July 2005?	replica Vickers Vimy
When did the Northern cod fishery collapse?	1990s
What led to an economic boom in St. John's?	Hibernia, Terra Nova and White Rose oil fields
For how long did the Northern cod fishery provide a stable economy for St. John's?	hundreds of years
How long did unemployment rates and depopulation suffer in St. John's?	decade
Near what body of water is St. John's located by?	Atlantic Ocean
How many Square miles is St. John's?	172.22
In what providence is Edmonton located?	Alberta
What is the largest Atlantic Province city?	Halifax
How is the climate in St. John's?	humid
In which province is Kelowna located?	British Columbia
Which Canadian city is the most rainiest?	British Columbia
What body of water is to the east of St. John?	Atlantic Ocean
From where do tropical storms travel from to St. John's?	United States
What is the foggiest Canadian city?	St. John's
What is the average wind speed in miles per hour for St. John's?	15.1 mph
What Canadian city has the mildest winter temperature?	British Columbia
What is the driest season on average in St. John's?	summer
What is another word for freezing rain?	silver thaws
What are wharves in St. John's constructed out of?	wood
In what year was the Great Fire?	1892
What was the most affected area of The Great Fire of 1892?	downtown core
What US city is St. John's often compared to?	San Francisco
What does the city council have restrictions on in downtown?	height of buildings
What have the restrictions on the height of buildings caused over the years?	controversy
What is the city lacking because of the height restrictions?	hotel rooms and office space
What was amended to provide more office space in downtown?	heritage regulations
What height was the original restriction in downtown for ?	15 metres
How tall was the first office building to be approved in the on Water Street between Bishop's Cove and Steer's Cove?	47-metre
In what year where there 100,646 inhabitants in St. John's?	2006
How many communities does the CMA include?	12
What was the population of the CMA in 2010?	192,326
What is Newfoundland and Labrador's largest city?	St. John's
What is the largest religion in St. John's?	Christian
What has declined in the recent years on St. John's?	sectarianism
What sects declined from 2001-2011?	Christian
What is supported by the federal, provincial and municipal governments?	civil service
Who is the largest employer in the city?	The provincial government
Who is the second largest employer in the city?	Memorial University
What years did the fishing industry fall in Newfoundland and Labrador?	1990s
What year is Hebron projected to start producing oil in St. John's?	2017
What has been growing in the recent years?	economy
When did the unemployment rate fall to 5.6 per cent?	May 2011
What was the city's unemployment rate in May 2011?	5.6 per cent
What is the city's per capita GDP?	$52,000
Where is the Resource Centre for the Arts?	The LSPU Hall
How many seats does the St. John's Arts and Culture theatre have?	1000
Where in the city is the LSPU Hall?	downtown
Where is Rick Mercer from?	Newfoundland
Where is Pippy Park located in the city?	east end
About how many acres is Pippy Park?	3,400
How many golf courses does Pippy Park have?	two
What other trail besides walking trails does Pippy Park have?	skiing
Where is the Fluvarium located?	Pippy Park
What part of the city is Bannerman Park located by?	downtown
What year was Bannerman Park opened?	1891
who was the Governor of the Colony of Newfoundland in 1891?	Sir Alexander Bannerman
Where does the Tely 10 Mile Road Race end?	Bannerman Park
Who donated land to create a Victorian-style park in 1891?	Sir Alexander Bannerman
What city does Signal Hill overlook?	St. John's
Where exactly is Cabot Tower located in St. John' ?	Signal Hill
What year was Cabot Tower built?	1897
In what year was Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee?	1897
 Who recieved the first transatlantic wireless transmission?	Guglielmo Marconi
Where do The Rock play their home games at?	Swilers Rugby Park
Who won the the Rugby Canada Super League championship in 2005?	Newfoundland Rock
In what country was the 2007 Rugby World Cup finals?	France
In what year did Canada beat USA 56–7 in a Rugby World Cup qualifying match?	2006
In what year did France host the Rugby World Cup finals?	2007
What was Canada's  tenth province?	Newfoundland
In what year did Newfoundland become a province?	1949
What is the capital of Newfoundland and Labrador?	St. John's
Where is the House of Assembly?	The Confederation Building
Who has been the leader of the NDP since 2006?	Lorraine Michael
By how much did crime in St. John's increase in 2009?	4%
What city had the seventh-highest metropolitan crime index in 2010?	St. John's
How much did crime in the country drop in 2009?	4%
How far is St. John's International Airport from the downtown core?	10 minutes
About how many passengers travelled through St. John's International Airport in 2011?	1,400,000
What is the airport code for St. John's International Airport?	YYT
What airport is approximately 10 minutes northwest of the downtown core?	St. John's International
Where is the eastern terminus of the Trans-Canada Highway?	St. John's
Outer Ring Road is a another name for what?	The divided highway
What does the divided highway provide?	relatively easy access to neighbourhoods
How many routes does the Metrobus have?	19
How many buses does the region have for public transit?	53
How many hospitals does the city have?	four
Who is responsible for public transit in the region?	Metrobus
How many private schools are in St. John's?	three
How many primary schools are in St. John's?	36
How many private schools are in the Francophone public school district?	two
What school offers the lowest tuition in Canada?	Memorial University of Newfoundland
What is the tuition per academic year at Memorial University of Newfoundland?	$2,644
Where does Rogers Cable has its provincial headquarters?	St. John's
What is the name of CBC's television station in St. John's?	CBNT-DT
What channel in St. John's airs Out of the Fog?	Rogers TV
Where does CBNT-DT broadcast from?	University Avenue
How many radio station does the city have?	15
How many French-language stations does the city have?	two
When did the province join the Canadian Confederation?	1949
What year was the PlayStation 3 released?	2006
What social gaming service was integrated into the PlayStation 3?	PlayStation Network
What was the thinner version of the PS3 called?	Slim
What year did the Super Slim model hit stores?	2012
How many PlayStation 3 units had been purchased as of early 2016?	85 million
What shape was the Sixaxis prototype in?	boomerang
What event did Sony choose for the PS3 unveiling?	E3 2005
What popular game was demoed in a video at the game shows?	Final Fantasy VII
What event did Sony take the PlayStation 3 to four months after E3?	Tokyo Game Show
What was one game Sony debuted on a modified PC so gamers could get a look?	Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots
How many USB ports did the original PS3 prototype have?	six
By the time the system appeared at E3 2006, how many Ethernet ports was it down to?	one
Why might Sony have reduced the number of ports on the PlayStation 3 before production?	to cut costs
In addition to the 20 GB model, what larger model did Sony offer?	60 GB
What color is the logo on the 60 GB PS3?	silver
Which region experience a setback that pushed back the release of the PlayStation 3?	PAL
What part of the system was Sony having trouble getting supplies for?	Blu-ray drive
Which Japanese PS3 model got a 20%-plus price cut before hitting the market?	20 GB model
Where did Sony offer the 60 GB model with an open pricing scheme?	Japan
How many playable games did the PlayStation 3 by the time it arrived at the 2006 Tokyo Game Show?	27
Instead of November, for what month of the following year was the release rescheduled?	March
What country had to wait until June of 2007 for their PS3?	South Korea
How big was the hard drive in the single South Korean version?	80 GB
What did customers in Singapore pay for the 60 GB PS3?	S$799
On what date did the PlayStation 3 go on sale in Africa?	March 23, 2007
What was the model number of the slim version of the PlayStation 3?	CECH-2000
What font was discontinued with the release of the slim model?	Spider-Man font
What would customers notice about the sound of the new, improved cooling system?	quieter
What did the boot screen on the game consoles read before Sony changed it to "PS3 PlayStation 3"?	"Sony Computer Entertainment"
What did Sony change about the PS3 games along with the packaging in 2009?	cover art
At what event did Sony tell everyone about the CECH-4000?	Tokyo Game Show
What size was the largest hard drive available on the Super Slim PS3?	500 GB
How many versions of the CECH-4000 were made?	Three
On what date was the 12 GB version of the Super Slim released in the UK?	October 12, 2012
What color was the PlayStation 3 that was included in the God of War: Ascension bundle in the States?	Garnet Red
How many games could you buy to go with your PS3 when it launched in North America?	14
What game won GameSpot's Game of the Year title for 2006?	Resistance: Fall of Man
What company developed the game Ridge Racer 7?	Namco Bandai Games
What's the name of the sequel game to MotorStorm?	MotorStorm: Pacific Rift
How many titles did the PS3 launch with in Europe?	24
Which Ratchet & Clank title debuted at E3 2007?	Ratchet & Clank Future: Tools of Destruction
What year was Warhawk released for the PlayStation 3?	2007
At what event were two new Final Fantasy games for PS3 first shown to the Japanese market?	TGS 2007
What Gran Turismo game was shown in 2007 but not released until after 2007?	Gran Turismo 5 Prologue
Which much anticipated third-party game with the name of a month of the year in it did Sony show at E3 2007?	Devil May Cry 4
What's Sony's budget line of PS3 games called in Japan?	The Best
If you live in Australia and want affordable PlayStation 3 games, what range would you shop for?	Platinum
What words would you see in the United States or Canada on a PS3 game that would signify its lower price?	Greatest Hits
Which Call of Duty title does Sony include in their low-end price range?	Call Of Duty 3
In what year was Devil May Cry 4 added to the budget game offerings for PS3?	2009
What company said it would bring 3D technology to the PS3?	Blitz Games
Along with Wipeout HD, what game did the press view in 3D in early 2009?	Gran Turismo 5 Prologue
What version of firmware update gave the PlayStation 3 its 3D capability?	3.30
What word describes what happens to a game when is edited to add functions not originally programmed?	patched
What was the PS3 console able to play after the system software was updated to 3.50?	3D films
What operating system does Fixstars Solutions offer for the PlayStation 3?	Yellow Dog Linux
What company sold Yellow Dog Linux before Fixstars Solutions?	Terra Soft Solutions
What company bought RapidMind in 2009?	Intel
How many PlayStation 3 consoles was Dr. Frank Mueller able to cluster together?	8
Who is buying PS3 clusters instead of supercomputers in order to save some money?	the U.S. military
What type of microprocessor is in a PS3?	Cell
What does PPE stand for?	Power Processing Element
What function is the NVIDIA RSX responsible for in a PlayStation 3?	Graphics processing
How many Synergistic Processing Elements are in a PS3's CPU?	eight
How much XDR DRAM is on board a PS3?	256 MB
What did Sony name their vibrating PS3 controller?	DualShock 3
At what event at the Tokyo Game Show was the DualShock 3 first announced?	press conference
What did many people who handled the DualShock 3 say it was compared to the Sixaxis?	heavier
What was the first country to be able to buy the new DualShock 3 in stores?	Japan
On what date was the DualShock three released in Australia?	April 24, 2008
How is "XrossMediaBar" abbreviated?	XMB
How many options categories display in the standard PS3 XrossMediaBar?	nine
One of Sony's streaming services is the PlayStation Vue; what's the other one called?	Crackle
When you start up your PS3, what's the first section of the PS Network you see?	What's New
What menu would you use to set up a video chat?	Friends
What does the abbreviation "NDRM" represent?	Network Digital Rights Management
How many different PS3s can one user access?	2
What identifier allows a player to activate a PlayStation 3?	PlayStation Network ID
PlayStation has safeguards in place to prevent illegal use of what type of movies or video?	copy protected
What application lets PS3 users view and organize photographs?	Photo Gallery
What version of PS3 contained Photo Gallery?	2.60
After version 3.4, Picasa was integrated into Photo Gallery along with what social networking site?	Facebook
Is Photo Gallery automatically or separately installed?	separately
Photo Gallery includes the ability to sort by age, color, or what other unusual criteria for photo software?	facial expressions
In what month of 2009 did VidZone start free service to some countries?	June
What do you have to agree to with Netflix before you can use their service on PlayStation 3?	paid Netflix subscription
What year did the announcement come about Netflix becoming available on PS3 in the U.S.?	2009
What type of disc was initially used to connect access to Netflix for PS3?	Blu-ray
When were users able to discard the disc and access Netflix directly through their PS3s?	October 2010
What functionality did the PlayStation 3 lose in version 3.21 of its firmware update?	'OtherOS'
What reason did Sony give for taking out OtherOS?	security concerns
Was firmware update 3.21 optional or mandatory if users wanted to continue accessing the PS Network?	mandatory
Which PS3 model never included OtherOS?	PS Slim
What legal action did some disgruntled OtherOS users take against Sony?	class action lawsuits
What part of the original model PS3s starting causing problems in March of 2010?	internal system clock
What essential network were some users unable to connect to because of the error?	PlayStation Network
What erroneous date did some users start seeing on their consoles?	December 31, 1999
What humorous nickname was given to the situation with the console system clock errors?	ApocalyPS3
The name "ApocalyPS3" combines "PS3" with what other word?	apocalypse
By what date did Sony correct the issue with the system clock?	March 2 (UTC), 2010
What were the broken models mistakenly classifying 2010 as?	a leap year
What storage system for dates led to the system clock error?	BCD
What clock unrelated to the error in the PS3 had to be updated in some cases in order to fix the bug?	operating system clock
What PS3 game can integrate a PlayStation Portable to use as a rear-view mirror?	Formula One Championship Edition
What kind of game is Formula One Championship Edition?	racing
If users want to download original PlayStation games, where do they go online?	PlayStation Store
Games in plain PlayStation format can be played both on the PS3 console and what other device?	PSP
What's the name of the feature that would let you play a game on your PSP without having it with you?	Remote Play
In what city did Sony hold their 2006 PlayStation Business Briefing?	Tokyo
Does PlayStation Network use artificial or real currency for purchases?	real
Along with being free and providing constant connectivity, what other feature does PS Network offer users?	multiplayer support
PlayStation Network is only available for PS3 and what other device?	PlayStation Portable
What's the name of Sony's exclusive PlayStation Network subscription service?	PlayStation Plus
How is PlayStation Plus often abbreviated?	PS+
Who was the President and CEO of SCEA in the year 2010?	Jack Tretton
On what date did the PlayStation Plus service officially launch?	June 29, 2010
Duration options for subscription to PS+ are either three months or what period of time?	one-year
Where can you buy downloadable content for the PSP and PS3?	The PlayStation Store
What do you click on in the PS3 interface to get to the PlayStation Store?	an icon
What connection would you go through to go to the PS3 store from a PSP?	Remote Play
How many unique downloads had there been from the PlayStation Store by late 2009?	over 600 million
From a PC, what application can you use to visit the PlayStation Store?	Media Go
What new feature for PS3 was released in September of 2009?	What's New
At what event did Sony announce What's New?	Gamescom
What did What's New replace?	Information Board
What type of information is disseminated through What's New?	news
What's geographical area does What's New tailor information to for each user?	region
How many  different sections does What's New have?	four
What section of What's New would a user visit to find the games they've played lately?	"Recently Played"
Before What's New existed, what default screen would show when a user put a movie in their PS3?	Video
What section of What's New can't show links to websites?	"Recently Played"
Other than the Video default screen for movies, what menu would the PS3 default to before What's New?	Games
What does Sony call their social network?	PlayStation Home
What is the customizable representation of a user in PS Home called?	avatar
Home has free, won, and what third type of content?	premium
Users employ the content to decorate club houses, their avatars, or what virtual dwelling space?	apartments
What type of games can users find participants for in Home?	multiplayer
Life was able to personalize information for users by what location division?	city
On what date was Life with PlayStation shut down?	November 6, 2012
What's was Life's channel that delivered information about history topics?	World Heritage
For weather updates from The Weather Channel, which of Life's channels would you have visited?	Live Channel
What was the date Sony shut down the PS Network because of a security breach?	April 20, 2011
How many users did Sony say might have been affected by the intrusion?	77 million
What did Sony call the special offer they handed out to respond to the breach?	"Welcome Back"
How many free days of PlayStation Plus were included in the offer?	30
How many free game downloads were included in the "Welcome Back" program?	two
What was PlayStation 3's toughest competitor in the video game market?	Wii
What did Wii offer that PS3 couldn't compete with?	unique gameplay
In 2006, did most people prefer the Xbox 360 or PS3 versions of cross-platform games?	Xbox 360 versions
Until what year was Sony seeing a loss on each PlayStation 3 console it sold?	2010
Which cost less in stores: PS3 or Wii?	Wii
How much did it cost to make one 20 GB PS3?	US$805.85
In contrast to the production cost, what was the retail price for a 20 GB PlayStation 3?	US$499
Assuming iSuppli got the numbers right, how much of a loss did Sony take for every 20 GB PS3 sold in the U.S.?	$306
What was the name of Sony's President who announced his retirement amid rumors in April 2007?	Ken Kutaragi
In U.S. dollars, how much was the enormous loss Sony reported the month before Kutaragi's retirement announcement?	US$1.97 billion
Who was Sony's CEO at the start of 2008?	Kaz Hirai
When did Hirai think the PS3 might start making the company some money?	early 2009
What market analyst firm said Sony could make the PlayStation 3 profitable by August 2008?	Nikko Citigroup
How many PS3 did Hirai set a public goal to sell by the time the product was nine?	150 million
What other Sony gaming console was Hirai setting his sales goal to beat?	PlayStation 2
Along with a drop in the cost of hardware, PS3 has gotten cheaper to make because what chip was phased out?	Emotion Engine chip
What's the name of the microprocessor produced by the 65 nm process?	Cell
What specific component of Blu-Ray disc have also gotten less expensive to make?	diodes
As of Summer 2009, what was the cost to Sony to make a PS3?	$240
The August 2009 cost is a result of what percentage decrease in production cost?	70%
What rating did Ars Technica initially give PlayStation 3?	6/10
What PS3 competitor won IGN's "Console Showdown" in 2010?	Xbox
What PC Mag. staffer picked PS3 over Xbox in June, 2012?	Will Greenwald
Which publication called the PlayStation 3 "a brilliant games console"?	Pocket-lint
Where did IGN place the PS3 on their 2009 list of the best video game consoles ever?	15th
What list by PC World ranked PlayStation eighth, in a bad way?	"The Top 21 Tech Screwups of 2006"
What gaming website called PS3 "a hate object reviled by the entire internet"?	GamesRadar
What quote sums up PC World's 2006 assessment of PS3?	"Late, Expensive and Incompatible"
How long did GamesRadar say it took Sony to turn the Internet against the PlayStation 3?	a year
In what year did Gabe Newell call the PS3 "a total disaster"?	2007
Who is Valve's VP of Marketing who says they want to hire programmers for a PS3 team?	Doug Lombardi
What year did Newell show up at Sony's EC3 press conference to take back what he said about PS3?	2010
What game did Valve develop for the PlayStation 3 console?	Portal 2
What's the name of Valve's software update system?	Steamworks
What group does Bobby Kotick think is being discouraged from working on the PS3?	developers
What does "ROIC" stand for?	return on invested capital
What company is Kotick the CEO of?	Activision Blizzard
What newspaper reported Kotick's concerns and his threat to stop supporting the PlayStation platform?	The Times
What game development company completely disagreed with Kotick's statements in The Times interview?	Bioware
What score did CNET give the PS3 out of ten?	8.8
What PlayStation 3 feature did Home Theater Magazine most like about PS3?	Blu-ray playback
Have reviews praised the PS3's hardware of software more frequently?	hardware
What other reviewer agreed with Home Theater Magazine's assessment of the PS3's Blu-ray player?	Ultimate AV
What website said the PlayStation 3 "lives up to the hype"?	CNET United Kingdom
With a day of its release, on what website did the PS3 Slim become the number-one bestseller?	Amazon.com
For how many consecutive days did the PS3 Slim hold the number-one spot on Amazon.com?	fifteen
What score did the PS3 Slim earn from PC World?	90 out of 100
PC World's rave review of the PS3 Slim was a complete turnaround from their thoughts on what older model console?	PS3
Along with the PS Slim's value, quietness, and lower power usage, what superficial quality did PC World praise?	repackaging
What aspect of the PS3 Slim was CNET unhappy was missing for PS2 games?	backward compatibility
How many of five possible stars did CNET give the PS3 Slim?	four
How many of its own five stars did TechRadar award the PS3 Slim?	four and a half
What area of the console did TechRadar feel was designed poorly compared to the original PS3?	exterior
What quality of the PS3 Super Slim was the website Spong excited about?	quietness
In addition to quieter fans and drive, what change from the other models did Spong praise?	smaller, lighter size
What piece of the PS3 Super Slim's hardware did Spong say was too "fiddly"?	disc loader
What did Spong said you have to do to the disc loader before the console will start reading the disc?	close the cover
What website rated the Super Slim four out of five stars?	CNET
What adjective did CNET use to describe the PS3 Super Slim's design?	"cheap"
What component of the Super Slim did CNET call "the easiest yet"?	hard drive
What hardware component did CNET have the biggest problem with, even comparing it to an old credit card reader?	disc-loader
Was the lowest-priced Super Slim more or less expensive than any of the PS3 Slim models?	more expensive
What magazine described the Super Slim as "nostalgic"?	T3
What PlayStation 3 model did T3 feel the Super Slim's design was paying homage to?	the original PS3
According to T3, what was the main differentiator between the "fat" PS3 and the Super Slim?	weight
What hardware element did T3 feel might have issues with durability?	the top loading tray
T3 felt Sony was saying goodbye to past models in preparation for what next-generation console?	the PS4
When royal assent takes place in the UK, where does the sovereign make an appearance?	House of Lords
Alternatively, when UK Lord Commissioners take the sovereign's place in the ceremony, where does the ceremony take place?	Palace of Westminster
Canadian governor generals can give their assent in person or by which other method?	written declaration
With what is royal assent sometimes associated with?	elaborate ceremonies
Where is a royal assent ceremony held within the United Kingdom?	Palace of Westminster
With what method is royal assent generally granted?	letters patent
How is royal assent granted within Australia?	the governor-general merely signs the bill
Royal assent is a process of approving a nation's legislative acts by whom?	constitutional monarch
Which three modern monarchies allow their ruler to withhold royal assent?	United Kingdom, Norway, and Liechtenstein
Since which century have modern political processes forgone royal assent?	18th
What nations allow the withold of the royal assent?	United Kingdom, Norway, and Liechtenstein
Under what circumstances does a monarch typically use the royal assent?	a dire political emergency or upon the advice of their government
Is usage of the royal assent frequent or rare in today's societies?	exceedingly rare
Modern-day sovereigns often acts on the advice of whom?	ministers
In the event that the monarch refuses to give royal assent, what can the monarch make use of?	reserve powers
Whose advice does a sovereign follow?	his or her ministers
Who often maintains parliamentary support and obtains the passage of bills?	ministers
Is it probable, improbable, or impossible that a sovereign would withhold assent?	improbable
What is another name for "Curia Regis"?	Royal Council
Who was it that peculiarly called a full parliament without royal authorization in 1265?	Earl of Leicester
As a result, the bishops, abbots, earls, and barons formed which body of parliament?	House of Lords
Which body did the shire and borough representatives form?	House of Commons
From what did parliament evolve?	Curia Regis, or Royal Council
What positions were contained within the House of Lords?	bishops, abbots, earls, and barons
Which branch of parliament contains shire and borough representatives?	House of Commons
A bill could not become a law without whose assent?	the sovereign
Who is considered the enactor of laws?	the sovereign
Which monarch was responsible for dissolving parliament in 1629?	Charles I
What is one action this monarch took that is typically left to the discretion of parliament?	raising taxes
After which event was it decided that parliament should meet on a regular basis?	English Civil War
Like Charles II had previously done, the last Stuart monarch withheld assent. Who was this monarch?	Anne
Which ruler removed parliament in 1629?	Charles I
Under whose advice did Anne withold the royal assent?	her ministers
What did motions attempt to accomplish that prompted Charles I to dissolve parliament in 1629?	restrict his arbitrary exercise of power
When was the last time royal assent was enacted?	11 March 1708
Who was the last monarch to use the royal assent in 1708?	Anne
During whose rule was power transferred more to parliament?	Hanoverian dynasty
Who was the first ruler during this dynasty?	George I
In attempting to take back control, George III and George IV opposed which church movement?	Catholic Emancipation
Which monarch relied on his ministers more than any of his predecessors?	George I
What did George III and George IV both oppose?	Catholic Emancipation
What rule did George III and George IV believe a Catholic emancipation bill would violate?	Coronation Oath
Which monarch granted assent reluctantly under the advise of his ministers?	George IV
In Scotland, who is responsible for submitting a bill for royal assent?	Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament
Which three publications are used to signify royal assent?	London, Edinburgh, and Belfast Gazettes
Under which Scotland Act sections is the royal assent governed?	28, 32, and 33
How many weeks pass before the monarch receives a bill from the Presiding Officer?	four-week period
Which entities have the capability to refer a bill to the Supreme Court?	Advocate General for Scotland, the Lord Advocate, the Attorney General or the Secretary of State
For what would a bill be submitted to the Supreme Court of Scotland?	review of its legality
What was the name of the method by which Wales passed legislation in the 2000's?	Measures
After a four-week period, who could refer a proposed measure to the Supreme Court?	Counsel General for Wales or the Attorney General
What were "measures" in Wales?	the means by which the National Assembly for Wales passed legislation between 2006 and 2011
During which years were measures used in order to pass legislation in Wales?	2006 and 2011
In Wales, who had the capability of submitting a bill to the Supreme Court?	Counsel General for Wales or the Attorney General
The sovereign grants assent by which order?	Order in Council
Who advises the sovereign in this decision?	Lord Chancellor
Which recent petition for reforms to the constitution led to assent being refused?	Chief Pleas of Sark
Who advises a bill to be granted or refused?	Lord Chancellor
When was an Order in Counil passed that laid out new rules for consideration of petitions against the royal assent?	13 July 2011
In what year did the Lord Chancellor refuse to present a law  concerning constituational reform for assent?	2007
What was the subject of the bill that the Lord Chancellor refused to present for royal assent in 2007?	reforms to the constitution of the Chief Pleas of Sark
Under ancient custom, an Act of Tynwald didn't go into effect until decreed at which location?	Tynwald Hill at St John's
Promulgation of an Act of Tynwald originally consisted of reading it in English and which other language?	Manx
Nowadays, only the short title and what else are read?	summary of the long title
How much of the proposed act must be currently read aloud on St John's Day?	only the short title and a summary of the long title
On what day does St John's Day occur?	(24 June)
Where is the open-air sitting of Tynwald usually held?	Tynwald Hill at St John's
Since 1993, which body has had power to enact measures?	Sodor and Man Diocesan Synod
This body makes provisions in respect to matters concerning whom?	Church of England in the Island
Up until 1994, royal assent was given by whom?	Order in Council
Which position now has the power to grant royal assent?	lieutenant governor
Before what year was royal assent approved by Order in Council?	1994
Who currently holds the power to grant royal assent to measures?	the lieutenant governor
During which years did the Synod have power to enact measures?	Between 1979 and 1993
In the Canadian federal government, who is typically responsible for deciding wether to give assent?	the Governor General of Canada
Which positions from the Canadian Supreme Court may also give assent if need be?	Chief Justice of Canada—or another justice
Who has the capability of granting assent if the Governer General of Canada cannot?	the Deputy of the Governor General of Canada—the Chief Justice of Canada—or another justice of the Supreme Court of Canada
How many methods are available to grant assent in Canada?	Two
If each house of parliament is notified seperately, what regulation applies?	both houses must be notified on the same day
How can the House of Commons be notified of assent if it is not in session?	publishing a special issue of the Journals of the House of Commons
In contrast to the House of Commons, how must the Senate be notified of assent?	governor general's letter read aloud by the speaker
Which year was royal assent last withheld in the UK?	1708
The United States Declaration of Independence mentions which British monarch?	George III
What did the American colonies accuse the monarch of?	refused his Assent to Laws
In what year was royal assent last witheld in the UK?	1708
Who continued to advise governors-general of granting of assent, even after their colonies had responsible government?	the British government
To whom did the British government occasionally still advice on the royal assent, although they had their own responsible governments?	colonies such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, and Newfoundland
The bill from the Australian House of Representatives was mistakenly sent and assented to by whom in 1976?	Governor-General
Why did this occur?	two bills of the same title had originated from the house
What did the Governor-General do with the first assent?	revoked the first assent
This same procedure was more recently done to fix a similar error in which year?	2001
What was the reason a bill was accidentally assented in 1976?	two bills of the same title had originated from the house
After an accidental assention of a bill with same name in 1976, when did a similar mistaken assention occur in Australia?	2001
What protocol was not followed in 1976 when a bill was mistakenly assented?	it had not been passed by each house
How was the case of two bills mistakenly assented corrected both in 1796 and 2001?	The Governor-General revoked the first assent, before assenting to the bill which had actually passed
What term refers to the legislature of the Isle of man?	Tynwald
In what year was lordship of the Isle of Man purchased?	1765
What does the term the Revestment refer to?	lordship of the Island was purchased by the British Crown in 1765
Previous to the Order in Council method, how was royal assent passed previously within the Isle of Man?	by letter from the Secretary of State to the governor
How is royal assent currently granted in the Isle of Man?	Order in Council
In Commonwealth realms, who is the representative of the sovereign?	the governor-general
Who grants royal assent in Canada?	lieutenant governors of the provinces
In Canada, who is authorized to defer assent and to whom?	A lieutenant governor may defer assent to the governor general, and the governor general may defer assent to federal bills to the sovereign.
Who grants the royal assent in Commonwealth nations other than the UK?	by the realm's sovereign or, more frequently, by the representative of the sovereign
What two documents declared all Commonwealth realms as sovereign kingdoms?	Balfour Declaration of 1926 and the Statute of Westminster 1931
Who exercised the power to withold royal assent in Alberta in 1937?	John C. Bowen
What the did Accurate News and Information Bill hope to accomplish?	force newspapers to print government rebuttals to stories to which the provincial cabinet objected
Who decided the unconstitutionality of three bills brought forth by the Social Credit party?	Supreme Court of Canada and by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
Which Houses in the UK must approve a bill before it is assented?	House of Commons and the House of Lords
Which Parliamentary Acts allow a bill to be presented for assent even after the House of Lords has refused it?	Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949
Who can be authorized to grant assent by letters patent?	the sovereign or by Lords Commissioners
In what language does the Clerk of the Parliaments announce Parliament's decision?	Anglo-Norman Law French
What words in Anglo-Norman Law French announce a granted assent?	"La Reyne remercie ses bons sujets, accepte leur benevolence, et ainsi le veult"
What is the shortened version of the notification of assent?	"La Reyne le veult"
What phrase is used to announce a withheld assent?	"La Reyne s'avisera"
When assention was formally granted in person, who read the titles of the bills?	The Clerk of the Crown
What job did the Clerk of the Parliaments have during assention notifications?	stating the appropriate Norman French formula
Before whose reign was assent always granted in person?	Henry VIII
Nowadays, when is the only time a formal assention ceremony occurs?	the annual State Opening of Parliament
On which side of the soverign does the Clerk of the Crown stand?	right
Why did Henry VIII wish to execute his fifth wife?	committing adultery
What was Henry VIII trying to avoid by creating a new procedure for granting assent?	listening to the entire text
How many times in the 16th century was assent granted by Commissioners?	five
Who was the last monarch to grant assent personally?	Queen Victoria
How many lords are usually present during assent by Commissioner?	five
What do the Lords Commissioners wear to a ceremony of assent?	scarlet parliamentary robes
Which commissioner reads the formal closing statement to the assention ceremony?	the senior
Which position reads the commisssion aloud during tthe ceremony?	The Lords Reading Clerk
During which decade was assention by commission discontinued?	the 1960s
When does assention by commission occur today?	once a year, at the end of the annual parliamentary session
In whatear did several members refuse to attend the assention ceremony after a heated debate?	1960
What was passed in reference to the discord in 1960 and 1965 during assention cremonies?	Royal Assent Act 1967
What is unique about the method used for assention allowed by the Royal Assent Act 1967?	does not require both houses to meet jointly
How is assent granted under the Royal Assent Act 1967?	by the sovereign in writing, by means of letters patent, that are presented to the presiding officer of each house of parliament
Which document formats the letters patent?	The Crown Office (Forms and Proclamations Rules) Order 1992
In which year were minor amendments made to the Crown Office Order?	2000
When assent is granted in person, when is it formally considered final?	when the assent is declared in the presence of both houses jointly assembled
An assent is considered granted when applying the Royal Assent Act 1967 when both presiding officers have done what?	notified their respective house of the grant of royal assent
When is assent effective if the presiding officers inform their houses at different times?	when the second announcement is made
Whose responsibility is it to assure that assent has been granted?	Clerk of the Parliaments
What is omitted when an act is published?	signature of the clerk is omitted, as is the Norman French formula
Who writes the formal Norman French formula on passed acts?	Clerk of the Parliaments
In what year did the New Zealand governor-general last personally grant the royal assent in parliament?	1875
Which country has not used the formal assention ceremony since the early 20th century?	Australia
Who are the leaders of each house given the responsibility of informing their group of the governor-generals actions?	President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives
When did Canada finally cease to use the traditional ceremony for granting assent as regular practice?	the 21st century
Why was King George VI's personal assent in 1939 noteworthy?	85 years after his great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, had last granted royal assent personally
With what bill in Canada did granting assent by writing become effective?	Royal Assent Act 2002
From where is the sovereign typically forbidden?	House of Commons
Whose job is it to release parliament after the ceremony?	The governor general or his or her deputy
Who reads the formal statement after the list of bills has been finished?	Clerk of the Senate
Which position nods their head to signify assention?	governor general
What is royal assent called in Belgium?	sanction royale
Who declared the monarch incapable of acting upon an abortion decriminalization bill in 1990?	Council of Ministers
Which King refused to sign an abortion decriminalization bill in 1990?	King Baudouin
Who declared the King capable of excersizing power again after a brief lapse in 1990?	both houses of parliament
How much time does a Jordinian leader have to sign or veto legislation?	six months
What majority is required to override a veto from the soverign?	two-thirds
What happens if the soverign doesn't sign the bill within the six-month time frame?	, it becomes law without his signature
What text is written and sent to the Senate if the House approves of a law?	"The Second Chamber of the States General sends the following approved proposal of law to the First Chamber"
What text is written and sent back to the government if a bill is rejected?	The Second Chamber of the States General has rejected the accompanying proposal of law."
If the Senate approves the law after receiving it from the House, what is written and sent to the government?	"To the King, The States General have accepted the proposal of law as it is offered here."
Where are laws published after receiving assent?	the State Magazine
Where is the original law text stored?	in the archives of the King's Offices
What happens in the rare case the government doesn't approve of a law that has passed both houses?	neither the monarch nor a minister will sign the bill, notifying the States General that "The King will keep the proposal under advisement."
Which articles in the Norwegian Constitution allow the monarch to reject a bill that has been passed through the Sorting?	Articles 77–79
Which article in the Norweigan Constitution provides a way to override a monarch's veto?	Article 79
How many elections are required to assend a bill that the monarch has vetoed?	two
Which article in the Spanish constitution gives the monarch the right to ask for a referendum?	Article 92
Which article specifies the number of days available to the monarch to provide a signature on an assended bill?	Article 91
In the 1978 Spanish constitution, which title describes how bills are passed?	Title III, The Cortes Generales
What chapter in the Spanish constitution describes how bills are to be passed?	Chapter 2, Drafting of Bills
What was King Juan Carlos' response to the media when asked if he would sign a bill supporting same-sex marriage?	"Soy el Rey de España y no el de Bélgica"
What other controversial bill did the king give his assent to in 2010?	a law permitting abortion on demand
When did same-sex marriages become legal in Spain?	3 July 2005
If the Spanish monarch is deemed incapable of granting assent, who is the power transferred to?	the next person of age in the line of succession
Could a Spanish ruler follow the same action of events as King Baudouin did in Belgium?	not be possible under the current constitution
Which articles allow the soverign to refise consent even when the bills have been passed through the Legislative assembly?	41 and 68
What statement by King George Tupou emphasized democracy?	he would be guided by his prime minister in the exercising of his powers
In which year was the Arms and Ammunitions (Amemndment) Bill adopted?	2011
In what month did the King veto the Arms and Ammunitions Amendment Bill?	December
What is an arithmetical structure comprising of a set of elements including an operation that joins any two elements to form a third element?	a group
What is the name used to describe the four conditions of closure, associativity, identity and invertibility?	group axioms
What permits elements with different mathematical starting points to be taken care of in a flexible manner while holding their key basic aspects?	abstract formalization of the group axioms
What shares an essential relationship to groups?	symmetry
What are the symmetry groups utilized as a part of the Standard Model particle physics?	Lie groups
What groups are are utilized toward comprehending symmetry wonders in chemistry?	Point groups
What groups can express the physical symmetry hidden behind special relativity?	Poincaré groups
Where did the idea of a group come from?	the study of polynomial equations,
When was the group notion summed up and solidly settled?	1870
What are smaller and easier to understand groups broken down into?	subgroups, quotient groups and simple groups.
When was announcement for the classification of finite simple groups?	1983
What is known as underlying set of the group?	The set
What is often utilized as a short name for the group?	the group's underlying set
What expressions are utilized when is really implied to be a longer expression?	shorthand expressions
What sends a point in the square to the relating point under the symmetry?	functions
 What gives another symmetry function?	Composing two of these symmetry functions
What group includes the symmetries of degree 4 and denoted D4?	the dihedral group
 Which French mathematician expanded on earlier work of Paolo Ruffini and Joseph-Louis Lagrange?	Évariste Galois
The journey for answers to polynomial equations of degree higher than 4 was the original motivation for what theory?	group theory
 Who developed a theory giving the first abstract definition of a finite group?	Arthur Cayley
What modern concept was created from many fields of mathematics?	abstract group
When did the uniform theory of groups develop from different sources?	1870
Who presented a method for specifying a group by means of generators and relations?	Walther von Dyck
What theory did Hermann Weyl study in addition to locally compact groups?	The theory of Lie groups
Who initially molded the theory of algebraic groups?	Claude Chevalley
Where did the group of theorists first meet?	The University of Chicago
What university class year belonged to the group of theorists?	1960–61
What did the group of theorists classify in 1982?	all finite simple groups
What two factors describe the large size of the project?	length of proof and number of researchers.
What ideas are used to understand groups beyond symbols?	structural concepts
What has to be compatible with the group operation?	constructions related to groups
What concept describes groups that can be related to each other via functions?	group homomorphisms
What are two groups called if they include homomorphisms?	isomorphic
What similar element do isomorphic groups carry?	isomorphic groups
How can showing the second equality yields the first prove the concept of isomorphic groups?	applying a to the first equality yields the second
What is composed of two rotations?	a rotation
What rotation can a rotation be reversed by?	inverse
What essential condition must be met for a subset of a group to be a subgroup?	The subgroup test
When is it preferable to consider two group elements to be the same?	irrelevant to the question whether a reflection has been performed
What should not be considered when asking if a reflection has been performed?	rotation operations
What number sets are used to show how subgroups can be seen as translations of the larger group?	Cosets
What is another term for coset multiplication?	coset addition
What group operation is taken by the set from the original group?	coset multiplication
What group does the inverse of gN include?	quotient group
What groups can be combined to describe every group?	is the quotient of the free group over the generators of the group
What group can be the quotient of the free group over the generators of the group?	any group
What is a finite composition of two symmetries or their inverses?	every symmetry of the square
What map shows the relation between sub and quotient groups?	injective map
What are the opposites of injective maps?	surjective maps
What is an example of a surjective map?	canonical map
What theory address the phenomenon of homomorphisms being neither injective nor surjective?	the first isomorphism theorem
What are usually analyzed by associating groups to them and studying the elements of the corresponding groups?	Mathematical objects
Who founded algebraic topology?	Henri Poincaré
What did Henri Poincaré introduce when he established algebraic topology?	the fundamental group
What topological properties translate into properties of groups?	proximity and continuity
What represents elements of the fundamental group?	loops
What positive integer is used to divide the sum of two positive integers in modular mathematics?	the modulus
What results from modular addition?	the remainder of that division
What type of device can be use to demonstrate modular addition?	a clock
What term describes the group of integers related to a prime number?	modulo p
What integers are included in modulo p?	1 to p − 1
How many group elements exist if p=5?	four group elements
What is a group labeled when the element 1 is primitive?	cyclic
What group is isomorphic to cyclic groups?	Any cyclic group with n elements
What example of cyclic group satisfies the express of zn = 1?	the group of n-th complex roots of unity
What are groups consisting of symmetries of given arithmetic concepts?	Symmetry groups
What term describes the introductory symmetry group of the square?	geometric nature
What can regarded as the study of symmetry?	group theory
What is the name of the rule that must be met for a group operation to occur?	group law
The group pattern is connected to the structure of the target by what behavior?	group action
What aids in predicting changes of physical traits?	group theory
What stage of a physical transformation can group theory be used to make prediction?	phase transition
What temperature causes the change of ferroelectric materials?	Curie temperature
What term describes the vibrational lattice mode that turns to 0 frequency at the change?	soft phonon mode
What are examples of finite symmetry groups used in coding theory?	Mathieu groups
What is used for error correction of transferred data?	coding theory
What describes functions having antiderivatives of a prescribed form?	differential Galois theory
What concept investigates geometric elements that stay stable under group action?	invariant theory
What groups combine matrices with matrix multiplication?	Matrix groups
What includes all invertible n-by-n matrices with real entries?	The general linear group
What term describes subgroups of the general linear group?	matrix groups
What matrix group portrays all possible rotations in n dimensions?	the special orthogonal group SO(n)
Rotation matrix groups are utilized in computer graphics with what concept?	Euler angles
What degree does not include simple formulas for cubic and quatric equations?	degree 5 and higher
What concept is associated with the solvability of polynomials?	Abstract properties of Galois groups
What are used to express the solutions of polynomials?	radicals
What does a finite group include?	a finite number of elements
What is the number of elements in a group named?	the order of the group
What type of class has a finite group that can be expressed as a subgroup of a symmetric group?	fundamental
What can be described as the group of symmetries of an equilateral triangle?	S3
What level of finality do mathematicians try to reach with math concepts?	complete classification
What area of classification leads to troublesome arithmetic?	finite groups
What defines finite groups of order p, a prime number, as being necessarily cyclic (abelian) groups Zp?	Lagrange's theorem
What can be used to classify small groups even though there is no classification of all finite groups?	Computer algebra systems
What describes finite simple groups as the building pieces for all finite groups?	The Jordan–Hölder theorem
What group operations must occur for group law and topology to integrate well?	continuous functions
What is the most simple example of topological groups?	reals R under addition, (R ∖ {0}, ·),
What variables do locally compact groups share that can be studied by harmonic analysis?	Haar measures
What concepts are fundamental to number theory?	adele rings and adelic algebraic groups
What group uses infinite field extensions with topology?	the absolute Galois group
What is used to generalize the connection of fields and groups to infinite field extensions?	Krull topology
What group is an advanced observation of infinite field extensions and groups that is adapted for the needs of algebraic geometry?	the étale fundamental group
What concept is of basic importance in modern physics?	Lie groups
What connects continuous symmetries to conserved quantities?	Noether's theorem
What term describes the basic symmetries of the laws of mechanics?	Rotation
What concept relates measurements of time and velocity of two observers in motion relative to each other?	Lorentz transformations
What describe the complete symmetry group of Minkowski space including translations?	Poincaré group
What product is created if the requirement that every element has an inverse is eliminated?	monoid
What type of numbers under addition form a monoid?	natural numbers N (including 0)
What method formally adds inverses to elements to any monoid?	the Grothendieck group
What can be replaced to simplify abstract algebra concepts?	the binary operation
Where is the Central African Republic located?	Central Africa
What country borders CAR in the North?	Chad
What Country borders CAR in the South?	the Republic of the Congo
What Country borders CAR in the West?	Cameroon
What is the population of CAR approximately?	4.7 million
Who established CAR's borders?	France
What country ruled CAR as a colony?	France
When did CAR become independent?	in 1960
Who was the first democratically elected President?	Ange-Félix Patassé
What religion is a minority in CAR?	Muslim minority
How long ago did people start living in the area?	Approximately 10,000 years ago
What agricultural job did people settling in the area perform?	farming
What vegetation helped populations expand?	African oil palm
What was an imported food that provided most of the carbohydrates?	Bananas
What important protein helped with expansion of the inhabitants?	Fish
When did the slave trade hit the CAR region?	16th and 17th centuries
What is one area where captive slaves were sent?	Europe
Which people were major slave traders in the 19th century?	Bobangi people
Who did the Bobangi sell slave to?	the Americas
What river saw the establishment of a new Kingdom?	Ubangi River
When was Equatorial Africa established?	1920
Where was Equatorial African ran from?	Brazzaville
What plant was mandated to be grown by the French?	cotton
What important infrastructure was built in the 1920s.	a network of roads
What religion was spread through CAR?	Christianity
During what war did French officers setup headquarters in CAR?	Second World War
Who was elected in 1946 as the first representative?	Barthélémy Boganda
How many votes did Boganda get?	9,000 votes
What was Bogandas platform that he ran for?	political stance against racism
What caused Boganda to leave his elected post?	disheartened with the French political system
What was the overwhelming amount of votes MESAN captured?	347,000 out of the total 356,000 votes
How many seats did MESAN win?	every legislative seat
Who was elected president of the Grand Council?	Boganda
How did Boganda die?	a plane crash
Who took over after Boganda died?	his cousin, David Dacko
What caused a violent uprising?	young students protested against Bokassa's decree
How many were killed in the April 1979 protests?	100 children and teenagers
Who overthrew Bokassa after this incident?	France
Who did France restore into power?	Dacko
Who eventually overthrew Dacko?	General André Kolingba
What was inspired by the fall of the Berlin wall?	a pro-democracy movement
What large country pressured CAR to hold elections?	the United States
When were free elections held?	October 1992
Who helped with the Free Elections?	UN Office of Electoral Affairs
What excuse did Kolingba use to deny the election results?	alleged irregularities
When was a second democratic election held?	in 1993
Who became the first democratically elected president?	Ange-Félix Patassé
What percentage did Patasse win with?	53% of the vote
What was the winning party?	Mouvement pour la Libération du Peuple Centrafricain
Did Patasse get a majority of the votes?	gained a simple but not an absolute majority
When was the new constitution for CAR approved?	28 December 1994
When did a mutiny form against Patasse?	In 1996–1997
The mutinies caused what effects on the country?	widespread destruction of property
What agreement gave the authority for deployment of military intervention?	The Bangui Agreements
Where did the peace corps evacuate to?	Cameroon
The failed coup caused what effects?	murder of many political opponents
Which General was involved in another coup?	General François Bozizé
Where did General Bozize flee to escape?	Chad
When did Bozize finally attempt his coup?	March 2003
Who succeeded in finally overthrowing Patasse?	Bozizé's forces
What war started in 2004?	Bush War
In what way did Bozize made his rule legitimate?	Bozizé won a presidential election
When did CAR ask for assistance from the French against rebels?	November 2006
How did the French assist against the rebels?	strikes by Mirage jets
What did the rebels take over?	towns in the country's northern regions
What agreement called for the stop of Hostilities?	Syrte Agreement
What did the Birao Peace Agreement call for?	the liberation of political prisoners
What major group did not sign the peace agreement immediately?	CPJP
When did the CPJP finally sign the peace agreement?	25 August 2012
When was the Birao Peace Agreement signed?	April 2007
Who became president in 2013?	Michel Djotodia
What was Bozize indicted for?	crimes against humanity
What mass murder did Bozize commit?	genocide
How many people were displaced in the unrests?	200,000
What faction was fighting against the remaining Bozize loyalists?	Séléka
What national part is located in the South West?	Dzanga-Sangha National Park
What large animals reside in the national park?	forest elephants
Which Primate can be found in the national park?	lowland gorillas
What National Park can be found in the North?	Manovo-Gounda St Floris
What has threatened the wildlife in this park?	the activities of poachers
What religious groups operate in CAR?	missionary groups
Where do most of the missionaries come from?	United States
What caused most of the missionaries to leave the country?	when fighting broke out between rebel and government forces
What African country bordering CAR are some of these missionaries from?	Democratic Republic of the Congo
When did fighting break out in CAR?	2002–3
Due to fighting, what threatened people in the NorthWest?	risk of starvation
Who assisted in saving the people from starvation?	United Nations
Who headed the UN effort to rebuild CAR?	Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
When did CAR request assistance directly to prevent war?	12 June 2008
Who assisted CAR in avoiding war?	UN Peacebuilding Commission
When was the new Government seated in CAR?	31 March 2013
What did the former opposition parties declare?	boycott the government
Who was refused as new president?	Djotodia
Who would rule the country temporarily?	a transitional parliament
How long did the parliament have until the next election?	18 months
What is the per capita income in CAR?	$400 a year
How is the per capita income compared to the world?	one of the lowest
What gemstone comes from the CAR?	diamonds
Which item that poachers kill elephants for can be obtained in CAR?	ivory
What hinders export?	country's landlocked position
What type of agriculture is popular in the CAR?	food crops
The economy grows at what rate in the last few years?	3%
How many tonnes of Cassave is produced per year?	200,000 and 300,000
What product is produced that is exported?	cotton
Which insect hinders livestock development?	tsetse fly
What is the major telecommunications provider in CAR?	Socatel
Which body regulated communications?	Ministère des Postes and Télécommunications et des Nouvelles Technologies
What type of access is available?	internet service
Who assists CAR with telecommunications?	ITU Telecommunication Development Sector
What does the CAR get help with with regards to communication from ITU-D?	improve infrastructure
How are the human rights in the CAR?	poor
What concerns are there regarding to human rights?	government abuses
What punishment is a human rights violation per the US state Dept?	extrajudicial executions
How is the prison quality in the CAR?	harsh and life-threatening conditions
What right in a court is denied and considered a human right violation?	arbitrary arrest, prolonged pretrial detention and denial of a fair trial
What two factors cause asthma?	genetic and environmental factors
What are two enviromental factors?	exposure to air pollution and allergens
What medications can also trigger asthma?	aspirin and beta blockers
What patterns are used to diagnose asthma?	the pattern of symptoms, response to therapy over time, and spirometry
How is asthma classified?	according to the frequency of symptoms, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate
Is there a cure for asthma?	There is no cure for asthma
How can symptoms be prevented?	by avoiding triggers, such as allergens and irritants, and by the use of inhaled corticosteroids
What is taken by mouth to treat rapidly worsening symptoms?	an inhaled short-acting beta-2 agonist such as salbutamol and corticosteroids
What happens in very severe cases of asthma?	intravenous corticosteroids, magnesium sulfate, and hospitalization may be required
What are the characteristics of asthma?	recurrent episodes of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and coughing
When are symptoms of asthma normally worse?	at night and in the early morning or in response to exercise or cold air
What is produced in the lungs by coughing?	Sputum
Is asthma worst during the day or at night time?	worse at night
Does everyone have horrible episodes of asthma?	Some people with asthma rarely experience symptoms, u
Do other health concerns happen less frequently or more frequently with asthma?	more frequently
What are three of the other health conditions that occur more frequently with asthma?	gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD), rhinosinusitis, and obstructive sleep apnea
What other type of disorders are frequent in asthma sufferers?	Psychological disorders
What are those with asthma that is poorly controll more susceptable to?	radiocontrast reactions
What are some of the enviromental factors that have been linked to asthma?	allergens, air pollution, and other environmental chemicals
What two things are associated with a greater risk of asthma-like symptoms?	Smoking during pregnancy and after delivery
What can cause symptoms and asthma serverity to change?	Low air quality from factors such as traffic pollution or high ozone levels
Exposure to what compounds can also trigger asthma?	indoor volatile organic compounds
What hypothesis tries to explain the increased amount of asthma world wide?	The hygiene hypothesis
How does the hygiene hypothesis explain the increase in asthma?	a direct and unintended result of reduced exposure, during childhood, to non-pathogenic bacteria and viruses
What has caused the reduced exposure in childhood?	increased cleanliness and decreased family size in modern societies
What could prevent asthma?	Exposure to bacterial endotoxin in early childhood
What is some of the evidence backing the hygiene hypothesis?	lower rates of asthma on farms and in households with pets.
What else is a risk factor for asthma?	Family history
If one identical twin has asthma, what are the odds of the other twin having asthma?	approximately 25%
How many genes were associated with asthma by the end of 2005?	25 genes
How many genes were associated with asthma in 2006?	over 100 genes
What else are these genes closely related to?	the immune system or modulating inflammation
What is asthma the result of?	chronic inflammation of the conducting zone of the airways
What two airways are most effected by asthma?	the bronchi and bronchioles
In what ways do airways change?	an increase in eosinophils and thickening of the lamina reticularis
What other cell types are involced with the changing of airways?	T lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils
What other components of the immune systems are included?	cytokines, chemokines, histamine, and leukotrienes among others
Is there a universal definition of astham?	there is not one universal agreed upon definition
What main components play a role in asthma?	many cells and cellular elements play a role
What is the inflamation a result of?	airway hyper-responsiveness
What does hyper-responsiveness of the airways cause?	episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness and coughing
What are two ways to reverse an asthma attack?	spontaneously or with treatment
Is there a test to determine asthma in an individual?	There is currently no precise test
What is diagnosis based on typically?	pattern of symptoms and response to therapy over time
When should you suspect asthma?	if there is a history of: recurrent wheezing, coughing or difficulty breathing
What is used to confirm the diagnosis of asthma?	Spirometry
What age is too young to use spirometry to determine asthma?	children under the age of six
What is recommended to help in the diagnosis of asthma?	Spirometry
Why is spirometry so commonly used to diagnose asthma?	It is the single best test for asthma
What helps support the evidence of asthma?	If the FEV1 measured by this technique improves more than 12% following administration of a bronchodilator
What substance can skew the results of an asthma test?	caffeine
What test can tell the difference between asthma and COPD?	Single-breath diffusing capacity
What is the rate that is used in most of the evidence?	≥20%
What is more variable than spirometry but not recommended?	. Testing peak expiratory flow
How is asthma clinically classified?	according to the frequency of symptoms, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate
How else is asthma classified?	as atopic (extrinsic) or non-atopic (intrinsic)
When asthma is caused by allergens that is called what?	atopic
What  is asthma usually classified based on?	severity
What is a important goal of asthma research?	Finding ways to identify subgroups that respond well to different types of treatments
What kind of condition is asthma?	a chronic obstructive condition
What are examples of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?	bronchiectasis, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema
Is the airway obstuction reversable in asthma?	asthma is usually reversible
What part of the airway does emphysema affect?	alveoli
What part of the airway does asthma affect?	the bronchi
Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction is common in what profession?	professional athletes
What professions has the highest rate of Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction?	cyclists (up to 45%), swimmers, and cross-country skiers
What conditions are more likely to cause Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction?	when it is dry and cold
What does not appear to help athletic performance that do not have asthma?	Inhaled beta2-agonists
Asthma that is the result of or made worse by workplace exposure is reported as what?	occupational disease
What percent of asthma cases in adults are work-related?	It is estimated that 5–25%
What are some of the most common agents?	isocyanates, grain and wood dust, colophony, soldering flux, latex, animals, and aldehydes
What professions normally have the highest risk of problems?	those who spray paint, bakers and those who process food, nurses, chemical workers, those who work with animals, welders, hairdressers and timber workers
What is a condition that can cause symptoms of astham in children?	allergic rhinitis and sinusitis
What are some other causes of airway obstruction?	foreign body aspiration, tracheal stenosis or laryngotracheomalacia, vascular rings, enlarged lymph nodes or neck masses
What other conditions can cause wheezing?	Bronchiolitis and other viral infections
In adults, what conditions can cause the symptoms of asthma?	COPD, congestive heart failure, airway masses, as well as drug-induced coughing due to ACE inhibitors
What is a complication of chronic asthma?	Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
If you are 65 years old and have an obstructive airway disesase, you are more likely to have what other conditions?	asthma and COPD
How is COPD differentiated?	by increased airway neutrophils, abnormally increased wall thickness, and increased smooth muscle in the bronchi
Why is this not determined in a patient with COPD?	due to COPD and asthma sharing similar principles of management
What are the principles of management for asthma and COPD?	corticosteroids, long acting beta agonists, and smoking cessation
What is weak that is not helping prevent the development of asthma?	The evidence for the effectiveness of measures to prevent
What preventative measures always work to prevent asthma?	none are well supported enough to be recommended for this indication
What has been determined about dietry restrictions during pregnancy and when breast feeding?	have not been found to be effective and thus are not recommended
Why are smoking bans in place?	effective in decreasing exacerbations of asthma
Who recoomends immunizations?	World Health Organization
What is a key component of control and preventing asthma attacks?	Avoidance of triggers
What are some of the more common triggers?	allergens, smoke (tobacco and other), air pollution, non selective beta-blockers, and sulfite-containing foods
What can reduce the effectiveness of medications?	Cigarette smoking and second-hand smoke
What did law that limit smoking accomplish?	decrease the number of people hospitalized for asthma
What type of exercise can provide small improvements?	Yoga
What type of person would use bronchial thermoplasty as an option?	For those with severe persistent asthma not controlled by inhaled corticosteroids and LABAs
What does bronchial thermoplasty consist of?	It involves the delivery of controlled thermal energy to the airway wall during a series of bronchoscopies
What effect does bronchial thermoplasty have?	it appears to decrease the subsequent rate.
What treatment helps improve those with allergic rhinitis and asthma?	sublingual immunotherapy
What is the prognosis for asthma?	generally good
What has caused the mortality rate to decrease?	due to better recognition and improvement in care
Worldwide, how many people suffer from asthma?	19.4 million people as of 2004
How many cases that are diagnosed in childhood make it past 10 years with asthma?	half of cases will no longer carry the diagnosis after a decade
By 2011, how many people were affected by asthma?	235–330 million people worldwide are affected by asthma
How many people die per year from asthma?	250,000–345,000 people
What countries is asthma more commonly seen?	It is more common in developed than developing countries
Why are different countries effected differently?	The reason for these differences is not well known
How much was the average cost of hospital stays for asthma-related issues for children??	about $3,600
How much was the average cost of hospital stays for asthma-related issues for adults?	from $5,200 to $6,600
Who was the most frequent primary payer amount children and adults?	Medicaid
Who was more likely to seek hospital help in the US for asthma reasons?	the lowest income communities
When was the first paper written about asthma?	In 1873
What was first used as a cure for asthma?	by rubbing the chest with chloroform liniment
In 1880 what was used intraveniously for asthma?	pilocarpin
When did inhaled corticosteroids and short acting beta agonist start being used?	in the 1960s
Did LaserDisks offer higher or lower quality sound and picture than VHS?	higher-quality
Why didn't LaserDisk gain popularity in North America?	high costs for the players and video titles themselves and the inability to record TV programming
With whom was LaserDisk a popular choice for it's picture and sound quality?	videophiles and film enthusiasts
In what city was LaserDisk used as a popular rental medium in the 1990s?	Hong Kong
Where was LaserDisc first available?	Atlanta, Georgia
How many years after VHS was LaserDisk released?	two years
Under what name was LaserDisc originally marketed?	MCA DiscoVision
How did the first viewers refer to the media?	"Video Long Play"
Who purchased the majority stake and re-marketed the product in 1980?	Pioneer Electronics
Was Laserdisk officially or unofficially reffered to as "Laser Videodisc"?	unofficially
Did MCA produce the disc or the players after being bought out?	discs
Who were the scientists that worked on the early research for Laserdiscs?	Richard Wilkinson, Ray Dakin and John Winslow
What company did the early Laserdisc researchers later found?	Optical Disc Corporation (now ODC Nimbus)
What product replaced LaserDisc in North America by the early 2000s?	DVD
Who chose LaserFisc for their Domesday Project in the mid-1980s?	British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
What was the BBC Domesday Project?	a school-based project to commemorate 900 years since the original Domesday Book in England
Which country still exported players to North America until 2001?	Japan
How large was a standard LaserDisc?	30 cm (12 in) in diameter
What numbers are used in Binary information coding?	1s and 0s
Were the ealiest LaserDiscs in 1978 analog or digitally formatted?	analog
What was the length capacity of the CAA55 format?	55 minutes 5 seconds
Why was Back to the Future released with analog sound?	due to the length of the title and the desire to keep the film on one disc
What was the maximum length of the CAA60 format?	60 minutes 5 seconds
How many works were released to the public with the CAA70 format?	There are not any known uses of this format on the consumer market
What was the difference between LaserDisc and LaserVision in the UK?	"LaserVision" is used to refer to discs with analog sound, while "LaserDisc" is used for those with digital audio
The Phantom Menace was one of the first home videos to use what sound format?	6.1 channel Dolby Digital EX Surround.
What sound formatting do DVDs use?	Dolby Digital audio in digital form
What competition caused LaserDisc sales to decline?	DVD's growing popularity
Did all AV receivers carry the demodulator circuits necessary for LaserDiscs, or only high-end models?	higher-end
What did the Onkyo outboard demodulator covert the RF AC-2 signal to?	6-channel analog audio
Was sound quality from disc to disc and between players consistent or varied?	varied greatly
Was analog or digital formatting more popular with enthusiasts?	digital
What result did adding CX Noise Reduction have on analog discs?	improved the signal-noise ratio of their audio
Which company added digital sound option when re-releasing movies?	Universal
Which channel would not work in conjunction with AC-3 audio?	right analog audio channel
What audio playback options were available if an AC-3 output was not present?	digital Dolby Surround or stereo audio tracks
What happens to the right channel in a player that doesn't recognize AC-3?	garbage (static) output
Are integrated AC-3 demodulators common in LaserDisc players or a rare find?	rare
How many 5.1 surround sound options exist in LaserDiscs?	Only one
What type of decoder logic is common in 1990s A/V receivers?	DTS
Which has a longer playing time: PAL LaserDiscs or NTSC discs?	PAL LaserDiscs
How many audio tracks do PAL LaserDiscs have?	two
Which two audio options are available on PAL LaserDiscs?	two analog-only tracks on older PAL LDs, or two digital-only tracks on newer discs
What was the name of the first solid-state laser consumer LaserDisc player?	LD-700
Besides a solid-state laser, what else was unique about the LD-700?	first LD player to load from the front and not the top
When did Pioneer release the LD-700?	March 1984
Which company continued to use gas-lasers in industrial models of LD players although they were no longer used in consumer models?	Philips
Which three names did MCA use for LaserDisc technology during its development?	Optical Videodisc System, "Reflective Optical Videodisc" or "Laser Optical Videodisc"
To what did MCA change the name to in 1969?	Disco-Vision
When did MCA remove the hyphen from the name Disco-Vision?	1978
Which company owned the rights to the world's largest collection of films during the 1970s?	MCA
Consumer sales of MCA films began in 1978 with what movie?	Jaws
What did VLP stand for in English-speaking countries?	Video Long-Play
What was the first consumer VLP player?	Magnavox VH-8000
Which group officially chose the name "Laservision"?	The LaserVision Association
The Laservision Association was comprised of which companies?	MCA, Universal-Pioneer, IBM, and Philips/Magnavox
Which company joined a 50/50 partnership with MCA in 1977?	Pioneer Electronics
In what year was the first Universal-Pioneer player released?	1980
What was the name of the first Universal-Pioneer player?	the VP-1000
Which singer did an ad for the LD-700 player in 1984?	Ray Charles
What other companies did MCA manufacture discs for?	Paramount, Disney and Warner Bros
What quirk is present in MCA's release of Howard the Duck?	only the start credits shown in widescreen before changing to 4:3 for the rest of the film
What is unique about the LaserDisc release of E.T.?	only format to include the cut scene of Harrison Ford playing the part of the school headmaster
Which film is only available with its original score in LD format , even today?	The Electric Horseman
How many horizontal TVL lines did LaserDisc have in comparison to VHS's 240?	425
Which medium was chapter based like DVD format, Laserdisc or VHS?	LaserDisc
Which medium allowed for multiple audio tracks, Laserdisc or VHS?	LaserDisc
Were Laserdiscs initially cheaper or more costly to produce than their VHS counterparts?	cheaper
How many parts does a VHS tape have that must be manufactured?	at least 14
How much did LaserDiscs cost to produce by the end of the 1980s?	$5.00 per two-sided disc
How much did VHS cost to produce by the 1990s?	as little as $1.00
Were Laserdiscs or VHS more durable in the long run?	LaserDiscs
Why is physical contact with a VHS tape less desirable than an optical reading?	progressive wear with each use
Where do VHS tapes store their information?	magnetic coating
How is data stored on DVDs?	digital blocks which make up each independent frame
What device seperated the black and white and color signals in LaserDiscs?	the receiver
In what areas are comb filters most likely to lose detail?	low-contrast details like skin tones
Are comb filters exact, or is some data smudged?	comb filters almost inevitably smudge some detail
Do LaserDiscs or DVD use analog video?	LaserDiscs
Are DVDs partially or entirely digital?	entirely
What is contrast banding?	subtle visible lines in gradient areas
What step of the DVD production process causes contrast banding?	MPEG-2 encoding process
How does LaserDisc operation vary from DVD?	the transport mechanism always obeys commands from the user
What are "User Protected Options" on DVDs?	where content protection code instructs the player to refuse commands to skip a specific part
Where are User Protected Options commonly found on DVDs?	copyright warnings
Which format, LaserDisc or DVD, gives the user the most control over playback?	LaserDisc
What does the repair+skip feature on newer DVD players do?	filling in unreadable areas of the picture with blank space or a frozen frame of the last readable image and sound
Which format, DVD or Laserdisc, can become unreadable with damage?	DVD
Will the same size scratch cause more problems for a DVD or LaserDisc?	DVD
Which format is considered to look most realistic, LaserDisc or DVD?	LaserDisc
Which format, LaserDisc or DVD, is said to appear sharper and clearer to most viewers?	DVDs
What features do LaserDiscs lack in, causing DVDs to appear sharper and clearer?	video signal-to-noise ratio and bandwidth
What was the vertical blanking interval used for in LaserDiscs, preventing Macrovision signal to be implemented?	internal timing
Why wasn't there a need to redesign the LaserDisc format to prevent piracy?	relatively small market share
What protection could not be applied to LaserDiscs, making them prone to piracy?	Macrovision's Copyguard protection
LaserDisc was the first format to provide what type of releases to consumers?	"Special Edition"
What was the first "Special Edition" film to be released to home video?	the 1984 Criterion Collection edition of Citizen Kane
What bonus features were available on the first home video "Special Edition"?	interviews, commentary tracks, documentaries, still photographs
What feature, unique to LaserDisc, made bonus content possible?	support for multiple audio tracks
What was required of a LaserDisc to continue playback after 60 minutes?	a disc has to be flipped over in order to continue watching
Which LaserDisc player solves the disc switching dilemma?	Pioneer LD-W1
What must be reduced in order to allow LaserDisc playback time to increase?	line count
Which format allows for more playback tie per side, CLV or CAV?	CLV
What video problems on a LaserDisc can be caused by dust or scratches?	glitches, streaks, bursts of static, or momentary picture interruptions
Which format used in DVDs has built-in error correction?	digital MPEG-2
What type of encoding, analog or digital, causes LaserDiscs to be succeptable to damages?	analog
When does "crosstalk" occur?	when the laser optical pickup assembly within the player is out of alignment or because the disc is damaged or excessively warped
What problem can be caused by a player becoming out of alignment?	"crosstalk"
How does "crosstalk" appear to the viewer?	swirling "barber poles" or rolling lines of static
In which format does crosstalk generally not occur?	CAV
Why does the CAV format prevent crosstalk?	the rotational speed never varies
What happens during "laser lock"?	the player reads the same two fields for a given frame over and over again, causing the picture to look frozen
Is LaserDisc quality consistent or inconsistent between player brands?	inconsistency
What is LaserDisc playback quality dependent on?	hardware quality
How cheaply could an older LaserDisc player be purchased in the 1990s?	$25
What range of prices were high-end LaserDisc players in the 1990s?	US$200 to well over $1,000
What substandard product was used in LD manufacturing that caused "laser rot"?	adhesive
What was the internal name for "laser rot" within LD processing plants?	"color flash"
What problems could occur with laser rot?	black spots that looked like mold or burned plastic which cause the disc to skip and the movie to exhibit excessive speckling noise
Why didn't LaserDiscs become popular in North America?	high cost of the players and discs
By 1990, how many American homes were estimated to use LD?	nearly one million
Why were LaserDiscs more popular in Japan?	prices were kept low to ensure adoption
Which format was more popular in high humidity areas such as Singapore?	LaserDiscs
How much did a LD cost in Hong Kong in the 1990s?	USD100
Broadcast in Hong Kong used which standard formatting?	PAL standard
In contrast to broadcast, which format did consumers use in Hong Kong?	NTSC
By what year had DVD taken over the LaserDisc market?	late 1990s
Which collector group highly values LaserDisc for their rareness?	movie enthusiasts
Until the end of what year were movies released in VHS, LD, and DVD in Japan?	2001
What country was the only to receive a LD release of Disney's Song of the South?	Japan
In what decade did Philips produce a "professional" LD model for computer?	early 1980s
In what year were LD jukeboxes created?	1985
Who created LD Jukeboxes in 1985?	Jasmine Multimedia
Which musical artists were featured on LD Jukeboxes in 1985?	Michael Jackson, Duran Duran, and Cyndi Lauper
How many EditDroid systems were ever built?	24
Were EditDroid discs single or multi-sided?	single-sided
Which production company engineered the EditDroid machines in the 1980s?	Lucasfilm
In what year did the Doomsday project occur?	1986
Which equipment was used for the Doomsday Project?	a SCSI-equipped LaserDisc player attached to a BBC Master computer
What does LV-ROM stand for?	LaserVision Read Only Memory
The Doomsday Project discs used which formatting?	CAV
Which of Apple's programming languages allowed users to ceatively manipulate LaserDiscs?	HyperCard
What did LaserStacks software enable Mac users to do?	play specific content from the disc
Where were "stacks" created with the LaserStack software used?	in education
Which commercial company was LaserStack's most successful distributor?	Voyager
A combination computer/LD player was comissioned by what government entity?	the U.S. Military
How much did Matrox's computer/LD combo weigh?	43 lb (20 kg)
How could Matrox's computer unconventionally be controlled?	removing the ribbon cable and connecting a serial cable directly from the computer's serial port to the port on the LaserDisc player
What quality made LDs a consideration for videogames in the 1980s and 1990s?	instant-access capability
What was the first game to use LaserDiscs?	Sega's Astron Belt
In what year was Sega's AStron Belt released?	1983
With what operating ratio would MUSE Discs operate?	5:3
What benefits did the MUSE narrow wavelength red laser have?	capable of reading through disc defects such as scratches and even mild disc rot that would cause most other players to stop, stutter or drop-out
In addition to scratches and rot, what other common LaserDisc issue was to be eliminated by MUSE discs?	Crosstalk
How many years did it take Blu-ray and HD-DVD players to duplicate MUSE technology?	almost 15 years
What was the price for early HDTVs?	US$10,000
Did MUSE have a large or small target market, even in Japan?	tiny
What were some movies that were released on MUSE LaserDiscs?	Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Lawrence of Arabia, A League of Their Own, Bugsy, Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Bram Stoker's Dracula and Chaplin
What were "Squeeze LDs"?	enhanced 16:9-ratio widescreen LaserDiscs
With what aspect ratio did Squeeze LDs operate?	16:9-ratio widescreen
Why did Squeeze LDs have a very limited market?	very few people owned 16:9 displays
Could the 16:9 aspect ratio be easily resized by a normal LD player, or was the image significantly distorted?	distorted
What percent vertical resolution increase did Squeeze LDs feature over regular widescreen LDs?	33%
Which movie was released twice on Squeeze LD?	Terminator 2
What improvement was added to Terminator 2's second Squeeze LD release?	THX certified
What Warner Brothers films were available in 16:9 aspect ratio Squeeze LDs?	Unforgiven, Grumpy Old Men, The Fugitive, and Free Willy
What films were available for Japanese market Squeeze LDs?	Basic Instinct, Stargate, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Showgirls, Cutthroat Island, and Cliffhanger
What does the acronym RLV stand for?	Recordable LaserVision disc
Which company originally developed and marketed the RLV?	Optical Disc Corporation (ODC, now ODC Nimbus)
In what year did ODC develop the Recordable LaserVision Disc?	1984.
What is the difference in appearance between an RLV disc and a regular LD?	reflective purple-violet (or blue with some RLV discs) color
Why do RLV discs have a blue or purple reflective color?	to make it recordable, as opposed to the silver mirror appearance of regular LDs
For what purpose were RLVs popular?	making short-run quantities of LaserDiscs for specialized applications such as interactive kiosks and flight simulators
What color were regular LaserDiscs, in contrast to RLVs blueish purple hues?	silver mirror
In contrast to large LD disks, what is the size of a standard CD?	12 cm (4.7 in)
What were CD size "single"-style discs called that were compatible with LaserDisc players?	CD Video (CD-V) discs, and Video Single Discs (VSD)
How much video content could be stored on a CD-V disk?	up to five minutes of analog LaserDisc-type video content
What were CD-V's video capacities usually used for?	music video
Which artist released a music video and three audio tracks on CD-V in 1989?	David Bowie
What were VSDs lacking that CD-Vs included?	audio CD tracks
In what areas of the world were VSDs popular?	only in Japan and other parts of Asia
Were VSDs or CD-Vs all digital and also playable on DVD players?	VSDs
What kind of symmetry do annelids have?	bilateral
What do annelids use to move?	parapodia
Which subtype of annelids includes most marine worms?	polychaetes
Which subtype of annelids includes earthworms?	oligochaetes
Since 1997, what are leeches seen as a subgroup of?	oligochaetes
What separates many annelids' segments?	Septa
Which annelids show no segmentation?	Echiura and Sipuncula
What end of annelids with well-developed segmentation has muscles that act like hearts?	front
What is movement by ripples called?	peristalsis
What movement method do some burrowing annelids use?	turn their pharynges inside out to drag themselves
How do annelids normally reproduce?	sexual reproduction
What can asexual reproduction techniques help annelids do?	regenerate after severe injuries
What larvae live like plankton?	trochophore
What annelids are hermaphrodites?	Oligochaetes
What annelids make a cocoon in a ring around themselves?	Oligochaetes
How do earthworms help the soil they live in?	aeration and enriching
How much of near-shore marine annelids are burrowing?	up to a third
How do burrowing marine annelids help ocean ecosystems?	enabling water and oxygen to penetrate the sea floor
What annelids' jaws are being studied by engineers?	Ragworms
Why are some leeches endangered?	they have been over-harvested
Why are annelid fossils rare?	annelids are soft-bodied
What fossil signs of annelids are found?	jaws and the mineralized tubes that some of the species secreted
How old is the earliest annelid fossil?	518 million years ago
What types of annelids appeared 299 million years ago?	modern mobile polychaete groups
What period started around 472 million years ago?	the mid Ordovician
What externally divides annelids' segments?	shallow ring-like constrictions called annuli
What divides annelids' segments internally?	septa ("partitions")
What do the segments of an annelid share?	a common gut, circulatory system and nervous system
What covers an annelid's exterior?	a cuticle
What is an annelid's cuticle made of?	collagen
What language does the term 'chaetae' come from?	Greek
What does 'chaetae' mean?	hair
Which parts of annelids are different from true segments?	the frontmost and rearmost sections
What language does 'prostomium' come from?	Greek
What does 'pygidium' mean?	little tail
How are the layers arranged in annelids' cuticles?	spiral in alternating directions
What are annelids' cuticles made out of?	collagen fibers
What do non-cuticle annelids use to protect their skin?	mucus-secreting glands in the epidermis
What layer is under the epidermis?	the dermis
What does 'coelom' mean?	(body cavity
What are parapodia?	limbs
What do chetoblast cells do?	hair-forming
What hair-like extensions do chetoblasts make?	microvilli
What are setae?	bristles
What are cirri?	fused bundles of cilia
What kind of parapodia do burrowing annelids often have?	ridges whose tips bear hooked chetae
What type of annelids have limb-like parapodia?	polychaetes
What are parapodia?	unjointed paired extensions of the body wall
What are ganglia?	local control centers
What is an annelid's brain in a ring around?	the pharynx
What is a pharynx?	throat
Where are clitellates' brains?	in the peristomium or sometimes the first segment behind the peristomium
Where are polychaetes' brains?	in the prostomium
What species group are annelids' muscle control similar to?	arthropods
What are giant axons?	the output signal lines of nerve cells
How do annelids withdraw from danger?	shortening their bodies
What kind of things can annelids' sensors detect?	light, chemicals, pressure waves and contact
What does 'nuchal' mean?	on the neck
What type of annelids have nuchal organs?	polychaetes
What are the nuchal organs thought to do?	chemosensors
What term means 'little eyes'?	ocelli
What are coelomata?	body cavities
What are annelids' body cavities separated from other segments by?	septa
What are annelids' body cavities separated from each other by?	vertical mesenteries
What is the mesothelium made of?	modified epitheliomuscular cells
How does peristalsis work?	waves of contraction and expansion that sweep along the body
Why are annelids' segments like water-balloons?	the septa enable the circular and longitudinal muscles to change the shape of individual segments
What are phrynges?	throats
What are cilia?	fine muscle-powered hairs
What can coelomocyte cells defend against?	parasites and infections
What type of pigment is dissolved in annelids' blood?	Respiratory
What runs the length of annelids' bodies with well-developed septa?	blood vessels
What do annelids without septa have to use for circulation?	circulation within the coelom
What type of annelids are very different from others?	leeches and their closest relatives
What type of tissue takes up most of the body of a leech?	connective tissue layer of the body wall
How many coelomata do leeches have?	two
What lines the coelomata of leeches?	mesothelium
What do leeches use to move?	suckers at their front and rear ends
What does 'everted' mean?	turned inside out to extend
What part of a polychaete can be everted?	pharynx
What types of annelids have evolved jaws?	Eunicidae and Phyllodocidae
What do annelids use jaws for?	seizing prey, biting off pieces of vegetation, or grasping dead and decaying matter
What do some annelids have 'crowns' of?	palps covered in cilia
What type of annelids are tube-dwelling?	Siboglinidae
What blocks the Siboglinidae's gut?	a swollen lining
How much of a Siboglinidae's weight is symbiotic bacteria?	15%
What gases come from hydrothermal vents?	hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide
What gases come from seeps?	methane
What do metanephridia remove?	soluble waste products
What do annelids without blood vessels do to remove waste?	protonephridia
How many stages are there in annelids' waste filtration?	two
What annelid system combines both filtration states in one organ?	protonephridia
How many sexes of annelids were there originally?	two
What releases sperm from annelids?	nephridia
What do annelid eggs become?	trochophore larvae
What do annelids' larvae live like?	plankton
What does the trochophore become when annelids mature?	the prostomium (head)
How many species of polychaetes have known lifecycles?	about 25%
What percent of polychaetes produce yolk-rich eggs?	14%
What is the benefit of yolk-rich eggs?	reduce the time the larva needs to spend among the plankton
What are most polychaetes' eggs covered in?	jelly
What do some non-single-sex polychaetes do?	change sex
What are most polychaetes lacking for reproduction?	permanent gonads
How do some annelids get a one-time chance at a better spawning spot?	the rear of the body splits off and becomes a separate individual
What annelid group includes leeches and earthworms?	clitellates
What type of sex are most earthworms?	hermaphrodites
Where are leeches' eggs fertilized?	in the ovaries
Where do leeches move their eggs to?	the cocoon
What type of annelids hatch as miniature adults?	clitellates
Who published a book about worms in 1881?	Charles Darwin
What was the first scientific study of how earthworms help soil?	The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms
Where do earthworms prefer to live on the surface?	generally in moist leaf litter
How does burrowers' loosening help the soil?	oxygen and water can penetrate it
What is the largest bird that eats earthworms?	storks
Where were native earthworms killed by glaciers?	glaciated areas of North America
Where did most of the current earthworms in glacial areas come from?	Europe
What type of forests can be hurt by invasive worms?	Northern hardwood forests
What type of annelid tunnels through coral?	Palolo worm
What annelid's rear end do Samoans like to eat?	Palolo worm
What type of bait do experienced anglers prefer?	spawning modules
What do some polychaetes eat that has been causing problems?	molluscs
What type of worm have there been proposals to farm?	Ragworms
When did leeches begin being used for blood-letting?	30 AD
Where did leeches begin being used for blood-letting?	China
When did Rome begin using leeches?	50 AD
When did India begin using leeches?	200 AD
Which organizations list Hirudo medicinalis as endangered?	IUCN and CITES
When did Cloudina exist?	549 to 542 million years ago
What do some people think Cloudina should be called instead of an annelid?	cnidarian
How old were the fossils of Canadia and Burgessochaeta found in Canada?	505 million years
What era was underway 505 million years ago?	early Cambrian
Where was Myoscolex found?	Australia
When did the Tertiary period begin?	65 million years ago
What era did oligochaetes evolve in?	early Cretaceous
What type of annelid fossils have been found from the mid Ordovician period?	oligochaetes
When were the earliest annelid fossils found?	472 to 461 million years ago
What two groups are annelids traditionally divided among?	polychaetes and clitellates
What subtype of clitellates contains earthworms?	oligochaetes
What subtype of clitellates contains leeches?	hirudinomorphs
How many polychaete families are there?	approximately 80
When did Greg Rouse begin trying to categorize polychaetes?	1997
Who compared annelid genes in 2007?	Torsten Struck and colleagues
How many annelid genes did Torsten Struck first compare?	3
How many annelid genes did Torsten Struck compare for a cross-check?	11
What subtypes of polychaetes were useless classifications, according to the 2007 study?	Scolecida, Canalipalpata and Aciculata
What did Rouse decide leeches were a subgroup of?	oligochaetes
How many previously-separate phyla did the 2007 study reclassify?	3
What did the 2007 study decide was the parent group for annelids?	Polychaetes
What offshoots of polychaetes are unsegmented?	echiurans and sipunculan
What offshoots of polychaetes are only segmented in the rear?	pogonophores
What nervous system structure is less univeral among annelids than was thought before 2007?	ladder-like
What superphylum are annelids in?	protostomes
What is the other superphylum besides protostomes?	deuterostomes
What superphylum are vertebrates in?	deuterostomes
What does 'Articulata' mean?	jointed animals
What are lophophores?	fan-like feeding structures
Which Lophotrochozoa phyla have similar egg development?	annelids, molluscs, nemerteans and flatworms
How do the cells of Lophotrochozoa eggs arrange themselves?	after the 4-cell stage, descendants of these 4 cells form a spiral pattern
What is the Lophotrochozoa spiral egg-cell pattern sometimes called?	spiral determinate cleavage
What does it mean to say that God is omnipotent?	unlimited power
What is the feeling of God being everywhere?	omnipresence
What is the extent of God's knowledge?	infinite knowledge
What is infinite knowledge classified as?	omniscience
What is the benevolence of God called?	omnibenevolence
Does God have a gender?	without any human biological gender
What type of human is God portrayed as in some religions?	a man (sometimes old and bearded)
What is a God in monotheism?	Supreme Being and principal object of faith
In what belief is God the creator and sustainer of the universe?	theism
What does deism believe God's role in the universe is?	the creator, but not the sustainer
Which belief is that God is the universe?	pantheism
Which belief system definitively believes in no Higher Power or Supreme Being?	atheism
Which belief system belives in some form of higher powwer, or something, but not organized religion?	agnosticism
What is God in theism?	creator and sustainer of the universe
What is monotheism?	belief in the existence of one God
What is pantheism?	God is the universe itself
What is atheism?	God is not believed to exist
What is God in deism?	the creator
What are vocalizations of the name of God, YHWH?	Yahweh and Jehovah
What is the Holy Trinity?	the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit
In the time of Atenism, what was God called?	Aten
What is the Islamic name for God?	Allah
What do members of the Bahá'í Faith call God?	Baha
What was the first monotheistic religion?	Atenism
What is the God of the Hebrew Bible called?	YHWH
What is the Christian God called?	Yahweh and Jehovah
What are the 2 titular names of God in the Jewish religion?	Elohim or Adonai
Where do scholars believe the name Adonai came from?	Aten
Where is the English word God derived from?	the Proto-Germanic * ǥuđan
Where the first Germanic words for God masculine or feminine?	neuter—applying to both genders
When did the Germanic words for God take on a masculine form?	Christianization of the Germanic peoples
What was practiced by the Germanic people before their Christianization?	Germanic paganism
What did the gaelic root of the word for God mean?	"to call" or "to invoke"
Where does the word God come from originally?	Codex Argenteus
What language does the English word God come from?	German
What gender where the original Germanic words meaning God in?	neuter
What differentiates God from gods?	the capitalized form of God
What belief has many gods?	polytheism
What does it mean to read the word LORD in all capitals in the Bible?	signifies that the word represents the tetragrammaton
What is the tetragrammaton gor God?	YHWH
No matter which religion, what is usually used as the name for the Supreme Being?	God
What form of the word God refers to polytheistic gods?	gods
What is the name of God in Judaism?	YHWH
What does the all caps word LORD used in some bibles represent?	YHWH
What type of view do Christians take on God?	trinitarian
How much can belief in God vary in Hinduism?	region, sect, and caste
Does hinduism only believe in a single god?	ranging from monotheistic to polytheistic to atheistic
What view does the Jewish community take on God?	monotheistic
What kind of religion is Hinduism considered?	dharmic
What type of religion is Judaism?	monotheistic
What type of religion is Christianity?	trinitarian
How many gods do the Hindu's have?	monotheistic to polytheistic to atheistic.
What do Muslims believe that Trinitism too closely resembles?	polytheism
Which belief is expected to never try and visualize God?	iconodules
What is the most basic belief of the Muslim religion?	tawhid
What religious text helps reinforce to Muslims that Christianity is more like polytheism?	Quran
What is the meaning behind the Muslim concept of tawhid?	"oneness" or "uniqueness"
What religion believes that all theist worship the same god?	Hinduism and Sikhism
What is the trinity in Christianity?	one God in three persons
What do monotheists believe?	one god
What do Muslims think of Christianity?	comparing it to polytheism
What is the basis behind Catholic theology?	God is infinitely simple and is not involuntarily subject to time
What ways can God interact with the universe?	religious experience and the prayers of humans
Why is it sometimes hard to think of God as benevolent?	God's responsibility for evil and suffering in the world
What is the suffix theism used for?	used to refer in general to any belief in a god or gods
What are examples of different types of theism?	monotheism or polytheism
What three points do most theists agree on?	God is omnipotent, omniscient, and benevolent,
What religion believes that God is infinitely simple and not subject to time?	Catholic
What does theism mean in general?	belief in a god or gods
What is a deistic view of God?	God exists, but does not intervene in the world beyond what was necessary to create it
How does a deistic God feel about us?	no interest in humanity and may not even be aware of humanity
What is Pandeism?	why God would create a universe and then abandon it
What does a deistic God not do?	neither answers prayers nor produces miracles
What type of religion believes that God is transcendent?	Deism
What is deism?	God has no interest in humanity
In deism is God represented in human form?	God is not anthropomorphic
In deism, does God answer prayers?	neither answers prayers
What is Pantheism?	God is the universe and the universe is God
WHat is Panentheism?	God contains, but is not identical to, the Universe
WHat is Kabbalah?	Jewish mysticism
Who is the founder of Hasidic Judaism?	The Baal Shem Tov
What is pantheism?	God is the universe
Who was the founder of Hasidic Judaism?	The Baal Shem Tov
What is Panentheism?	God contains, but is not identical to, the Universe
What from of Hinduism does not believe in panentheism?	Vaishnavism
What is another name for Jewish mysticism?	Kabbalah
What is pantheism?	God is the universe
What do some non-theists view God as?	a symbol of human values and aspirations
Although a proclaimed atheist, who was it that said "the word 'God' is to me a sound conveying no clear or distinct affirmation"?	Charles Bradlaugh
What is NOMA?	non-overlapping magisteria
In NOMA, what should be used to answer questions about the physical world?	science
What should be used to answer ultimate questions on morality and meaning?	theology
Name the nineteenth century English atheist?	Charles Bradlaugh
What does Stephen Jay Gould call philosophy that deals in the supernatural?	non-overlapping magisteria" (NOMA)
What category does NOMA fall under?	theology
What did Sagan argue was the only was to prove the existence of God?	the discovery that the universe is infinitely old
What is Richard Dawkins belief about the existence of God?	"a universe with a god would be a completely different kind of universe from one without, and it would be a scientific difference."
What kind of difference does Dawkins believe would come from the existence of God?	a scientific difference
Who argued that the existence of God is an empirical question?	Richard Dawkins
Who stated that God was difficult both to prove or disprove?	Carl Sagan
How could science discover if there was not a creator?	the universe is infinitely old.
What does Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow pose as a better question that "Is there a God"?	who created God
Who wrote The Grand Design?	Stephen Hawking and co-author Leonard Mlodinow
What is Michael Nikoletseas profession?	Neuroscientist
How do Hawking and Mlodinow believe the question of God can be answered?	purely within the realm of science
What is the name of Stephen Hawking's book?	The Grand Design
Who was Hawking's co-author?	Leonard Mlodinow
Who says the that whether there is or isn't a God are just like questions in natural science?	Michael Nikoletseas
Why does Stewart Guthrie believe that people project their human features onto non human things?	it makes those aspects more familiar
What is one of the most common traits of religion according to Boyer?	The construction of gods and spirits like persons
What did Frued believe about the belief in God?	god concepts are projections of one's father
How does Pascal Boyer believe that gods and other supernatural beings behave?	much like people
Who argues that there are lots of supernatural things in the world?	Pascal Boyer
How do supernatural entities act?	much like people
Which religion does Boyer equate with a modern soap opera?	Greek mythology
Who believed that gods are just projections of a person's father?	Sigmund Freud
What are ways that small social groups can force morality?	gossip or reputation
Who suggested that by including the presence of an omniscient God, selfishness can be controlled and cooperation can be gained?	Matt Rossano
What did Émile Durkheim suggest about the existence of God?	gods represent an extension of human social life to include supernatural beings
Why would humans have begun to create gods?	a means of enforcing morality
Who posited that humans created gods to create morality in social groups?	Matt Rossano
Omnipresent gods are a way to watch large groups and enforce what?	morality
Omniprestent gods helped build what?	more cooperative groups
How did St. Anselm define the existence of God?	"that than which nothing greater can be conceived"
Who said that God is "a substance consisting of infinite attributes"?	Baruch Spinoza
What did Baruch Spinoza use as proof for the existence of God?	a variation of the Ontological argument
What did Spinoza believe the world was made of?	one substance, God, or its equivalent, Nature
Who defined god as "that than which nothing greater can be conceived"?	St. Anselm
Name a famous pantheist?	Baruch Spinoza
What was Spinoza's concept of God?	infinite
Spinoza believed that the universe was made up of one substance which is?	God
How does Dawkins interpret evidence for or against the existence of God?	a lack of evidence for the material existence
What do atheists believe of God?	an imaginary entity only
How long has the thought of the existence of God been carried on?	trans-generational
How does Dawkins interpret his findings on the existence, or not, of God.	a lack of evidence for the material existence of such a God
Who believes God isn't real?	Lawrence M. Krauss and Sam Harris
What is the Omnipotence paradox?	can God create a stone so heavy that he cannot lift it
What is another term for the Omnipotence paradox?	Paradox of the Stone
Does either outcome of the Paradox of the Stone prove the existence of God?	God is not omnipotent. A being that is not omnipotent, though, is not God
What shows God is not omnipotent if he creates a stone that he cannot lift?	there is something that he cannot do
What must God be, in order to be a Supreme Being?	omnipotent
What paradox states that if a god can't create a stone so heavy he can't lift it?	Paradox of the Stone
What does the Paradox of the Stone posit?	he is not omnipotent
What does it mean if a God is not omnipotent?	is not God
Are there any answers to the Pradox of the Stone?	Several
What do religions share across their belief structures?	similarities arising from their common roots
What are some religious traditions that are found within differing religions?	expansive powers and abilities, psychological characteristics, gender characteristics, and preferred nomenclature
Who does Christianity share roots with?	attributes of God in Islam, and the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy in Judaism
How many Attributes of Mercy are in Judaism?	Thirteen
What three religions share similar parts?	God in Christianity, attributes of God in Islam, and the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy in Judaism
What three religions share similar beginnings?	Christianity, attributes of God in Islam, and the Thirteen Attributes of Mercy in Judaism
What attributes do religions all roughly share?	expansive powers and abilities, psychological characteristics, gender characteristics, and preferred nomenclature
How is sex by God handled in a monotheistic religion?	God has no counterpart with which to relate sexually
How do polytheistic religions view sex by God or gods?	attribute to each of the gods a gender, allowing each to interact with any of the others, and perhaps with humans, sexually
What is God's role in the creation of the world?	begetter
In what ways can the gender of God be viewed?	literal or an allegorical aspect
What do polytheistic religions assign to their gods?	gender
What role does got serve in a sexual intercourse?	the active (as opposed to the receptive) role
In which type of religion does God have no sexual partner?	monotheistic
What is a muslims life purpose?	to worship God
What type of God is the Muslim God?	a personal God
What aspect does Alister McGrath argue is important in Christianity?	a "personal god"
What does prayer usually include in Islam?	forgiveness
What type of God is the Muslim God?	forgiving
Who believe they are the one and only chosen few?	exclusivists
Who believe that they are the only people that know the truth?	exclusivists
What is one called that believes he has the one religion, but that the others aren't necessarily wrong?	pluralism
What is it called when someone belives that their own religion is an advancement of older religions?	supersessionism
What is a religion that believes that all religions are correct?	universalism
What does it mean if God can't predict the future?	God may not be omniscient.
Who posited the existence of God?	medieval philosophers
What philosophical debates arose in the middle ages?	God's omniscience
How does Alvin Plantinga describe faith?	"properly basic"
Who stated "the heart has reasons of which reason does not know"?	Pascal
Which philosopher takes the evidentialist position?	Richard Swinburne
Name three philosophers of the last 100 years arguing for the existence of God?	Immanuel Kant, David Hume and Antony Flew
When did George W. Bush first say 'war on terrorism'?	16 September 2001
Which word did George W. Bush apologize for using when talking about the war?	crusade
When did George W. Bush first say 'war on terror'?	20 September 2001
Where did Bush say the 'war on terror' begins?	with al-Qaeda
When did Bush say the 'war on terror' ends?	every terrorist group of global reach has been found, stopped, and defeated
What did Obama say the US is at war with, in 2009?	a far-reaching network of violence and hatred
What was the "Global War on Terror" officially renamed to in March 2009?	Overseas Contingency Operation
What term did Obama want the government to stop using?	war on terror
Who said in 2012 that the fight would change from military to law enforcement?	Jeh Johnson
What was the  "Overseas Contingency Operations" renamed to in 2010?	Countering Violent Extremism
Who said the 'war on terrorism' is 'an entire language of discourse'?	Richard Jackson
Who said that 9/11 drew a line between 'the civil and the savage'?	John Ashcroft
What did the Bush administration describe as parasitical?	terrorists
What did the Bush administration describe as heroic?	Americans
Which war gave birth to al-Qaeda?	the Soviet war in Afghanistan
When did the Soviets leave Afghanistan?	February 1989
Which countries supported Afghan islamists against the Soviets?	United States, United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and the People's Republic of China
Who did Osama bin Laden volunteer to help fight in the 80s?	Soviets
Which group later became al-Qaeda?	World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders
When did al-Qaeda attack the US embassy in Kenya?	7 August 1998
How many people were killed when al-Qaeda attacked US embassies in 1998?	224
How many Americans were killed when al-Qaeda attacked US embassies in 1998?	12
What operation did Bill Clinton start to retaliate for the 1998 embassy attacks?	Operation Infinite Reach
How much of Sudan's medicines were produced by a pharmaceutical plant Clinton's operation bombed?	around 50%
How many planes were hijacked on 9/11?	four
Which al-Qaeda cell were the 9/11 hijackers members of?	Hamburg
Where were the 9/11 planes originally going?	California
How many al-Qaeda operatives hijacked planes on 9/11?	19
How soon after planes crashed into them did the WTC towers collapse?	within two hours
What law was signed on Sep 14, 2001?	Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists
Who did the AUMF authorize the US military attacking?	those responsible for the attacks on 11 September 2001
What law did Congress refer to as a basic for the AUMF?	section 5(b) of the War Powers Resolution
When was the War Powers Resolution passed?	1973
When did the US invade Afghanistan?	October 2001
Who helped the US invade Afghanistan?	UK and coalition allies
What was the goal of the US invading Afghanistan?	oust the Taliban regime
When did the US begin airstrikes on Afghanistan?	7 October 2001
Where did bin Laden escape to in Dec 2001?	Pakistan
Where did the Taliban regroup in 2002?	western Pakistan
In what parts of Afghanistan did the Taliban attack Coalition forces in 2002?	southern and eastern
What operation began in Feb 2010?	Operation Moshtarak
Where did Operation Moshtarak take place?	southern Afghanistan
When did Afghanistan sign a security agreement with the US?	September 2014
Where did the USSOC Pacific deploy to in Jan 2002?	Philippines
What was the goal of the 2002 Philippines deployment?	combating Filipino Islamist groups
What was the main Filipino Islamist group being attacked?	Abu Sayyaf
What humanitarian effort followed the 2002 military operation in the Philippines?	Operation Smiles
What did Operation Smiles do for the Philippines?	provide medical care and services to the region of Basilan
How many people were killed by US Special Forces on Sep 14, 2009?	two
Where was the Sep 14, 2009 action?	near the Somali village of Baarawe
What country's ships did some witnesses say were involved in the Baarawe attack?	French
What Somali group is affiliated with al-Qaeda?	Al-Shabaab
What nationality was Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan?	Kenyan
When did a Mali conflict begin?	January 2012
What group were the Mali radicals affiliated with?	al-Qaeda
When did France provide troops in Mali?	January 2013
What did France call its Mali operation?	Operation Serval
What was Operation Serval's goal?	dislodging the al-Qaeda affiliated groups from northern Mali
When did the first Gulf War begin?	1991
How did the first Gulf War end?	ceasefire agreement that suspended hostilities (but not officially ended)
Who did the US try to protect in Iraq after the first Gulf War?	Iraq's Kurdish and Shi'a Arab population
Which region of Iraq do the Kurds live in?	northern
Which region of Iraq do the Shi'a live in?	southern
When was the first ground attack in the post-9/11 Iraq war?	21 March 2003
Which nationalities worked together in the Battle of Umm Qasr?	British, American and Polish
When did the US capture Baghdad?	April 2003
When did Bush say 'major combat operations' were complete in Iraq?	1 May 2003
What regime were Hussein loyalists part of?	Ba'ath
Which civil war did the Iraq branch of Al Qaeda begin fighting in?	Syrian
With support from Syrians, what did the Iraq branch of Al Qaeda rename themselves to?	Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS/ISIL)
What part of Iraq did ISIS invade?	western
Who denounced ISIS?	Al Qaeda's core organization
What relationship do Al Qaeda and ISIS now have?	competition
When did Obama launch airstrikes on ISIS?	10 August 2014
What law did Obama cite on Sep 9, 2014?	the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists
When did Obama make a speech about ISIS on TV?	10 September 2014
Which countries worked together to bomb ISIS on Sep 21-22, 2014?	the United States, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the UAE, Jordan and Qatar
Where were the Sep 21-22 airstrikes?	Syria
Which Pakistan president supported the US attacking the Taliban?	Pervez Musharraf
How many Pakistan airbases did Musharraf let the US use?	three
What was the name of the US's Afghanistan operation?	Operation Enduring Freedom
Who was the US Secretary of State in 2001?	Colin Powell
Who said he had 'war-gamed' the US?	Musharraf
When did Musharraf give an anti-Islamism speech?	12 January 2002
What did Musharraf say he'd combat?	Islamic extremism and lawlessness within Pakistan
What did Musharraf ban?	militant organizations
What did Musharraf say his ban wasn't influenced by?	foreign influence
When did Musharraf arrest Maulana Masood Azhar?	2002
What group did Maulana Masood Azhar lead?	Jaish-e-Mohammed
What group did Hafiz Muhammad Saeed lead?	Lashkar-e-Taiba
What nationality is Zayn al-Abidn Muhammed Hasayn Abu Zubaydah?	Saudi
Which third-highest-ranking al-Qaeda officer was captured?	Khalid Sheikh Mohammed
What controversial technology did the US use in Pakistan?	drones
Which US agency runs its drones in Pakistan?	the Central Intelligence Agency
Why did the US use the CIA instead of the Air Force to run drones?	to avoid breaching sovereignty through military invasion
Abuse of what term allowed a lack of a formal war declaration?	Global War on Terror
Who wrote 'Letter to American People' in 2002?	Osama bin Laden
Who was the US Secretary of Defense in 2002?	Donald Rumsfeld
Which group did Rumsfeld think was active in Kashmir?	Al-Qaeda
What teams hunted for Bin Laden in Kashmir in 2002?	Special Air Service and Delta Force
Who led the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen?	Fazlur Rehman Khalil
Who did a US drone kill in Sep 2009?	Ilyas Kashmiri
What group did Ilyas Kashmiri lead?	Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami
After 2009, who began fighting in Waziristan?	Kashmiri militants
What group did Al-Badar Mujahideen break away from?	Hizbul Mujahideen
What did Al-Badar Mujahideen call for in 2012?	mobilisation of resources for continuation of jihad in Kashmir
Who declared the Partnership Action Plan against Terrorism?	member states of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
When was the Partnership Action Plan against Terrorism announced?	22 November 2002
Where did NATO begin naval operations after 2002?	the Mediterranean Sea
What was NATO's operation in the Mediterranean called?	Operation Active Endeavour
What were the countries who supported the US's post-9/11 invasions called?	the "coalition of the willing"
Which country disavowed the Taliban?	Pakistan
How many soldiers did Pakistan contribute to fight the Taliban?	tens of thousands
Where in Pakistan is Waziristan?	North-West
Where did Pakistan try to remove the Taliban and Al-Qaeda?	northern tribal areas
What was the primary fighting force in southern Afghanistan?	The British 16th Air Assault Brigade
Which nations besides the UK contributed significantly to the southern Afghanistan fight?	Australia, Canada and the Netherlands
How many troops did Canada send initially?	2,000
How many troops did Australia send initially?	240
How many troops did the Netherlands send initially?	1,400
What new agency did Bush create after 9/11?	Department of Homeland Security
When was the DHS created?	November 2002
What other massive agency's creation was the DHS compared to?	the Department of Defense
What did the DHS focus on?	domestic efforts to prevent future attacks
When was the Patriot Act passed?	October 2001
What did the Patriot Act make it easier for law enforcement to search?	telephone, e-mail communications, medical, financial, and other records
What did the Patriot Act make it easier to do to immigrants?	detaining and deporting immigrants suspected of terrorism-related acts
How was the definition of terrorism expanded by the Patriot Act?	to include domestic terrorism
Which newspaper revealed the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program?	The New York Times
When did the ACLU first challenge the Patriot Act?	30 July 2003
What rights did the ACLU say the Patriot Act violated?	First Amendment rights, Fourth Amendment rights, and right to due process
What did Section 215 of the Patriot Act allow the FBI to search?	a person's business, bookstore, and library records
Who passed symbolic resolutions against the Patriot Act?	governing bodies in a number of communities
What terrorism-related resolution did the UN Security Council adopt in 2005?	Resolution 1624
Which countries haven't submitted the required reports to the UN Security Council?	the United States and Israel
What plan did the DoD release in 2005?	National Military Strategic Plan for the War on Terrorism
What did Resolution 1624 try to protect?	international human rights laws
What phrase has been called a misnomer?	War on Terror
What has the 'war on terror' been used as an excuse for?	to pursue long-standing policy/military objectives, reduce civil liberties, and infringe upon human rights
Which other misnamed 'war' has 'war on terror' been compared to?	War on Drugs
What is the likely fate of the 'war on terror'?	it is unlikely international terrorism can be brought to an end by military means
What flaw in the 'war on terror' name did Francis Fukuyama point out?	"terrorism" is not an enemy, but a tactic
What does the 'war on terror' name obscure?	differences between conflicts such as anti-occupation insurgents and international mujahideen
Who said the US's presence in Iraq increases resentment and terrorists?	Shirley Williams
What fed US hysteria about terrorism?	media
What has the 'war on terror' done to the US's international image?	damaged
Who runs the Welsh Assembly?	Carwyn Jones
What is the largest opposition party in the Scottish Parliament?	The Labour Party
How many MEPs does it have in the British Parliament?	twenty
What year was Jeremy Corbyn elected?	2015
About when did the Labour Parry start?	late 19th century
when was george odger elected?	1870
What year did Thomas R. Steels propose the single body union branch?	1899
Where was Thomas R. Steels a member?	Doncaster
WHere was the proposed conference held?	Memorial Hall
How many delegates passed the motion?	129
Who was elected Secretary?	Ramsay MacDonald
How many candidates were sponsored in the 1900 electrion?	15
What boosted support in 1901?	Taff Vale Case
What was the Taft Vale Case?	a dispute between strikers and a railway company
From this case, what happened?	made strikes illegal
How much were they ordered to pay in damages for the strike?	£23,000
Who overturned the Taft Vale judgement?	Liberal Government
Who was elected Chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party?	Keir Hardie
How many votes did Keir Hardie win by?	one vote
Who was Keir Hardie's opponent?	David Shackleton
How many MP were elected in the 1910 election?	42
Who passed the Osborne judgment?	Trade Disputes Act
When was the Trade Disputes Act passed?	1913
WHen was the COmmunist party refused affiliation?	between 1921 and 1923
HOw many seats id Labour win in 1922?	142
Who was voted the first leader of the Labour Party?	Ramsay MacDonald
In what year did Ramsay MacDonald become the Labour PM?	1924
How many MP did they get in the election in 1924?	191
When was the Zinoviev letter published?	1924
After how long did the government collapse?	nine months
When did MacDonald submit the resignation of his ministers?	1931
What caused MacDonald to form a separate party?	he and his supporters were promptly expelled
Who won the 1931 election?	National Government
In what year was the Scottish and Welsh devolution rejected?	1979
How many votes did the vote of confidence lose by in 1979?	a single vote
In what year was Labour shown to have a slight lead?	1978
Who were some of the people striking in 1978-1979?	lorry drivers
Why were they striking?	higher pay
What was this strike called?	Winter of Discontent
When was the Labout party defeated?	1979
What year was Michael Foot elected as leader?	1980
What did four members of the Labour Party leave to creat?	Social Democratic Party
Why was the electoral college introduced?	widen the voting franchise
Who was Foot replaced by?	Neil Kinnock
Who was Neil Knnocks deputy?	Roy Hattersley
What years were the miners strike?	1984–85
What was the name of the miner's leader that was blamed for the strike?	Arthur Scargill
How many seats did Labour win in 2010?	258
How many seats did the Conservatives win?	307
WHen did Brown announce his intention to stand down?	10 May 2010
How much in contributions did the Labour party get from January to Marrch 2008?	£3 million
How far was the party in debt for the same time period?	£17 million
How far was the Conservative party in debt?	£12 million
How many more seats did LAbour get in 1987?	20
What was the merger of SDP and the Liberals called?	Liberal Democrats
Who did the NEC expel	activists and the two MPs who supported the group.
What year did Kinnock call for a general election?	1991
What was Kinnocks party theme?	"It's Time for a Change"
What was the original Tory lead percentage?	14
What did the percentage fall to?	8%
Who replaced Kinnock?	John Smith
When did Smith change the party's rules?	1993
What does OMOV stand for?	one member, one vote
WHen was Black Wednesday?	September 1992
What was Black Wednesday?	economic disaster
When was the recession declared over?	April 1993
When did Smith die?	May 1994
What did Smith die of?	a heart attack
What was the other name for the Labout Party?	"New Labour"
When was this branding first used?	1994
When did Labour publish a new draft manifesto?	1996
What was this manifesto called?	New Labour, New Life For Britain
Who did Tony Blair side with?	President George W. Bush
Why did Blair side with Bush?	the Iraq War
Who has an active Iraq War inquiry?	Sir John Chilcot
Was the idea of the Iraq War popular or unpopular in Western countries?	deeply unpopular
When did Blair announce he was quitting?	September 2006
When were the next elections?	May 2007
Who did Labour lose power in the election to?	Scottish National Party
Who was Blair replaced by?	his Chancellor, Gordon Brown
What was the party membership at the end of 2009?	156,205
What is the official name for Estonia?	the Republic of Estonia
Where is Estonia located in Northern Europe?	the Baltic region
What borders the north of Estonia?	the Gulf of Finland
What body of water borders Estonia on the west?	the Baltic Sea
What country borders south Estonia?	Latvia
When did Estonia start hoping for freedom?	the period of national awakening
Who was in control during the national awakening?	the Russian Empire
Who was in control of Estonia for most of the country's history?	Danish, Swedish and German rule
What year was the Republic of Estonia established?	1918
What war ended as Estonia was born?	World War I
What features describe Estonia as a developed nation?	high-income economy and high living standards
What standard of living does Estonia rank well in?	the Human Development Index
What country performs well in evaluation of economic freedom, civil liberties, and education?	Estonia
What year did Estonia rank third in press freedom?	2012
What financial institution is associated with Estonia?	the Nordic Investment Bank
When did political subgroups begin to appear in Estonia?	first centuries AD
What subdivision was associated with the province?	kihelkond
What subdivision was associated with the land?	maakond
What type of structure did most provinces have?	fortress
Who commanded the defense of an area?	The king or other highest administrative official elder
Which subdivision of Estonians lived in Saaremaa?	The Oeselians
Where is Saaremaa located?	the Baltic Sea
Where was the initial mention of the Oeselians?	Ptolemy's Geography III
Who described the sailboats of the Estonians as pirate ships?	Henry of Latvia
What year did the Oeselian pirates carry out a famous raid?	1187
Who did the Oeselian pirates atack?	the Swedish town of Sigtuna
What important figure was killed in the raid?	Swedish archbishop Johannes
What two ships were used by the Oeselian pirates?	the piratica and the liburna
What type of ship was the liburna?	merchant ship
What god did the Oeselians worship?	Tharapita
Who described Tharapita?	Henry of Latvia
Where was Tharapita born in his legend story?	on a forested mountain in Virumaa
What famous Viking God is associated with Tharapita?	Thor
What event formed a crater in Saaremaa?	meteor disaster
What was the capital of Danish Estonia?	Reval
What event preceded the founding of the capital?	the invasion of 1219
What structure was built at Toompea Hill?	the fortress of Castrum Danorum
What year was Reval granted with Lübeck city rights?	1248
What is the date of St. George's Night?	23 April 1343
When did the indigenous Estonians try to overthrow their Danish and German rulers?	St. George's Night
What belief system did the native Estonians try to remove?	the non-indigenous Christian religion
What event ended the uprising?	the invasion of the Teutonic Order.
What date did sovereignty shift from the state of Denmark?	1 November 1346
When was Terra Mariana established?	2 February 1207
Who ruled the southern parts of Estonia?	Livonian Brothers of the Sword
What year did the Livonian Brothers join the Teutonic Order?	1237
What year did the King of Denmark sell Estonia to the Teutonic Order?	1346
Who did Estonia rebel against in 1343?	German rule
When did the Battle of Grunwald take place?	1410
What event preceded the decline of the Teutonic Order?	the Battle of Grunwald
Who did the Estonians defeat in the Battle of Swienta?	the Livonian Order
What is date of the Battle of Swienta?	1 September 1435
When was the Livonian Confederation Agreement signed?	4 December 1435
When did the The Reformation in Europe start?	1517
Who led the The Reformation in Europe?	Martin Luther
What was the year of Martin Luther's death?	1546
What parts of society did the Reformation change?	Language, education, religion and politics
What was the previous language of the church?	Latin
What form of servitude was eliminated?	serfdom
When did the Estonian nationalist movement begin?	19th century
The development of Estonian national identity was accompanied with what era?	the Age of Awakening
Who were the leaders of the Age of Awakening?	Johann Voldemar Jannsen, Jakob Hurt and Carl Robert Jakobson.
What capital of France was lost to the Nazi Germans?	Paris
When did the Soviet army initiate their blockade on Estonia?	14 June
What was the name of the Finnish aeroplane attacked by the Soviets?	Kaleva
Where was the destination of Kaleva?	Helsinki
Who commanded the defense of the Estonia to surrender?	the Estonian government
Who disarmed the Estonian Defence Forces?	the Red Army
What was the name of the single unit that didn't surrender?	the Estonian Independent Signal Battalion
When did the Estonian Independent Signal Battalion face off against the Soviets?	21 June
What date was Estonia annexed by the Soviets?	6 August 1940
Who annexed Estonia as the Estonian SSR?	the Soviet Union
The rules of joining a super power were ignored from what document?	the Estonian constitution
What system was used to decide on joining the Soviets?	elections
What date did the Germans invade the Soviets?	22 June 1941
When did the Werhmacht cross the south border of Estonia?	7 July
What body of water did the Red Army retreat behind?	the Pärnu River
When did the Red Army fall back to the Parnu River?	12 July
When did the Germans invade the Soviet Union?	22 June 1941
When did the Werhmacht cross south border of Estonia?	7 July
Who helped the Germans take over Estonia?	the Estonian Forest Brothers
What did the majority of Estonians view the Germans as?	liberators
Who was in control of Estonia before the Germans?	the USSR
What did Estonia hope to restore after the removal of the USSR?	the country's independence
What did Germany take from Estonia for their war strategy?	Estonia's resources
Who did some Estonians join as an alternative to the Germans?	the Finnish Army
Who was the Finnish Army allied with?	the Nazis
Who composed the The Finnish Infantry Regiment 200?	Estonian volunteers in Finland
What year did most Estonians join the Germans after a new Soviet threat was emerging?	1944
How many Estonians chose to retreat or flee when in anticipation of another Soviet invasion?	tens of thousands
Which countries did most Estonians desire to flee to?	Finland or Sweden
What was the name of the refugee ship that Estonians boarded?	the SS Walnut
What date did the Soviet Council of Ministers issue a declaration to remove native Estonians?	12 January 1949
What percentage of Estonians died after deporation?	Half the deported perished
When were the deported Estonians allowed to return?	the early 1960s
What event led to the return of Estonians back home?	Stalin's death
Who fought a guerrilla war against the Soviets?	the Forest Brothers
What political strategy only allowed major parts of of Estonia to be accessed by the Soviets?	Militarization
What sea islands were declared border zones?	Saaremaa and Hiiumaa
What document did people need to travel to the border zones?	permit
What was established in the city of Paldiski?	A notable closed military installation
What did most Western countries view as an illegal claim by the USSR?	the annexation of Estonia
What relationship did Western countries continue with Estonia?	diplomatic relations
What institution did Western countries refuse to recognize?	the Estonian SSR
What decade started the push for Estonian independence?	1980s
What year did the Singing Revolution occur?	1989
What was the demonstration of the Singing Revolution trying to fight for?	independence
How many people created a chain of solidarity that went Estonia and other countries?	more than two million people
What was the name of the human chain?	the Baltic Way
What is the length of the border that Estonia shares with Lativa?	267 kilometers
What is the length of the border that Estonia shares with Russia?	290 kilometers
What document established the border between Russia and Estonia?	the 1920 Tartu Peace Treaty
What body of water borders Estonia?	the Baltic Sea
What is the average elevation of Estonia?	50 metres (164 ft)
What is Estonia's highest mountain point?	the Suur Munamägi
How tall is the the Suur Munamägi?	318 metres (1,043 ft)
What section of the temperate climate zone does Estonia reside?	northern part
What is the similar trait of Estonia's four seasons?	near-equal length
What is the average temperature of the Baltic Islands?	16.3 °C (61.3 °F)
What is the warmest month in Estonia?	July
What is the largest administrative subdivision in Estonia?	A maakond
What is the county government in Estonia called?	Maavalitsus
A Maavanem holds what position in Estonia?	county governor
Who represents the national government on a local level?	Maavanem
Who is the leader of Estonia's government?	the Prime Minister of Estonia
What political structure aids the Prime Minister?	a multi-party system
The political scene of Estonia is similar to other countries in what continent?	Northern Europe
Who is Europe's longest serving Prime Minister?	Andrus Ansip
What position do the citizens of Estonia elect for a four year term?	The Parliament of Estonia
What year did the Estonians create a constitutional document for their modern political system?	1992
How many representatives are in the Estonian parliament?	101 members
What can the Estonian parliament do in regards to treaties?	ratify and denounce international treaties
Who chooses high state officials of Estonia?	The Riigikogu
Who does the government have to explain their actions to?	the Riigikogu
What can the Riigikogu monitor for abuse of influence?	activities of the executive power
Who establishes the executive branch of Estonia?	the Prime Minister of Estonia
Who has to approve the Government of Estonia after it is nominated by the President?	parliament
How many ministers serve in the government?	twelve
Who has the ability to assign other ministers?	The Prime Minister
What is the most amount of ministers that a Prime Minister can assign?	three
What is another name for the governing body of ministers?	the cabinet
What strategy does the cabinet execute?	domestic and foreign policy
What major responsibility does the cabinet hold?	everything occurring within the authority of executive power
What digital technology as Estonia been advacning?	Internet voting
What year did the first internet vote occur in local Estonia elections?	2005
What year did the first internet vote occur in Estonia parliamentary elections?	2007
In 2007, how many Estonians used internet voting?	30,275
What document declares supreme power for the people?	the Constitution of Estonia
Who holds supreme judicial power in Estonia?	the Supreme Court or Riigikohus
How many judges are on Estonia's supreme court?	nineteen
How many years does the Chief justice serve?	nine
What date did Estonia join the League of Nations?	22 September 1921
What date did Estonia join the United Nations?	17 September 1991
What date did Estonia join NATO?	29 March 2004
What date did Estonia join the European Union?	1 May 2004
What type of foreign policy has Estonia sought after getting their independence?	close co-operation
What were the most important foreign policy priorities?	accession into NATO and the European Union
What trend has accompanied Estonia's cooperation with Western powers?	deterioration in relations with Russia
Which Baltic countries have cooperated with Estonia since the early 1990s?	Latvia and Lithuania
What is the combined group of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly and the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers?	The Baltic Council
What is the name of the joint group that Estonia shares with Denmark and 7 other countries?	Nordic-Baltic Eight
What year did Parliamentary co-operation between the Baltic Assembly and Nordic Council start?	1989
What has been a major factor in the restoration of Estonia after winning their independence?	closer ties with the Nordic countries
When did Toomas Hendrik Ilves deliver his speech?	December 1999
Who expressed a speech called "Estonia as a Nordic Country"?	Toomas Hendrik Ilves
What year did the foreign ministry hold an exhibit exploring the Nordic ties of Estonia?	2003
When did Estonia join the European Union's Nordic Battle Group?	2005
What government institution did Estonia continue to show desire in joining?	the Nordic Council
What percentage of Estonia's foreign trade was held by Russia in 1992?	92%
What percentage of Estonia exports are sent to Nordic countries?	42%
What is the name of Estonia's Army?	Maavägi
What is the name of Estonia's Navy?	Merevägi
What is the name of Estonia's Air Force?	Õhuvägi
What name describes the combined body of all Estonia military?	the Estonian Defence Forces
Which countries aid Estonia in trilateral defense strategies?	Latvia and Lithuania
What joint military educational academy does Estonia share with Baltic Countries?	the Baltic Defence College
Where is the Baltic Defence College located?	Tartu
When were the Baltic states asked to join NORDEFCO?	January 2011
Who have been jointly working on protection against cyberwarfare?	The Ministry of Defence and the Defence Forces
What year was a declaration of e-military introduced?	2007
What event in 2007 led to a need for e-military action?	massive cyberattacks
When was the Computer Emergency Response Team of Estonia established?	2006
What institution views the economy of Estonia as high income?	the World Bank
What was the GDP of Estonia in 2015?	$28,781
What countries share similar levels of GDP with Estonia?	Slovak Republic and Lithuania
Where is Estonia ranked in the 2015 Index of Economic Freedom?	8th
How much of consumed electricity does Estonia produce by itself?	75%
What percentage of electricity was produced with local oil shale in 2011?	about 85%
What alternative energy sources account for 9% of energy production?	wood, peat, and biomass
What percentage of electricity was produced from renewable energy in 2009?	6%
When did the global economic recession start?	2007
What trend led to the decrease of Estonia's GDP?	global economic recession
Who approved the supplementary negative budget drafted by the Estonian government?	Riigikogu
What year did Estonia start their economic rise based on strong exports?	2010
What Estonia view itself as after winning independence?	the gateway between East and West
What year did Estonia establish a flat tax?	1994
Who was the source of influence for the flat tax?	Milton Friedman
What was tax rate imposed on the personal income?	a uniform rate of 26%
What was the worst economic year for Estonia after winning independence?	1999
What year did Estonia reclaim their independence?	1991
What event played a major part in the decline of the economy during 1999?	the 1998 Russian financial crisis
When did Estonia unite with the WTO?	November 1999
What lacking resource does Estonia depend on other countries for?	energy
What type of energy production as many companies been investing in recent years?	renewable energy sources
What energy source has been increasing in Estonia?	wind power
What is total amount of energy production from wind power?	nearly 60 MW
In what region does Estonia hold one of the highest per capita income levels?	Eastern
Being close to what commercial area gives Estonia a competitive advantage?	Scandinavian markets
What is a major trait of the Estonian employed workers?	highly skilled
What is the largest city in Estonia?	Tallinn
When did a huge deficit and rising inflation place pressure on Estonia's currency?	2007
What area of commerce did Estonia need to expand?	export-generating industries
How much electricity is imported by Estonia annually?	200 million kilowatt hours
How much electricity is exported by Estonia annually?	1.562 billion kilowatt hours
How much money did Estonia receive from European Union Structural Funds between 2007 and 2013?	53.3 billion kroons (3.4 billion euros)
What year was the start of investments from the European Union Structural Funds?	2007
What year was the end of investments from the European Union Structural Funds?	2013
What period did the amount of ethnic Estonians drop by 61%?	Between 1945 and 1989
What trend caused the drop of ethnic Estonians?	mass immigration of urban industrial workers from Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus
Who ordered large scales of deportations and executions?	Joseph Stalin
What year did minorities in Estonia make up more than a third of the country?	1989
How did Estonians view the demographic change of less ethnic Estonians?	a national catastrophe
What Russian institutions were removed in the decade following Estonia's reclaim of independence?	Russian military bases
What percentage of Estonians were ethnic in 2006?	69%
What number of Estonia's counties are over 80% ethnic Estonian?	Thirteen
How many counties are in Estonia?	15
Which county in Estonia is the most uniform?	Hiiumaa
What percentage accounts for the total number people living in Hiiumaa that are ethnic Estonians?	98.4%
What number describes the percentage of Russian Estonians?	25.6%
What year was the Estonian Cultural Autonomy law established?	1925
In 1925, what rule did Estonia create that was unique in Europe?	The Estonian Cultural Autonomy law
How many minorities were granted cultural autonomies?	more than 3,000 people
What groups of minorities could elect a cultural council before the Soviet occupation?	Germans and Jewish minorities
What document labeled the the description of the citizenship policy of Estonia as "discriminatory"?	The 2008 United Nations Human Rights Council report
What percentage of Estonian Russians have though of going back to Russia?	5%
What proportion of Estonian Russians see themselves as different from their Russian counterparts?	more than half
What guarantees freedom of religion for Estonian citizens?	Estonia's constitution
Estonia's constitution declares the division of what parts of society?	separation of church and state
What individual privacy rights are citizens granted?	belief and religion
What percentage of Estonians claim no religion?	75.7%
What is the major group that believes in Eastern Orthodox Christianity?	Russian minority
Which religious group is the second largest with 150,000 members?	the Russian Orthodox Church
What religious group do Catholics in Estonia follow?	Latin Apostolic Administration of Estonia
What language does Estonian share similar words with?	Germanic
What proportion of vocabulary did Estonia borrow from Germany?	nearly one third
What standard language did Estonia adopt during German rule?	High German
What percentage of the Estonia language includes Low Saxon words?	about 15 percent
What are the three levels of higher learning in Estonia?	bachelor's, master's, and doctoral studies
What medical fields have their bachelor's and master's levels combined into one unit?	basic medical studies, veterinary, pharmacy, dentistry
What do Estonian public universities have more of than higher education institutions?	autonomy
What is the largest private university in Estonia?	Estonian Business School
What is the main science institution in Estonia?	The Estonian Academy of Sciences
What is the strongest research body that executes fundamental and applied research?	the National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics
What decade were the first computer centers created in Estonia?	the late 1950s
What cities were the locations of the first computer centers?	Tartu and Tallinn
What virtues does modern Estonian society promote?	liberty and liberalism
What size and power of government is popular in Estonia?	limited government, discouraging centralised power and corruption
What is a highly prized fixture of Estonian society?	free education
What ideal does Estonia hold towards the environment?	closeness to nature
What institute provides education in art, design, and media?	The Estonian Academy of Arts
What institute promotes awareness of native culture?	Viljandi Culture Academy of University of Tartu
What parts of native culture does the Viljandi Culture Academy highlight?	native construction, native blacksmithing, native textile design
How many Estonian museums existed in 2010?	245
What name describes the Estonian Song Festivals?	Laulupidu
What year did the tradition of Laulupidu start?	1869
How many people celebrated Laulupidu in 2004?	about 100,000 people
Where does Laulupidu usually take place?	the Tallinn Song Festival Grounds
When does Laulupidu occur?	every five years in July
What year did Estonia win the Eurovision Song Contest?	2001
What year did Estonia host the Eurovision Song Contest?	2002
Who performed the song "Everybody"?	Tanel Padar and Dave Benton
What performer has represented Estonia two different times?	Maarja-Liis Ilus
What was the first ever Estonian song to hit the popular European charts?	"Rändajad" by Urban Symphony
What event preceded the domination of Estonia by different European powers?	the Northern Crusades
Which three nations occupied Estonia up until 1918?	Germany, Sweden, and Russia
What era contains the oldest records of written Estonia works?	the 13th century
What document dated in 1241 contains place and family names?	The Liber Census Daniae
Who was the most famous prose writer in early Estonian history?	Oskar Luts
What is the name of lyrical novel written by Oskar Luts?	Kevade
What is the name of the book written by Anton Hansen Tammsaare?	Truth and Justice
Who wrote a book detailing Estonia's rise from peasants to independence?	Anton Hansen Tammsaare
Which medieval town is on the UNESCO World Heritage List?	Tallinn
When were the preserved hill forts in Estonia built?	pre-Christian times
What institutional structures still exist from medieval times?	castles and churches
What factors have influenced Estonian food for most of their history?	seasons and simple peasant food
What are the most common foods in Estonia?	black bread, pork, potatoes, and dairy products.
What fresh items do Estonians traditionally enjoy in summer and spring?	berries, herbs, vegetables
What food gathering behaviors are now seen as hobbies in modern Estonian culture?	Hunting and fishing
What physical activity plays a major part in Estonian society?	Sport
What year did Estonia declare independence from Russia?	1918
What event did Estonia compete in as a nation for the first time ever?	the 1920 Summer Olympics
What year was Estonia annexed by Russia?	1940
What city hosted the 1980 Summer Olympics Sailing regatta?	Tallinn
What year did Estonia's basketball team first compete in the Summer Olympics	1936
How many instances has Estonia appeared in the EuroBasket tournament?	four
Which Estonian football club competes in the EuroCup?	BC Kalev/Cramo
What is the name of second best basketball club in Estonia?	Tartu Ülikool/Rock
How many Estonian teams are in the Baltic Basketball League?	Six
What is one of the main causes of the turbulent history?	expansion of the Ottoman Empire
What was the main cause of the spread of Shtokavian?	population migrations
In which geographical region did Shtokavian become wide spread?	western Balkans
What was one of the major differences between the Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs?	religion
What is "Illyrian?"	language
What were some of the names given to language during period of foreign control?	"Slavic", "Illyrian", or according to region, "Bosnian", "Serbian" and "Croatian"
What specific historical event caused a group of religious and verbal differences in South Slavic dialect?	expansion of the Ottoman Empire
Why was Shtokavian the most widespread culture in the western Balkans?	population migrations
In which time period was Serbo-Croatian standardized?	mid-19th-century
What was the name of the document that standardized Serbo-Croatian?	Vienna Literary Agreement
What were both Serbian and Croatian standards based off of?	Eastern Herzegovinian
What was Serbo-Croatian the official language for in the 20th century?	Kingdom of Yugoslavia
Which additional language was added as an official language after the breakup of Yugoslavia?	Bosnian
What were both Serbian and Croation standards based on?	Shtokavian subdialect, Eastern Herzegovinian
Which language officially served the Kingdom of Yugoslavia?	Serbo-Croatian
What ethnic names does Serbo-Croatian associate with?	Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, and sometimes Montenegrin and Bunjevac
What kind of phonology do South Slavic languages have?	simple
How many consonants are in the Serbo-Croatian alphabet?	twenty-five
What is the default sentence structure for the Serbo-Croatian language?	subject–verb–object
What kind of language is Serbo-Croatian?	pro-drop
Other than Gaj's Latin alphabet, what other written language can Serbo-Croatian be written in?	Serbian Cyrillic
How many vowels does the Serbo-Croatian language have?	five
How many consonants does the Serbo-Croatian language have?	twenty-five
From where does Serbo-Croatian derive its grammar?	Common Slavic
Which alphabets can be used to express the Serbo-Croatian language?	Serbian Cyrillic or Gaj's Latin
When was the term Serbo-Croatian first used?	1824
Who popularized the term Serbo-Croatian?	Jernej Kopitar
Aside from the Ottoman Empire, which other empire did the Serb and Croat lands in the mid 19th century belong to?	Austrian
In which region of land was the Serbo-Croat language referred to as "Bosnian"?	Bosnia and Herzegovina
What is an example of a political text where the term Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian was used to describe the language?	Hague War Crimes tribunal
Did South Slav languages develop coherently or independently?	independently
What were the names given to the various dialects predating the 19th century?	"Illyric", "Slavic", "Slavonian", "Bosnian", "Dalmatian", "Serbian" or "Croatian"
Who first used the term Serbo-Croatian in 1824?	Jacob Grimm
For what reason is the term "Serbo-Croatian" controversial today?	prejudice that nation and language must match
Which dialect did writers and linguists of both Serbian and Croatian backgrounds wish to use as their common standard language?	Shtokavian
Why was Shtokavian suggested as a common language base?	most widespread dialect
What 1850 document formally declared the intent to create a unified standard?	Vienna Literary Agreement
After whose death in 1907 was the "Bosnian" name changed to "Serbo-Creation"?	administrator von Kállay
What is the term used for books that lay out spelling rules?	pravopis
Which language was that of 3/4 of the population?	Serbo-Croatian
Of the two Serbo-Croatian variants, which had twice as many speakers as the other?	Serbian
What three noun genders does Serbo-Croatian have?	masculine, feminine, and neuter
Where are adjectives properly placed in the Serbo-Croatian language?	in front of the noun they modify
Which number in the Serbo-Croatian language is treated as an adjective?	one [jedan]
What is the term used when shifing the acent to the next preceding syllable?	"Neoshtokavian retraction"
Which dialects did not follow the Neoshtokavian retraction?	Chakavian, Kajkavian and the Old Shtokavian
Where can one look for memorization clues concerning accent positions?	Comparative and historical linguistics
Serbo-Croatian is the only Slavic language to use what two scripts together?	Latin and Cyrillic
Which version, Latin or Cyrillic, is most commonly used?	Latin
How many extra letters does the Croatian Latin alphabet have?	five
What is a dialect continuum?	each dialect has some similarities with the neighboring one, and differences grow with distance.
What caused the dialect continuum to become fractured?	migrations from the 16th to 18th centuries resulting from the spread of Ottoman Empire on the Balkans
Contrary to the 16th and 18th centuries, what caused migrations in the 20th century?	urbanization and wars
Which dialect covers more area than all other dialects combined?	Štokavian
What is morphology to a language?	tense system
What has caused Stokavian to become more widely spoken?	migrations caused by Ottoman Turkish conquest of the Balkans
How many standard variants of the Serbo-Croatian are spoken?	four
In which areas are the four standard Serbo-Croatian variants spoken?	Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Who concluded that Serbo-Croatian is a pluricentric language?	Daniel Bunčić
Who believes Serbo-Croatian is one language with multiple variants?	Enisa Kafadar
Is it the majority or minority opinion that two different standard languages existed and overlapped at some historical point?	majority
Who stated that the argument between pluricentric or dual standard classifications has been the "longest, most serious, and most acrid discussion in 21st century Croatian culture?"	Igor Mandić
Which Croatian linguist agrees with Igor Mandic and feels that Serbo-Croatian language is pluricentric?	Croatian linguist Snježana Kordić
Which language groups lived in Dalmation city-states prior to the 19th century?	Italian or Slavic
Today's Croatian language has its roots in what other language?	Old Croatian
Prior to the 19th century, why was it irrelevant whether a person spoke Croatian or Serbian?	two languages were not distinguished by most speakers
To which group did the people of the Catholic faith refer to themselves primarily?	Catholic Christendom
After allowing for their religion, did the people of the Catholic faith see themselves as Serbian or Croatian?	Croatian
Ivan Broz stated that a Dalmatian identifiying as a Serb was just as foreign as what two other ethnicities?	Macedonian or Greek
What was the first book published in Serbo-Croatian?	Glagolitic Missale Romanum Glagolitice (1483)
For what was "Evangel from Reims" named?	the town of its final destination
In what year was the first book printed in Serbo-Croatian?	(1483)
Which agreement was signed in 1954 by writers, linguists, and literary critics?	Novi Sad Agreement
On what principle did the Novi Sad Agreement focus upon?	equal status
Who was given the task of creating a dictionary in the Novi Sad Agreement?	Matica hrvatska and Matica srpska
Which tense indicates that an action hasn't finished?	imperfective
Which two states do Shtokavian verbs have?	perfective or imperfective
When is the perspective aspect of a verb used?	action was completed, instantaneous, or of limited duration
To what did the ending -ei evolve into in Ijekavian Neostokavian?	-io
What is the western equivalent of the prefix "pre"?	prije
Why did pre or prije develop rather than the symboled "pre"?	due to potential ambiguity with pri
What is the meaning of "pri"?	approach, come close to
All Slavic vernaculars were called what among Romans?	(Illyrian)
Who is considered the most competent Serbian scientist on language?	Milan Rešetar
Where was Milan Resetar born?	Dubrovnik
Which language does Milan Resetar state that Dubrovnik derived from?	Serbian
What opinions do Croatian Nationalists have on the language issue?	they speak an entirely separate language from Serbs and Bosnians
What opinions do Croatian Nationalists have on the language issue?	they speak an entirely separate language from Serbs and Bosnians
Which language did Ljudevit Gaj and Vuk Karadzic prefer?	Neoštokavian-Ijekavian
Where is the Neostokavian-Ijekavian language predominantely spoken?	Bosnia and Herzegovina
How do Serbian nationalists feel about the Croatians using their language?	Croats have "taken" or "stolen" their language
In which province are Serbian and Croatian both languages offial?	Vojvodina
To what should the language be referred to instead of "Bosnian"?	"Bosniak" (bošnjački)
In what elementary grades is Bosnian an optional course?	1st and 2nd
What is Alaska's total population according to the 2015 Census?	738,432
How many of Alaska's residents reside in the Anchorage area?	Approximately half
Which industries are most prevalent in Alaska's economy?	fishing, natural gas, and oil
How does Alaska compare in size to other US states?	largest state in the United States by area
Where does Alaska rank in population comparative to other US states?	3rd least populous
What are the contiguous states sometimes called?	"the Lower 48"
What is Alaska's capital city?	Juneau
How many miles are between Alaska and Washington state?	500
Which set of islands extend into the Eastern Hemisphere?	Aleutian Islands
Which forest is the largest national forest in the US?	Tongass National Forest
Which city was Alaska's former capital?	Sitka
What is the area closest to the continental US called?	Panhandle or Inside Passage
Where did most settlement occur after the Louisiana Purchase?	Panhandle or Inside Passage
Which area contains the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field?	The North Slope
What is the northernmost city in the US?	Barrow
What resource is the North Slope known for?	massive reserves of crude oil
How much tidal shoreline does Alaska have in miles?	nearly 34,000 miles
On which island is Mount Shishaldin located?	Unimak Island
What do geoligists believe is unique about Wrangellia?	actively undergoing continent building
What is most impressive about Mount Shishaldin in comparison to Mount Fuji?	most perfect volcanic cone on Earth
How high does Mount Shishaldin rise above sea level?	10,000 feet (3,048 m)
What percentage of Alaska is maintained by the US federal government?	65%
What types of areas are managed by the federal government as public lands?	national forests, national parks, and national wildlife refuges
How many acres is the Bureau of Land Management in charge of?	87 million
How much of the state is controlled by the Bureau of Land Management?	23.8%
What is the world's largest wildlife refuge?	The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
How many acres of its land does the state of Alaska own?	101 million acres
How much land is the state of Alaska provided by the Alaska Statehood Act?	101 million acres (41 million hectares)
Why aren't homestead and subdivision areas more popular?	remote and roadless locations
Which group claims it is Alaska's largest private land owner?	Doyon, Limited
What privelege do private Alaskan corporations have that its public citizens do not?	hold title (including subsurface title in many cases
Was a law enacted in 1991 allowing corporations to sell land holdings or was it repealed?	repealed before they could take effect
How much precipitation does Juno receive each year?	over 50 in
In what region of Alaska is the daytime temperature above freezing during summer?	Southeast
Southern Alaska has what two Koppen climate classifications?	mid-latitude oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfb) in the southern sections and a subarctic oceanic climate (Köppen Cfc) in the northern parts
How much precipitation does Ketchikan receive each year?	over 150 in (380 cm)
What two bodies of water influene the climate in Western Alaska?	Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska
Is precipitation varied or uniform in Western Alaska?	tremendous amount of variety
Which area of Western Alaska is techincally a desert?	the region around Kotzebue Sound
How much precipitation does the desert area of Western Alaska receive?	less than 10 in (25 cm) of precipitation annually
Which President allowed Tsimshian settlers to inhabit Annette Island?	Grover Cleveland
What epidemic resulted in numerous deaths between the 1830s and 1860s?	smallpox
In what year did the Tsimshian people arrive in Alaska?	1887
Which Alaskan indigenous group is now well-known for their art?	the Haida
Which indigenous group is controversially known for hunting caribou on protected land?	The Gwich'in people of the northern Interior region
The Inuplat population inhabit what areas?	The North Slope and Little Diomede Island
Which Alaskan indigenous group was the fist to be exploited by Russians?	Aleut
During what time period do some researchers believe Russians settled in Alaska?	17th century
Whose expedidion potentially landed in Alaska during a storm and founded a settlement in 1648?	Semyon Dezhnyov
Whom did Nikolai Durkin say lived in a village on the Kheuveren River?	"bearded men" who "pray to the icons"
During which years did Nikolai Durkin visit Alaska?	1764–1765
What event brought thousands of people to Alaska in the 1890s to early 1910s?	gold rushes
What year was Alaska officially incorporated as a territory?	1912
In what year was Alaska's capital officially changed to Juneau?	1906
Which industries did European settlers in Alaska begin?	fishing and logging
From what countries were European settlers in Alaska?	Norway and Sweden
On what day was Alaska officially named a state?	January 3, 1959
In what year did Alaskan Statehood gain momentum following a territorial referendum?	1946
What cause did James Wickersham focus on in his early Congressional tenure?	Statehood for Alaska
From which areas did Alaskan supporters face political challenges?	mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within Alaska
On what day was Alaskan Statehood finally approved by Congress?	July 7, 1958
What major event happened in Alaska on March 27, 1964 killing 133 people?	Good Friday earthquake
Did the earthquake or resulting tsunamis and landslides do the most damage to Alaskan communities?	resultant tsunamis and landslides
How did the Good Friday earthquake compare to other documented earthquakes in the world?	second-most-powerful earthquake in the recorded history of the world
Which factors concerning the Good Friday earthquake do some believe caused a higher survival rate?	The time of day (5:36 pm), time of year and location of the epicenter
How did the Good Friday earthquake compare to the 1989 San Francisco earthquake?	over one thousand times more powerful
At least how many native Alaskan languages exist, according to the Alaska Native Language Center?	at least 20
What are the two main native Alaskan language families?	Eskimo–Aleut or Na-Dene
How many of Alaska's native languages are in danger of becoing dormant or extinct languages according to a 2014 study?	nearly all
A study completed in what year found that nearly all of Alaska's native languages are at risk of becoming extinct?	2014
According to the Association of Religion Data in 2010, what percentage of Alaskans are members of a relgious congregation?	34%
Which religion is most prevalent in Alaska?	Evangelical Protestants
How does Alaska compare with other states in church membership?	least religious states of the USA
Which other nearby states are also considered to be less religious than others?	Washington and Oregon
Which church was established in Kodiak in 1795?	First Russian Orthodox Church
What was one way in which Russian immigrants integrated into Alaskan society?	Intermarriage with Alaskan Natives
Alaska has the largest population of what religious lifestyle of any state?	Quaker population
What religious tradition may be a problem for Alaskan Jews?	observance of halakha
What was the per capita personal income in Alaska in 2007?	$40,042
How does Alaska's per capita personal income rank against other states?	15th in the nation
How much of Alaskan state revenue comes from petroleum extraction?	80%
Beyond petroleum, what is Alaska's largest export?	seafood, primarily salmon, cod, Pollock and crab
In which Alaskan areas are military bases prevalent as an important part of the local economy?	Fairbanks North Star, Anchorage and Kodiak Island boroughs, as well as Kodiak
What program allows Alaska to keep low taxes?	Federal subsidies
What are some of Alaska's industrial products?	crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, gold, precious metals, zinc and other mining, seafood processing, timber and wood products
How, specifically, have tourists helped the local economy in Alaska?	supporting local lodging
What other states rank higher than Alaska in crude oil production?	Texas, North Dakota, and California
How does Alaska rate in comparison with other states in crude oil production?	fourth
Which area in Alaska is the nation's second highest-yielding oil field?	Prudhoe Bay
How many barrels of oil does Prudhoe Bay produce per day?	400,000
Prudhoe Bay is second place in production to what other oil field in the US?	North Dakota's Bakken Formation
How much oil can the Trans-Alaska Pipeline transport per day?	up to 2.1 million barrels
How much recoverable gas is still undiscovered in Alaska, according to the US Geological Survey?	85.4 trillion cubic feet
Alaska's coastline also has potential in which two environmentally friendly energy types?	wind and geothermal energy
Alaska's large rivers have potential for what environmentally friendly type of energy production?	hydroelectric
Why were alternative energy sources judged uneconomical in 2001?	low (less than 50¢/gal) fuel prices, long distances and low population
How much does gas cost in Alaska, in comparison to the national average?	30–60¢ higher
What are some reasons why gas prices may vary in Alaska, especially?	transportation costs, seasonal usage peaks, nearby petroleum development infrastructure
What does Alaska's economy heavily rely on?	diesel fuel
What purpose does diesel fuel have in Alaska?	heating, transportation, electric power and light
What is the Alaska Permanent Fund?	constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues
In what year was the Alaska Permanent Fund established?	1976
Why was the Alaska Permament Fund established?	to manage a surplus in state petroleum revenues from oil
Who originally proposed the Alaska Permanent Fund?	Governor Keith Miller
Why did Governor Keith Miller propose the Alaska Permanent Fund before the Prudhoe Bay sale?	fear that the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of the sale (which amounted to $900 million) at once
Was Alaska's Constitution written to encourage or discourage state funds being used for a particular purpose?	discourage
Why is the Permanent Fund an exception to the premise of the Alaskan Constitution?	political climate of distrust existing during the time of its creation
Where is the principal of the Permanent Fund invested?	outside Alaska
How much was the initial principal of the Permanent Fund?	$734,000
How high has the principal of the Permanent Fund grown?	$50 billion
How long must an Alaskan have lived in the state in order to receive a Permanent Fund Dividend?	minimum of 12 months
What percentage of the Permanent Fund is divided betwen Alaska's eligible residents?	5%
When did disembursements from the Permanent Fund begin?	1982
How much was the initial disembursement from the Permanent Fund?	$1,000
Which crops are produced in the Delta-area?	barley and hay
Small farms west of Fairbanks cater to whom?	restaurants, the hotel and tourist industry, and community-supported agriculture
Which area did Hammond develeop during his second term?	Delta Junction area
What causes food in Alaskan cities to be relatively expensive?	shipping costs
How high can the cost of transport be in some remote areas?	50¢ per pound ($1.10/kg)
Which state in the US is the only to have higher fuel prices than Alaska?	Hawaii
How much does it cost to transport a gallon of milk in some rural areas of Alaska?	$3.50
Why is there a debate about moving the capital of Alaska to another town?	Juneau, is not accessible by road
Which part of Alaska has no road system connecting it to other areas?	western part
Compared to the rest of the US, does Alaska has many or few road connections?	few
What year was the Alaska Railroad built?	around 1915
To what does "The Railbelt" refer?	region served by ARR tracks
Which development in 1915 played a key role in developing Alaska?	Alaska Railroad (ARR)
The ARR was one of the last railroads in the US to use what?	cabooses
When are cabooses still used occasionally?	some gravel trains
When was the Parks Highway constructed?	1970s
What is the name of Alaska's ferry system?	the Alaska Marine Highway
Which other Ferry group works alongside the Alaska Marine Highway to coordinate travel?	The Inter-Island Ferry Authority
Which areas does the Alaska Marine Highway serve?	southeast, the Gulf Coast and the Alaska Peninsula
Which two cities are served by major airlines?	Anchorage and, to a lesser extent Fairbanks
What is the most efficient means of transportation into and out of Alaska?	air travel
How many visitors came to Alaska between 2012-2013?	almost 2 million
Which service allows government to subsidise regular air travel in Alaska?	Essential Air Service program
Which airline offers in-state travel with jet-service?	Alaska Airlines
What are some Alaskan regional hubs?	Bethel, Nome, Kotzebue, Dillingham, Kodiak
What are the names of a few regional Alaskan airlines?	Ravn Alaska, PenAir, and Frontier Flying Service
What model is the most popular aicraft in Alaska?	Cessna Caravan
How much of the subsidized bulk mail delivery program goes to carriers who offer passenger service?	70%
Which plane is considered quintessentially Alaskan?	bush seaplane
Where is the busiest seaplane base in the world?	Lake Hood
Which state had the most pilots per capita than any other US state?	Alaska
Lake Hood is located next to what International Airport?	Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport
Which Alaskan way of transport is more for sport than for transportation?	dogsled
Which dog-sled race in Alaska is the most famous?	Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race
What does the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race commemorate in Alaskan history?	the famous 1925 serum run to Nome
Why were sled-dogs used to deliver medicine to Nome in 1925?	all other means of transportation had failed
Which dogsled race most accurately follows the route of the 1925 serum run?	"Serum Run"
Which two companies provide internet and data transport to Alaska?	GCI and Alaska Communications
In what year was a project to connect Asia and rural Alaska announced?	2011
How much money did the federal government contribute via stimulus to the connectvitiy between Asia and Alaska?	$350 million
Which company owns and operates the Alaska United Fiber Optic System?	GCI
How does Alaska finance its state government operations?	petroleum revenues and federal subsidies
How many states in the US do not have sales tax?	five
How many US states do not collect an individual income tax?	seven
Which state has the lowest tax burden of the entire US?	Alaska
Which political party does Alaska generally support?	Republicans
How many elections have Democrats won in Alaska?	one
Which candidate was the only Democrat to win Alaska in a landslide election in 1964?	Lyndon B. Johnson
Which Democratic candidate was the first to win 40% of the vote in Alaska since 1964?	Barack Obama
The areas surrounding which university has been historically a Democratic stronghold?	University of Alaska Fairbanks
Which areas of Alaska have the highest Republican concentrations?	The Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the majority of Fairbanks (including North Pole and the military base), and South Anchorage
As of 2004, how many Alaskan residents refuse to select a political party?	well over half
Into how many recording districts is Alaska divided?	34
What is the function of an Alaskan recording district?	a mechanism for administration of the public record in Alaska
Which documents do recording districts universally use between areas?	acceptance criteria, fee schedule, etc.
What are CDPs?	census-designated places
How many incorporated cities and CDPs does Alaska have, according to the 2010 Census?	355
Are the majority of CDPs connected or disconnected from the North American road network?	unconnected
In what area are the majority of cities and CDPS located in Alaska?	"The Bush"
In 2010, what percent of Alaska's population did not live in a city or CDP?	2.88%
What four areas have not been established as CDPs by the Census Bureau?	Ketchikan, Kodiak, Palmer and Wasilla
Which seven CDPs were incorporated as part of the 1980 Census?	Clover Pass, Herring Cove, Ketchikan East, Mountain Point, North Tongass Highway, Pennock Island and Saxman East
In what year did Alaskan State Troopers become an official organization?	1941
What is different about a "Public Safety Officer" that distiguishes the position from a policeman?	have police training but do not carry firearms
What do wildlife enforcers regulate?	hunting and fishing regulations
What type of vehicles do Troopers operate?	a wide variety of land, air, and water patrol vehicles
What is Alaska's most prominent orchestra?	Anchorage Symphony Orchestra
Which company is Alaska's only professional opera?	The Anchorage Opera
What are a few of Alaska's noteworthy music festivals?	Alaska Folk Festival, the Fairbanks Summer Arts Festival, the Anchorage Folk Festival
Which Alaskan native starred in a film also set in Alaska?	Ray Mala
Where did actors on the set of The Magnificent live during their stay in Alaska?	"Camp Hollywood"
In what area of Alaska was Camp Hollywood located?	Northwest
Which chef was hired to prepare meals for the actors in The Magnificent?	from the Hotel Roosevelt in Hollywood
Which classical views about the method of science did Popper reject?	inductivist
Who proposed empirical falsification as the central principle of the scientific method?	Popper
What is necessary for a scientific theory to be falsified?	decisive experiments
Which account of knowledge did Popper contest?	classical justificationist
What is the term for Popper's non-justificational theory of criticism?	critical rationalism
In which city was Karl Popper born?	Vienna
What religion did Popper's family observe during his youth?	Lutheranism
Whose law firm did Popper's father join in Vienna?	Burgomaster Herr Grübl
What numerical range of volumes did Popper's father keep in his library?	12,000–14,000
What disposition regarding books did Popper inherit from his father?	bibliophile
At which age did Popper first attend university?	16
What political doctrine interested Popper in 1919?	Marxism
Which Austrian political party did Popper join as a youth?	Social Democratic Workers' Party of Austria
What incident killed several of Poppers Marxist political comrades?	street battle in the Hörlgasse
To which political philosophy did Popper continue to adhere after moving away from Marxism?	social liberalism
What trade did Popper enter as an apprentice?	cabinetmaker
What type of facility did Popper plan to open that would benefit from his furniture-making skills?	daycare
In which psychoanalysts clinics did Popper volunteer?	Alfred Adler
When did Popper become an ordinary student rather than a guest at university?	1922
For which vocation did Popper complete his university examinations?	elementary teacher
Who supervised Popper's doctorate?	Karl Bühler
What is an English translation of the title of Popper's doctoral thesis?	The question of method in cognitive psychology
What subjects was Popper authorized to teach in secondary school in 1929?	mathematics and physics
Whose rise to power motivated Popper to publish his work in hopes of obtaining an academic position abroad?	Nazism
In which work published in 1934 did Popper introduce his theories centered around falsifiability?	The Logic of Scientific Discovery
Where did Popper move in 1937?	New Zealand
Where was Popper's academic appointment in New Zealand?	Canterbury University College of the University of New Zealand
Which lifelong friend did Popper make in Dunedin?	John Carew Eccles
What philosophical fields did Popper teach at the London School of Economics?	logic and scientific method
Which Austrian school's failure to give Popper a directorship prompted him to return to the United Kingdom at the end of his life?	Ludwig Boltzmann Gesellschaft
How old was Popper when he died?	92
Which cemetery in Vienna received Popper's ashes?	Lainzer
Where are Popper's manuscripts kept now?	Hoover Institution at Stanford University
Which university has the contents of Popper's library?	Klagenfurt University
What was Popper's wife's name?	Josefine Anna Popper
Which award did Popper receive from the American Political Science Association?	Lippincott Award
What recognition did Austria bestow on Popper in 1986?	Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold for Services to the Republic of Austria
Who gave Popper its Humanist Laureate Award?	International Academy of Humanism
Which English monarch knighted Popper?	Queen Elizabeth II
Which central European university made Popper a fellow?	Charles University, Prague
In which year did Popper win the Karl Renner Prize?	1978
Which city made Popper part of its Ring of Honour in 1983?	Vienna
What award given by a Japanese foundation did Popper win in 1992?	Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy
Popper won the Dr. Leopold Lucas Prize in which year?	1981
What political philosophy that attracted Popper as a teenager had a profound influence on his thinking going forward?	Marxism
For a time during which year did Popper consider himself a communist?	1919
At which stage of life was Popper most strongly influenced by Marxist thinking?	teenage years
How did Popper feel about Marxism after only a short time associating with other Marxists?	disillusioned
What political ideology dominated Austrian politics in the decades before the second world war?	fascism
What key event in 1938 pushed Popper into exile from Austria?	the Anschluss
What political ideology do Popper's major works defend?	democratic liberalism
What form of political organization do Popper's works mainly critique?	totalitarianism
What was the Anschluss?	the annexation of Austria by the German Reich
Which two important psychologists did Popper view as advancing non-scientific theories?	Freud and Adler
Whose recent breakthrough in physics did Popper view as paradigmatic science?	Einstein
What quality of the theory of relativity did Popper believe made it proper science?	risky
What did Popper think psychoanalytic theory shared more feature with than real science ?	primitive myths
What could you not do to psychoanalytic theory that Popper believed crucial in genuine science?	falsify
According to Popper, a theory is scientific only is it is susceptible to what?	falsification
What key components of science are ineffective when brought to bear on non-scientific theories?	criticism or experiment
How did Popper characterize the wide applicability and immunity to criticism of psychoanalytic theory?	weaknesses
What term did Popper use for his philosophy?	critical rationalism
Which account of scientific method did Popper's repudiate?	the classical observationalist-inductivist account
What was Popper's position on classical empiricism?	rejection
According to Popper, what is the only way one can test scientific theories because they are necessarily abstract?	indirectly
Popper pointed out an important logical asymmetry between what two concepts?	verification and falsifiability
What does Popper say demarcates scientific theory from non-science?	falsifiability
What political theory did Popper say did not meet his falsifiability criterion?	Marxism
What branch of psychology was Popper critical of for not producing falsifiable theory?	psychoanalysis
Which of Popper's works addresses the improvement of scientific understanding of the world over time?	All Life is Problem Solving
Popper described the growth of scientific understanding as what kind of process?	evolutionary
What aspect of a scientific theory can never be fully verified, according to Popper?	truth content
What process in science is like the process of natural selection in nature?	error elimination
What is a better description for theories that survive scientific scrutiny than "more true?"	more "fit"
What is another term for the tentative theories enter the process of error elimination in science?	conjectures
Toward what does Popper believe scientific understandings progress?	more and more interesting problems
Popper's thoughts on falsification present a solution to the philosophical problem concerning what type of scientific reasoning?	induction
What parts of a theory are unnecessary before the simple theory is falsified?	additional conditions
Who presented a solution to the philosophical problem of induction centered around falsifiability?	Popper
Popper's rational approach opposes what technique sometimes used to remove contradictions in knowledge?	ad-hoc-measures
Which of Popper's students argued that rational criticism should be most widely applied?	W.W. Bartley III
What type of knowledge is not the only sphere of rational criticism, according to Popper's student W.W. Bartley III?	empirical
According to Popper, what is not grounds for doubt?	lack of justification
What principle of traditional philosophy did Popper take an anti-justificationist stance against?	principle of sufficient reason
What does Popper believe is essential to do to theories instead of justification?	eliminate errors
What don't we need to look for about theories in Popper's view?	good positive reasons
What is the term for the view that there are discoverable general laws constraining history's development?	historicism
What political forms did Popper believe historicism supported?	authoritarianism and totalitarianism
What unpredictable feature of the world did Popper say refuted historicism?	the growth of human knowledge
Which of Popper's works criticized the idea that history has an inexorable developmental path?	The Poverty of Historicism
Whose theory of truth did Popper read with intense interest in 1935?	Alfred Tarski
What theory of interest to Popper did Alfred Tarski publish in 1933?	semantic theory of truth
Tarski's theory overcame certain objections to what conception of truth?	truth as correspondence
What kind of realism did Popper believe Tarski's theory supported?	metaphysical
What term do philosophers give to the kind of theory Tarski proposed about truth?	deflationary
With what does Popper say Tarski's theory replaces the predicate "is true?"	"corresponds to the facts"
What concept did Tarski introduce to discuss the conditions for the truth of statements?	metalanguage
What two things does Popper argue Tarski's theory involves in an evaluation of truth?	assertions and the facts to which they refer
What term does Popper use that roughly means verisimilitude?	truthlikeness
Poppers notion of verisimilitude leaves no place for which kind of probabilities in the evaluation of scientific hypotheses?	subjective
What class of considerations did Popper believe were not important in scientific measurement?	epistemic
What is the logical content of hypotheses inversely proportional to in Popper's reasoning?	probability
What did Popper argue was objective and independent of its subject?	knowledge
How many different worlds or realities did Popper differentiate in Objective Knowledge?	three
What constituted World One in Popper's theory?	the physical world
Who produced the contents of World Three?	individual human beings
Which world's evolution corresponds to the growth of human knowledge?	World Three
Which of Popper's notions is often invoked in creation-evolution debates?	criterion of falsifiability
What kind of research program did Popper call Darwinism?	metaphysical
What phrase did Popper use to describe Darwinism's relation to proper falsifiable theories?	possible framework
Popper's philosophy is often applied in what political debate concerning biological science?	creation–evolution
Along with some creationists, Popper believed that evolution must have what quality to its progress?	goal-directed
Popper disagreed with creationists that whose hand must be directing evolution?	god
What kind of an entity did Popper believe the universe to be?	creative
What is the name of Popper's model of evolution?	spearhead
Popper's model of evolution is part of what family of models?	genetic pluralism
What directs the actions of organisms in Popper's biological model?	goals
Organisms' goals shift along with which notable genetic process?	Mutations
Which view of evolution emphasizing large changes in organisms' phenotypes does Popper oppose to his own?	hopeful monster
Which aspect of organisms changes most radically in the process of evolution Popper envisions?	behaviour
How does Popper describe the "monsters" that evolve in his view of evolutionary processes?	hopeful behavioural monster
What kind of Darwinism does Popper subscribe to in contrast to the naturalistic kind?	active
Which professor cited by Popper described the creation-evolution debate as "a storm in a Victorian tea-cup?"	C.E. Raven
What controversy involving science did Popper believe was sensationalized because of its connection with religion?	creation-evolution
In which year did C.E. Raven publish the remarks on creation-evolution quoted by Popper?	1943
What term does Popper use when describing creationism as a type of theory?	metaphysical
In which year did Popper give a secret interview concerning his views about God?	1969
Which term for his religious outlook did Popper prefer?	agnosticism
What did Popper believe were at the heart of religious disagreements, and should not be the cause of as much conflict as they are?	myths
Although he opposed organized religion, what attitude did Popper think should be taken toward it:	tolerant
What branch of philosophy did Popper advance the most?	philosophy of science
Which department did Popper found at the London School of Economics?	Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method
Which two major philosophers of science learned a great deal from Popper at the London School Economics?	Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend
What did Paul Feyerabend ultimate do to Popper's philosophy of science?	repudiated it entirely
Where did Popper establish a university department for the philosophy of science in 1946?	London School of Economics
Which other Austrian scholar and friend of Popper also worked near him at the London School of Economics?	Friedrich Hayek
What was Hayek's academic field?	Economics
In which year did Popper write Hayek a letter expressing his intellectual debt to him?	1944
Who did Popper say was the only thinker who might have had a greater influence on him than Hayek?	Alfred Tarski
Which of Hayek's publications was dedicated to Popper?	Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
What other contemporaneous school of thought is often confused with Popper's own contributions?	logical positivism
Popper has stressed that his description of scientific methodology should not be mistaken to apply to whom?	any particular scientist
At what level does Popper indicate his view of scientific methodology applies?	system or community
What kind of progress does science make given the methodology Popper describes?	slow but steady
What thesis says a scientific hypothesis is not testable in isolation from its system of theories?	Quine-Duhem
Which of Popper's works responds to critiques of naive falsificationism?	The Logic of Scientific Discovery
The planet Uranus' apparent failure to follow Newton's laws led to the discovery of which planet?	Neptune
According to Popper, the scientific selection process favors which type of theory?	more generally applicable
Popper believed he had already discussed similar ideas to Kuhn's about scientific communities in what work?	Logic of Discovery
What aspect of Kuhn's thinking did Popper criticize?	relativism
What did Popper say must be the beginning phase of science?	the critical discussion of myths
According to Popper, what second layer does scientific inquiry have that pre-scientific inquiry does not?	a critical attitude
What kind of criteria frequently used in science complicates the definitiveness of some hypotheses' falsification?	statistical
What other flaws complicate the problem of identifying faulty scientific hypotheses?	flaws in the evidence
According to Popper, what resolves conflicting hypotheses and observations in the long run?	the collective judgment of scientists
Which book by Houck points out logical flaws in Popper's falsificationism?	Science Versus Crime
Who argued that Popper's falsificationism was just as logically untenable as Logical Positivism's verificationism?	Carl Gustav Hempel
Who wrote the book Science Versus Crime which challenged the logic of falsificationism?	Houck
Which German psychologist and tutor of Popper may have originated some of Popper's ideas?	Otto Selz
Who claimed Otto Selz deserved credit for ideas published by Popper?	Michel ter Hark
What contributed to Otto Selz's cessation of work in 1933?	the rise of Nazism
What is the name of the 2004 paper that links Popper's work to that of his tutor Otto Selz?	Popper, Otto Selz and the rise of evolutionary epistemology
Popper is criticized for dismissing which major philosophers in his work?	Plato, Hegel and Marx
Which two prominent scientists advanced theories that John N. Gray claims would never have survived the scientific method Popper describes?	Darwin and Einstein
Which work by John Gray challenges Popper's falsificationism?	Straw Dogs
According to Gray, what should have falsified Einstein and Darwin's theories when first proposed?	available evidence
What kind of thesis does Gray advance about scientific progress?	irrationalist
Gray's approach aligns with which approach that Popper himself considered untenable?	inductivist
A possible rebuttal to Gray's argument appears in Popper's reply to which philosopher?	Imre Lakatos
What did general relativity do that made it tentatively acceptable when it was proposed?	explained the empirical refutations of Newton's theory
In contrast to Gray, which theory did Popper argue was at least equally consistent with Newton's on the available evidence?	Einstein's theory
Which type of theory is most falsifiable?	simplest
What school of philosophy does Popper's thinking on induction oppose?	positivism
For Popper, knowing that a theory is true is what?	impossible
What quality of a useful theory must be easily detectable?	its falsity
Who instigated the 1919 riot that reshaped Popper's political views?	Communists
The 1919 riot involving Popper's comrades was part of what larger political move?	a coup
Popper's critique of which doctrine has its origins in first-hand observation of communist agitation?	historicism
Which historically significant communist activist was associated with the 1919 riots in which some of Popper's friends were killed?	Béla Kun
What did the Marxist rioters believe would cause more death and suffering than their own agitation?	class struggle
What country did the mandolin originate from?	Italian
What does mandolin translate to?	small mandola
What musical family does the mandolin come from?	lute family
How is the mandolin usually played?	usually plucked with a plectrum or "pick"
How many courses does a mandolin commonly have?	four
What are the four common styles of mandolins?	the Neapolitan or round-backed mandolin, the carved-top mandolin and the flat-backed mandolin.
What is the round-back mandolin made of?	strips of wood, glued together into a bowl
Which style of mandolin has a shallower, arched back, and arched top?	round-back
Which form of music do Neapolitan mandolins feature?	European classical music and traditional music.
Which mandolin is commin in American Folk music and blue grass music?	Carved-top instruments
What did most of the development of the mandolin revolve around?	soundboard (the top)
Were premandolins quiet or loud instruments?	quiet instruments
What are modern mandolins' strings made of?	four courses of metal strings,
What is the most common soundboard shape?	generally round or teardrop-shaped
What are the sound holes covered with?	bordered with decorative rosettes or purfling
Who introduced the lute to Spain?	the Moors
What country helped transfer the lute from Arabian to European culture?	Sicily
Who brought the lute to Sicily?	Byzantine or later by Muslim musicians
What court held singer-lutenists after the Norman conquest?	Palermo
What building has ceeiling painting dedicated to the lutenists?	Palermo’s royal Cappella Palatina,
What is there currently confusion over?	eldest Vinaccia luthier who first ran the shop
Who is said to have ran the first shop?	Gennaro Vinaccia (active c. 1710 to c. 1788) and Nic
Where does the mandolin built by Antonio Vinaccia reside?	University of Edinburgh
Where does the mandolin built by Giuseppe Vinaccia reside?	University of Edinburgh
Where does the mandolin that Gaetano Vinaccia reside?	Conservatoire Royal de Musique in Brussels, Belgium.
What year was the beginning of the transition from mandolino to mandolin?	1744
Where did the mandolin grow in popularity?	in the streets where it was used by young men courting and by street musicians, and in the concert hall
When did the mandolin's popularity begin to fall?	After the Napoleonic Wars of 1815, however, its popularity began to fall
Who were two of the promiment players in the 19th century?	Bartolomeo Bortolazzi of Venice and Pietro Vimercati
What year did the export market for manodlins from Italy dry up?	1815
When did the mandolin's poplarity rebound?	Beginning with the Paris Exposition of 1878
What popular group performed at the Paris Exposition?	Estudiantes Españoles (Spanish Students)
When was it said that mandolin's popularity peaked?	early years of the 20th century.
What instrument was the mandolin confused with during the 1880's?	bandurria
What were formed worldwide that incorporated the mandolin famiy of instruments and other instruments as well?	Mandolin orchestras
When was the second decline of mandolin popularity?	early 20th century,
Why was the second decline in popularity not a strong as the first?	Thousands of people had learned to play the instrument
Who created the rasonator mandolin?	Luthiers
What are two types of new mandolins the Luthiers created?	mandolin-banjo and the electric mandolin
What types of music did musicians begin to play the mandolins in?	Celtic, Bluegrass, Jazz and Rock-n-Roll styles — and Classical too.
What happens to mandolin notes when plucked?	decay to silence
Do mandolin notes decay faster or slower than larger string instruments?	faster
What is tremolo?	rapid picking of one or more pairs of strings
What parts of the mandolin faciliate the tremolo technique?	paired strings
What is a plectrum?	pick
What kind of style does the Neapolitan mandolin have?	almond-shaped body resembling a bowl, constructed from curved strips of wood
How many strings does the Neapolitan mandolin have?	8
What are the Neapolitan mandolin made of?	metal strings
What sits on top or is flush with the sound table of the Mandolin?	hardwood fingerboard
How long is the scale commonly used on European roundbacks?	13-inch scale
Where did the Lombardic family of bowlback mandolins come from?	Milan and Lombardy
What do the Lombardic mandolins resemble more than modern mandolins?	mandolino or mandore
What differences do the Lombardic mandolins have from the Neapolitan mandolin?	They are shorter and wider
How many strings do the Lombardic mandolins have?	6 strings
Who was the developer of the Milanese mandolin?	Antonio Monzino
Who described the Lombardi mandolin as wider and shorter than the Neoapolitan mandolin?	Samuel Adelstein
How many strings do the regular mandolin's have?	4
What was the Lombardi Mandolin tuned to?	C, D, A, E, B, G.
How many frets did the Lombardi have?	20 frets
How many octaves did the Lombardi cover?	three octaves
Who popularised the Cremonese Mandolin?	Bartolomeo Bortolazzi
What was Bartolomeo Bortolazzi's popular mandolin method?	Anweisung die Mandoline von selbst zu erlernen nebst einigen Uebungsstucken von Bortolazzi
How many strings did the Cremonese Mandolin have?	four single-strings
Did Bortolazzi like playing the new wire strung mandolins?	uncomfortable to play
What did Bortolazzi say about the sound?	less pleasing...hard, zither-like tone
When was a new sytle of carved top and back construction mandolins created?	end of the 19th century
What was the new sytle of mandolins inspired from?	violin family instruments
What sytle did the new style of mandolins supplant?	European-style bowl-back
Who founded the Gibson Mandolin-Guitar Manufacturing Co, Limited?	Orville Gibson
What shape sounds holes do these styles of mandolins have?	two f-shaped soundholes like a violin (F-5 and A-5), or an oval sound hole (F-4 and A-4 and lower models)
Where are the soundholes located?	directly under the strings
What mandolin is associate with Bluegrass music?	Gibson F-hole F-5 mandolins
What style is associate with other types of music?	A-style
Why is the F-5 mandolin more expensive?	complicated woodwork
What style of Gisbon Mandolin was largely replicated?	Gibson F-5
When was the Gibson F-5 largely replicated?	early 1920s
Who supervised the Gibson F-5's replication?	Gibson acoustician Lloyd Loar
Who are the other makers from the Loar period?	Lyon and Healy, Vega and Larson Brothers
Who were notable modern American mandolin manufacturers?	Kay, Gibson, Weber, Monteleone and Collings.
What instrument does the mandolin share the same tuning of?	violin
Where was the mandolin primarily used?	classical tradition with Mandolin orchestras
When was the mandolin considered a fad?	early 20th century
Who contributed to the idea that the mandolin was a fad?	Giuseppe Pettine, Raffaele Calace and Silvio Ranieri
When did the mandolin craze end?	1930s
Who played a key role Australian mandolin movement?	Phil Skinner
When did the Australian mandolin movement begin?	20th century
When was Phil Skinner awarded an MBE?	1979
What was Phil Skinner's birth name?	Harry Skinner
At what age did Phil Skinner begin playing music?	10
Who is the director of the Sydney Mandolins?	Adrian Hooper
How many commisions of Sydney Mandolins have their been?	over 200 works
On what media was most of these work released?	Compact Disks
What radio stations can they be heard on?	ABC and MBS networks
Who has had many Concertos written for him?	mandolin virtuoso Paul Hooper
What is an Etsudiantinas?	mandolin orchestras
Where were the Estudiantinas active in during the early 20th century?	Belgium
What groups remain today?	Royal Estudiantina la Napolitaine (founded in 1904) in Antwerp, Brasschaats mandoline orkest in Brasschaat and an orchestra in Mons (Bergen).
Where is Gerda Abts well know in?	Belgium
Where is Gerda Abst a professor mandolin?	Koninklijk Conservatorium Artesis Hogeschool Antwerpen
Prior to what age did France have a history with the mandolin?	Golden Age of Mandolins
Where in France did the mandolinists play?	Paris
When did the mandolinists stop playing in Paris?	Napoleonic Wars.
Who were the players and composers during this time?	Giovanni Fouchetti, Eduardo Mezzacapo, Gabriele Leon, and Gervasio
What years was considered the Golden Age of Mandolins?	1880s-1920s
What Island is the mandolin a main instrument in Cretan Music?	island of Crete
When did the mandolin appears on Crete?	around the time of the Venetian rule of the island.
What was one of the variants of the mandolin that was used?	mantola
Who reported that the mandolin and the mpoulgari were used to accompany the lyria?	Stelios Foustalierakis
The mandolin was reported to be popular among what sex?	woman
Many adaptations of the instruments were done to cater to what type of music?	Indian Carnatic
What is the mandolin usually tuned to for Indian music?	E-B-E-B.
There is no concept of what in Indian music?	absolute pitch
What is another popular madonlin tuning?	C-G-C-G
These mandolin are used in a popular dance music called?	Bhangra
What types of instruments do irish player prefer?	might be adequate for Irish traditional music, virtually all Irish players prefer flat-backed instruments with oval sound holes
Why is it said that the Italian style can't hold their own session?	too soft-toned
Which type mandolin had a tendency not to stay in the player's lap?	the carved-top mandolins with f-holes
Which mandolin was preferred for formal performances and recordings?	flat-topped "Irish-style" mandolins
What was the Irish style mandolin reminiscent of?	WWI-era Martin Army-Navy mandolin
Who are some of the famous Irish Mandolinists?	Andy Irvine
Who are popular fiddle player and tenor banjo player?	John Sheahan and the late Barney McKenna
What was John Sheahan and Barney Mckenna's band called?	The Dubliners,
Who made the instruments used by the Dubliners?	UK luthier Roger Bucknall of Fylde Guitars
What Irish guitarist played the mandolin on stage?	Rory Gallagher
Who composed the Concerto in C Major Op 3 6?	Antonio Vivaldi
Who placed it in his 1787 work?	Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
What two artists created four variations of the Concerto in C Major Op 3 6?	Don Giovanni and Beethoven
Who composed the La conquista della Spagne di Scipione Afriacano il giovance?	Antonio Maria Bononcini
When was Alexander Balus composed?	1748
What country still maintains strong classic music tradition with mandolin?	Japan
How many people compose the Japanese mandolin orchestras?	40 or 50 members
What other instruments do the Japanese madnolin orchestras play?	include woodwind, percussion, and brass sections.
Japan hold and extensive collection of what?	20th Century mandolin music from Europe and one of the most complete collections of mandolin magazines from mandolin's golden age
Who purhcased one of the collections of mandolin magazines?	Morishige Takei.
What does bandolim mean?	Portuguese for "mandolin"
When was the bandolim porpular among the Portugese bourgeoisie?	19th century
Where can you see mandolins a part of in Portgal?	traditional and folk culture
Where is the Portuguese mandolin scene located?	Madeira Island
How many active mandolin orchestras does the Madiera Island have?	over 17
Who is a famous British player?	Simon Mayor
What did Simon mayer produce?	six solo albums, instructional books and DVDs, as well as recordings with his mandolin quartet the Mandolinquents.
Who played the mandolin on the album Tubular Bells?	Mike Oldfield
What was UK's biggest selling album?	"Fog on the Tyne
What song by Rod Stewart used the mandolin?	Maggie May
What group in the US was popular?	Estudiantina Figaro
When did the Estudiantina Figaro come to the US?	January 2, 1880
Where did the Estudiantina Figaro play?	Boston and New York
What group was inspired by the Estudiantina Figaro?	Original Spanish Students
What did the Origianl Spanish Students expect the American  public not to know?	the difference between the Spanish bandurrias and Italian mandolins
When did madolin awareness in the US become fluent?	1880s
When was the first madolin made in the US?	1883 or 1884
Who made the first US mandolin?	Joseph Bohm
Where was Joseph Bohmann from?	Chicago
What type of madolin was Partee using ?	French-made mandolin
What popular musical casted a teacher-dealer?	The Music Man
What did these teacher-dealers often conduct?	mandolin orchestras
How many people were usually in these teacher-dealer orchestras?	4-50 musicians
Who played the mandolin in Vaudeville?	Samuel Siegel
Who was the famous African American musican and director?	composer James Reese Europe.
The setting the mandolin was used in until the 1930's was?	ensemble setting
Where did the mandolins find a new home?	bluegrass
What mandolin was designed to boost interest in the mandolin?	Lloyd Loar Master Model from Gibson
What mandolin became the face of bluegrass music?	Loar
What instrument did artist Bill Monroe use?	F-5 S/N 73987
What groups have become popular amonbgpublic schools?	mandolin-based guitar programs
What are two of the popular public school groups?	Fretworks Mandolin and Guitar Orchestra
Who found the Classical Mandolin Society of America?	Norman Levine
Who are modern mandolinists and composers?	Samuel Firstman, Howard Fry, Rudy Cipolla
What family recorded an old-time music in 1924-1926?	Cowan Powers and his family
Who was the earliest known southern music artist?	Orpha Powers
What type of mandolin was becoming popular by 1930's?	single mandolins
Who was considered the father of Bluegrass music?	Bill Monroe
What was Bill Monroe's group called?	Blue Grass Boys
What chording sound was Monroe popular for?	the chop
What keys was Monroe popular for?	B and E
Who was Monroe's most influential follower?	Frank Wakefield
Who developed a electric five-string mandolin?	Moore of the Texas Playboys
What type of music did the electric five-string mandolin help popularize?	Western Swing music
Who was the major bluegrass mandolinist that became popular in 1950's?	Jesse McReynolds
What grop was Jesse McReynolds a part of?	Jim and Jesse
What technique did Jesse McReynolds create?	crosspicking
What is crosspicking?	syncopated banjo-roll-like style
Who won several award for his Monroe influenced music?	Ronnie McCoury
What is Jethro Burns commonly known for?	half of the comedy duo Homer and Jethro
What type of music did Jethro Burns play?	jazz mandolinist
Who popularized the mandolin in Western Swing Music?	Tiny Moore
Who was well known for important works of traditional blugrass?	Chris Thile of California is
Who are othe rwell know players?	Marty Stuart, Vince Gill, and Ricky Skaggs
Who got his start with his father's mandolin?	Howard Armstrong,
Who is the most popular blue music mandolinist?	Ry Cooder
What other instrument did the Tennessee string bands use?	ukulele in there and a bass fiddle
Who played in the Whistler and His Jug Band?	Willie Black
When did the mandolin first appear in rock music?	psychedelic era of the late 1960s
Who played the drums and the mandolin in the group called The Band?	Levon Helm
What Rod Stewart song in 1971 featured the mandolin?	Maggie May
What artist from the Greatful Dead played the mandolin?	David Grisman
Tommy Shaw sang and played the mandolin in which Styx song?	Boat on the River
What type of mandolin do rock musicians today use?	single-stringed electric
Which Irish-American punk band uses Mandolins?	Dropkick Murphys
What REM song uses simple mandolin licks?	Losing My Religion
What American rock band has extensive use of mandolins?	System of A Down
What film's theme song uses a mandolin?	Days of Thunder
What place in Brazil do mandolins play an important role?	Venezuela
What is the sound of mandolin associated with in the west country?	regional genres of the Venezuelan Andes
Who are the famous Venezuelen mandolinist?	Alberto Valderrama, Jesus Rengel, Ricardo Sandoval, Saul Vera, and Cristobal Soto.
What type of music has mandolins played?	mandolin orchestras have traditionally played many arrangements of music written for regular orchestras or other ensembles
Where do traditional mandolin orchestras remain popular?	Japan and Germany
What do the structure of a contempory traditional orchestra consist of?	first and second mandolins,
What are smalled ensambles composed of?	two mandolins, mandola, and mandocello,
What are the mandocellos usually tuned like?	cello
In what phylum are insects classified?	arthropod
How many parts comprise the body of an insect?	three-part
In addition to the head and abdomen, what is the other major section of an insect's body?	thorax
What type of exoskeleton do insects have?	chitinous
How many pairs of jointed legs do insects have?	three
What does insect mean in latin?	cut into sections
What is the Latin word for insect?	insectum
Insects are a class of what?	invertebrates
Insects have what kind of skeleton?	chitinous exoskeleton
An insects 3-part body includes a throat, abdomen, and what?	head
How does the lifecycle of most insects typically begin?	hatch from eggs
What is the primary constraint on the physical growth of an insect?	inelastic exoskeleton
What stage of development differentiates a 4-stage metamorphosis from a 3-stage metamorphosis, notably absent in the latter?	pupal stage
What is the term given to denote the series of stages involved in the development of an adult insect?	nymphal
What era is attributed to the findings of enormous fossilized dragonflies with extremely long wingspans?	Paleozoic
Insects hatch from what?	eggs
Insects growth is constrained by what?	the inelastic exoskeleton
An insects developement involves a series of what?	molts
How many stages of metamorphosis does an insect go through?	4-stage
The most diverse insects coevolved with what?	flowering plants
What is the term for the gait of an insect characterized by walking in alternating triangles?	tripedal
What larval adaptation is common to underwater insects?	gills
What species of insect has the capability to walk on the surface of water?	water striders
What do crickets do in order to attract or repel a mate?	stridulate
What variation of beetle in the Coleoptera order communicate by way of light?	Lampyridae
Insects move by walking, flying, and what else?	swimming
Which insects walk, fly, and swim?	Adult
Insects walk the ground in alternating what?	triangles
Insects walking in an alternating triangle is called a what?	tripedal gait
What can insects do with each other in a variety of ways?	communicate
By what method do humans often try to control the spread of insects?	insecticides
What portion of the biosphere would be devastated absent the complex pollination role of insects?	terrestrial
What insect provides a tangible economic benefit via the production of silk?	Silkworms
What insect is known to consume carrion?	blow-flies
Humans consider most insects as what?	pests
Humans can control insects using what?	insecticides
Insects have the potential to damage what?	crops
Insects can damage crops by feeing on sap, fruits, or what?	leaves
Silkworms are used by humans for producing what?	silk
What is the Latin term for insect?	insectum
Who introduced the Latin term for insect, borrowing from the Greek vernacular?	Pliny the Elder
How many sections does an insect's body appear to be divided?	three
Which Greek philosopher used the term entomos to describe insects, making reference to their notched bodies?	Aristotle
In what year is it typically reported that the word insect was first documented in English?	1601
Insect means to have a notched or divided what?	body
Insects are cut into how many sections?	three sections
Who gave this class of life the name "insect"?	Aristotle
In what year did the word "insect" appear in a document?	1601
Who introduced the Latin version of the word "insect"?	Pliny the Elder
From what period do researchers believe that the oldest known full-body impression of a flying insect originates?	Carboniferous
What is believed to be the oldest known insect fossil?	Devonian Rhyniognatha hirsti
In what year did Tufts researchers reportedly uncover what is believed to be the oldest known impression of a flying insect?	2008
What is the term for a mandible with two articulations?	dicondylic
With what type of insect is a dicondylic mandible associated?	winged
What higher-level is constantly up for debate and research?	phylogeny
The higher-level phylogeny is of the what?	arthropods
What kind of impression has been uncovered by a University?	full-body
A University discovered a primitive flying what?	insect
How old is the primitive plying insect found by the University?	300 million-year-old
In addition to Carboniferous, what other insect order is inclusive of extant groups, stem groups and Paleozoic groups?	Early Permian
To what measurement, in cm, did the wingspans of giant dragonfly-like forms reach?	55 to 70
Higher levels of what substance possibly contributed to the phenomenon of gigantism?	oxygen
How many million years ago is the Permian period believed to have begun?	270
The most significant mass extinction of insect groups is commonly ascribed to what period?	Permian-Triassic
Late Caboniferous and Early Permain are what kind of orders?	insect orders
The insect orders include both of what?	extant groups
The insect orders include a number of what kind of groups?	Paleozoic groups
What kind of giant insect form had wingspans?	dragonfly-like forms
How wide were the wingspans of the dragonfly-like forms?	55 to 70 cm
What type of defense did plants adaptively evolve in response to insects?	chemical
What is the term for a plant-eating insect?	herbivores
What do many insects adaptively utilize in self-defense from predators?	plant toxins
How is toxicity sometimes visibly displayed by insects as a warning?	colors
What is an example of a mutually beneficial process indicating the coevolution of plants and insects?	pollination
Insects are considered terrestrial what?	herbivores
What were insects the major selection agents of?	plants
What did plants eventually form against insects?	chemical defenses
Insects formed mechanisms to shield against what?	plant toxins
Insects show how toxic they are with what kind of colors?	warning colors
What is the term for the class of insects with wings?	Pterygota
What is the term for the class of insects without wings?	Apterygota
What group of insects are inclusive within the Monocondylia primarily due to the shape of their mandible?	Archaeognatha
What is the collective group to which Thysanura and Pterygota belong?	Dicondylia
Insects are historically divided into how many groups?	two groups
Insects with wings are known as what?	Pterygota
Does an Apterygots have wings or wingless?	wingless
What is a Thysanura?	silverfish
Thysanura and Pterygota are what?	Dicondylia
Morphology-based and appearance-based are known as what?	systematics
What class is the Hexapoda ranked?	superclass
How many groups are defined in the superclass?	four groups
Springtails are also known as what?	Collembola
Collembola, protura, and dipkura are in a group called what?	Entognatha
Paleoptera and Neoptera are what kind of insect orders?	winged
An insects hard body parts are called what?	sclerites
Insect's wings fold flat over their what?	abdomen
Neoptera can be divided into what kind of "based" group?	metamorphosis-based
Paraneopter and Endopterygota are closely what?	related
What are likely to be paraphyletic?	The Exopterygota
Strepsiptera and Diptera are controversial what?	Matters
Strepsiptera and Diptera grouped together are called what?	Halteria
A discussion regarding wing pairs is not supported by what community?	the entomological community
What is split or lumped together by a taxonomist?	The Neuropterida
The true diversity within the insect species remains what?	uncertain
How many insect species are estimated to exist?	2.6–7.8 million species
How many new species of all organisms are discovered each year?	20,000
Of all the species on earth, how much do insects make up?	less than 20%
For many years to come, most insect species will remain as what?	undescribed
What kind of bodies to insects have?	segmented bodies
Insects bodies are supported by what?	exoskeletons
Chitin is what kind of outer covering on an insect?	hard
An insect's body is divided into what kind of units?	interconnected
What is an insects head, throat, and abdomen called?	tagmata
What part of the insect contains most of the sensing organs?	head
What is another word for head capsule?	epicranium
What displays the most features on an insect?	Orthoptera
What is the vertex also known as?	apex
The vertex is usually located between what kind of eyes?	compound
The throax has how many sections?	three sections
Another term for tagma is?	thorax
The anterior section is closest to the what?	head
The prothrorax is what segment of the insect?	anterior
The pleura is made of how many lateral regions?	two
What is the largest tagma of an insect?	abdomen
How many segments make up an insects abdomen?	11–12 segments
The abdomen is less strong than the thorax and what?	head
An insects abdomen has a sclerotized tergum and what else?	sternum
The pleural area holds what?	Spiracles
Insect's outer skeleton is known as what?	the cuticle
The cuticle has how many layers?	two
Which cuticle later is like wax?	the epicuticle
The epicuticle does not consist of what?	chitin
Is the procuticle thinner or thicker than the epicuticle?	thicker
Insects are also known as what kind of vertebra?	invertebrates
Insects have developed what kind of active capability?	flight
Active flight ability has played what kind of role for insects?	important
How many times are insects muscles able to contract?	multiple
Insects muscles are attached to their what?	exoskeletons
What is on each side of a thoracic segment?	ganglion
How many ganglia are on each side of a thoracic segment?	one
Ganglia are connected into a what?	a pair
How many pairs of ganglia are in a segment?	one pair
What other location on an insect are ganglia located?	abdomen
How many insects have nociceptors?	a few
Cells that detect and transmit pain are called what?	nociceptors
When were nociceptors discovered?	2003
Nociceptors were discovered by studying the common what?	fruitfly Drosophila
Which probe did the larvae react to?	the heated probe
What produces saliva in an insects mouth?	salivary glands
What leads from the salivary glands to the reservoirs?	salivary ducts
What is an opening through the head called?	salivarium
Where is the salivarium located?	behind the hypopharynx
Where does an insect's digestion happen?	The gut
What is another name for mesenteron?	midgut
Food goes in to the midgut after leaving where?	the crop
The majority of an insects digestion happens where?	the mesenteron
What kind of projections are in the midgut wall?	Microscopic
What are microscopic projections called?	microvilli
What is a proctodaeum?	the hindgut
What kind of food particles have uric acid?	undigested
What kind of acid forms fecal pellets?	uric acid
An insects rectum absorbs how much water?	90%
Where is an insects dry pellet discarded through?	the anus
Female insects reproductive system contain a pair of what?	ovaries
What kind of glands are in a female insect's reproductive system?	accessory glands
What connects the parts inside a female insect's reproductive system?	ducts
Where are egg tubes are found inside of an insect?	ovaries
What are egg tubes called?	ovarioles
What is the male reproductive system called?	testis
Where is tracheae located?	the body cavity
Most make insects contain a pair of what?	testes
What are inside male testes?	sperm tubes
Follicles inside a male insect's reproductive system connect to what?	the vas deferens
Respiration for insects happens without what?	lungs
Insect's respiratory system contains sacs, and what else?	internal tubes
What gets diffused or actively pumped through an insect's respiratory system?	gases
What gets delivered to tissues in an insect's respiratory system?	oxygen
Which system inside an insect's respiratory system does not carry oxygen?	circulatory system
What kind of exchange is demonstrated by different insects?	gas exchange
Gas exchange patterns can contain what kind of ventilation?	diffusive ventilation
Carbon dioxide is released continuously in what kind of gas exchange?	continuous gas exchange
What gas exchanges does carbon dioxide release when the insect is resting?	discontinuous gas exchange
Diffusive ventilation occurs by what?	diffusion
Where are insects hatched from?	eggs.
Fertilization happens where?	inside the egg
Fertilization and what else happens inside the egg?	development
Chorion is another word for what?	shell
Broods is another term for what word?	generations
Polymophism is a developmental and reproductive what?	variations
Haplodiploidy is what type of system?	sex-determination system
The number of chromosome sets determines the offspring's what?	sex
The sex-determination system is found in which insects?	bees and wasps
Polymophism species have different forms or what else?	morphs
How many insects use parthenogenesis?	Some
GIving birth without fertilized eggs is called what?	parthenogenesis
What usually partakes in a form of parthenogenesis?	aphids
Aphis have asexual and sexual what?	reproduction
Aphis are usually female and what else during the summer?	parthenogenetic
Incomplete metamorphosis insects are called?	Hemimetabolous
What kind of metamorphosis do hemimetabolous insects undergo?	incomplete
Do hemimetabolous insects change quickly or gradually?	gradually
Hemimetabolous insects gradually change by a series of what?	molts
Insect's molt when they outgrow what?	exoskeleton
What is a complete metamorphosis called?	Holometabolism
How many stages happen in complete metamorphosis?	four stages
What is another word for egg?	embryo
What is an imago?	the adult
Name an example of an insect that undergoes complete metamorphosis?	Butterflies
Insects have specialized organs of what kind?	perception
Insect organs are described as sensitive and what?	specialized
What kind of insect can detect ultraviolet wavelengths?	bees
Bees can detect what kind of light?	polarized light
What is a Polistes versicolor?	yellow paper wasp
Insects have what kind of sense of numbers?	rudimentary
Which insect displays a rudimentary sense of numbers?	solitary wasps
What kind of species does a solitary wasp prey upon?	single
What does the mother wasp provide for her eggs when they hatch?	caterpillars
Is the male solitary wasp bigger or smaller than the female solitary wasp?	smaller
What is another name for Colleobola?	Onychiuridae
Mycetophilldae is another name for what?	Diptera
Phengodidae is party of what insect family?	beetle
Elateridae and Staphylinidae are what kind of luminescent?	bioluminescent
What kind of fly mimics the flashing of female Photinus to attract males?	fireflies
Most insects are able to perceive darkness and what else?	light
What insect is not abel to perceive light and dark?	cave crickets
Most insects have what kind of vision?	acute
Insects notice what type of movement?	minute
Many insects are able to see visible light, ultraviolet, and what other kind of light?	infrared
What were the earliest organisms to produce sound?	Insects
Insects can sense what?	sounds
Insect sounds come from what kind of action?	mechanical
The mechanical action of what allows insects t make sound?	appendages
Moths create what kind of click sounds?	ultrasonic
What sound volume is produced by Coleoptera?	low
Low insect sounds are made by the insect's what?	movement
Low insect sounds can be heard through what?	microscopic stridulatory structures
Insect moving sounds are used to warn and do what with other insects?	communicate
Corixids are able to communicate with what type of sounds?	underwater
What are used by insects to communicate with members of the same species?	vibrations
Vibrations are used to communicate with members of the same species, and what other species?	different species
Which insects has a song to attract males from the same species?	Nezara viridula
What is a lycaenid caterpillar?	gossamer-winged butterfly
Living in association with ants is called what?	myrmecophilous
Animal taste and smell rely on what kind of communication?	Chemical
What is the physiological response of a sense organ called?	Chemoreception
Chemical stimuli are signals that regulate the activity of what?	a cell
What is a message-carrying chemical called?	semiochemical
Kairomones are a type of what?	semiochemicals
Insects use sound and what other means for communication?	chemical means
The chemicals used by insects to communicate are called what?	semiochemicals
Semiochemicals come from where?	plant metabolites
Insect chemicals are used to attract and what else?	repel
What insect chemical benefits both the receiver and the producer?	Synomones
Termites are considered what type of insect?	Social
Termites, bees, wasps, and what other insect are social insects?	ants
What is another term for social insect?	eusocial animal
Social insects live in well organized what?	colonies
The method that a bee dances is called what?	dance language
Insects with fine scale spatial orientation live in colonies and where else?	nests
Some insects have a fine scale spatial orientation and/or what else?	homing
Spacial orientation/homing allows an insect to return to one specific hole among how many?	thousands
An insect recalling a specific location for up to a year is called what?	philopatry
An insect that can recall a specific location for up to a year does what?	hibernate
Eusocial insects provide food for their offspring full-time or part-time?	full-time
What do eusocial insects guard?	eggs
What do eusocial insects build?	nest
Most eusocial insects lead what kind of life once becoming an adult?	short
An adult eusocial insect does not contact it's what?	growing offspring
Insects are the only invertebrates that have evolved into what?	flight
What part of the insect has been up for debate?	wings
Wings from the paranotal lobes are based on what theory?	paranotal theory
Wings from modified gills is from what origin?	pleural origin
The epicoxal theory suggests insect wings are modified what?	epicoxal exites
How many legs do adult insects contain?	six
Most adult insects have adopted what kind of gait?	tripedal
The tripedal gait allows what kind of walking?	rapid
Insects can adopt how many gaits?	a variety
Insects can change their gait to deal with the loss of what?	limbs
What kind of locomotion is seen in stick insects?	sedate
What is another name for walking stick insects?	Phasmatodea
Some insects can walk on top of what?	water
What insect can walk on the surface of water?	water striders
Water striders are part of what insect family?	Gerridae
Water beetles have legs of what type of structure?	paddle-like
Dragonflys use what kind of propulsion?	jet
Dragonflys shoot water from where?	rectal chamber
Water striders have what kind of special groove up their leg?	recessed
Rove beetle Stenus emit what type of gland secretions?	pygidial
Learning how insects interact with the surrounding environment is called what?	Insect ecology
Another term for surrounding environment is what?	ecosystem
What kind of role do insects play in their ecosystem?	important
What type of burial do insects engage in?	dung
Beetles are also known as what?	scavengers
What is an important defense strategy for insects to survive?	Camouflage
What does coloration and shape help an insect do in the surrounding environment?	blend
Protective coloring is common in what insect family?	beetle
What is Chrysomelidae?	leaf beetles
A beetle can resemble what kind of dung?	bird dung
Mimicry is another type of what kid of strategy?	defense
Mimicry is used to do what to potential enemies?	deceive
Longhorn beetles look similar to what other insect?	wasps
Mimicry complexes are usually found where?	in Lepidoptera
What is a well known Mullerian complex?	Taxa
What kind of defense is found in the Coleoptera species?	Chemical
What chemical defense is used by the Monarch butterfly?	bright colors
Insects become toxic by doing what with the chemicals from plants?	sequestering
Which insect manufactures it's own toxins?	Lepidoptera
Some beetles can spray what from their abdomen?	chemicals
Pollen transferred in the reproduction of plants is called?	Pollination
What is required to transport pollen?	an animal
Most pollination is completed by what?	insects
What do insects receive in return for pollination?	energy rich nectar
Flowers that allow only one type of pollinator is called what?	pollination syndromes
Humans consider insects as what?	pests
Lice and bed bugs are considered what kind of insect?	parasitic
Flies and what other kind of insect transmit diseases?	mosquitoes
What kind of insect can damage architectural structures?	termites
Locusts destroy what?	agricultural goods
What kind of insects attract the most attention from humans?	pest insects
Many insects are what to the environment?	beneficial
What do bees, wasps, butterflies, and ants do to flowers?	pollinate
What do insects gather from plants?	nectar
What kind of environmental problem would occur without pollination?	serious
What insects feed on other insects?	Insectivorous
Insectivorous insects are beneficial or harmful to humans?	beneficial
What insect feeds on aphids?	ladybugs
What are the most visible predators of insects?	birds
What is the largest consumer of insects?	insects themselves
Insects play prominent roles in what?	biological research
What is a common insect used for research purposes?	fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
What percent of the fly genome is similar to the human genome	70%
Drosophila has helped develop principles in what kind of linkage?	genetic
Genetic systems are conserved among what?	eukaryotes
Insects are considered as what in some cultures?	delicacies
What deep-fried insect is part of the normal diet in some cultures?	cicadas
Insects have what kind of protein content?	high
What is the term for eating insects?	entomophagy
Where is eating insects considered taboo?	first-world countries
What ancient world insect is considered symbolic?	Scarab beetles
Cicadas symbolize immortality in what culture?	Chinese
The praying mantis symbolizes patience and what else?	creation
Witchety grubs serve as personal clan totems in what country?	Australia
What kind of ants are symbolic among the Australian Aborigines?	honey ants
What do all living humans belong to?	the same species
What species are all humans?	Homo sapiens
Race has no taxonomic significance among whom?	humans
What set of traits do some scientists use race to make distinctions among?	fuzzy
How do scientists around the world continue to conceptualize race?	in widely differing ways
What type of group can't be biologically defined?	racial
What type of categorization in every day usage is there wide agreement it is only a social construct?	racial
What do some people contend racial categories are obviously correlated with?	biological traits
Some genetic markers have varying frequencies among what populations?	human
What is the majority opinion on whether racial categories can be considered to have impact on human genetic variation?	no current consensus
How do people create a social reality in which social categorization is achieved?	define and talk about a particular conception of race
What can be said to be a social construct?	races
What contexts do racial social constructs develop within?	legal, economic, and sociopolitical
Constructs may be the result rather than the inciter of what?	major social situations
What effect does race have in the lives of people?	real material
Socioeconomic factors and enduring views on race has led to what for certain racial groups?	considerable suffering
What is discrimination often paired with?	racist mindsets
What do members of one group typically perceive the moral standing of outgroups as?	inferior
What do groups with less power often find themselves?	excluded or oppressed
What has led to many tragic instances of events like slavery and genocide?	Racism
What does law enforcement in some countries use to profile suspects?	race
Why is using racial categorization for profiling often criticized?	perpetuating an outmoded understanding of human biological variation
What promotes stereotypes?	use of racial categories
Who can race serve as a significant factor when studying social inequality?	social scientists
What may in part reflect subjective attributes, self-identities and social institutions?	sociological factors
What have human groups always considered themselves as compared to other nearby groups?	distinct
During which process did our current idea of race come about?	exploration and conquest
Where did Europeans come into contact with other groups?	different continents
What have differences among groups not typically been perceived as being?	natural, immutable and global
What ideaology is found in the natural sciences?	classification and typology
When did many of the ideas associated with the term "race" arise?	time of the scientific revolution
What created relations between Europeans and people with different cultures?	colonization
Who speculated about the observable difference among different groups of humans?	Europeans
Justifying the subordination of what group was one of the incentives to categorize human groups?	African slaves
What groups has there always been brutal conflict between?	ethnic
Who was the author of the first published book classifying humans into distinct races?	François Bernier
In what century did differences among human groups become a focus of science?	18th century
What race was typically ascribed the most desirable features?	White
How was Homo sapiens europaeus described as?	active, acute, and adventurous
What attributes were bestowed on homo spaiens afer?	crafty, lazy, and careless
What year was Blumenbach's treatise published?	1775
How many divisions did Blumenbach's treatise specify?	five
What type of transition was noted from one group to the next?	graded
What can one not mark between the variety of mankind?	limits
What race was later renamed to Negroid?	Ethiopian
What did the merging of superstitious beliefs and scientific ones regarding group differences produce?	an "ideology of race"
What were races considered to be, according to the ideology of race?	primordial, natural, enduring and distinct
How might some groups have resulted, according to the ideology?	mixture between formerly distinct populations
What group was identified as being inferior to Europeans?	Negros
Who particularly noted the unnatural sexual appetites of Africans?	Thomas Jefferson
What theory is the belief that differences races had evolved independently on each continent?	polygenism
What country did Edward Long and Charles White advocated the belief of polygenism in?	England
What was the profession of Christoph Meiners and Georg Forster?	ethnographers
In what century was polygenism most widespread?	19th century
The Ethnological Society was sympathetic towards what cause?	abolitionist
What species do all living humans today belong to?	Homo sapiens
When is it theorized that Homo habilis evolved in East Africa?	2 million years ago
How many millions of years ago had Homo erectus spread throughout Europa and Asia?	1.5
Members of what species populated parts of Africa in a relatively short time?	Homo habilis
What group might have Archaic Homo sapiens evolve out of?	African Homo erectus
Who taught and accepted the belief that biologically distinct races were isomorphic?	many anthropologists
What practice was combined with the field of eugenics regarding the distinctness of social groups?	scientific racism
What effect did the Nazi eugenics program have on racial essentialism?	lost widespread popularity
What conclusions were race anthropologists pressured to revise?	sources of phenotypic variation
What did a lot of modern anthropologists in the West come to view racial designation as?	invalid
What type of geneticists have debates about what can provide a basis for a new conception of race?	Population
What class of researchers surprisingly have no generally accepted concept of population?	biologists
What do most definitions of population rely on?	qualitative descriptions
What do Waples and Gaggiotti identify two broad types of?	definitions for populations
What are both ecological and evolutionary definition modifiers of?	paradigm
What are traditionally geographically isolated?	subspecies
What is "subspecies" used to indicate an objective degree of?	microevolutionary divergence
What is an objection to the idea of subspecies because it doesn't specify this?	degree of differentiation
What would a population have to somewhat be to be considered a subspecies?	biologically different
What did Templeton argue is necessary to impose a threshold on for a population to be a subspecies?	level of difference
What must organisms have a measurable level of to be seen as a subspecies?	difference
Who proposed subspecies be defined by the seventy-five percent rule?	Dean Amadon
What year did Dean Amadon make his proposal?	1949
The 75% rule states how much of a population must lie outside the range of other populations for a defining set of characters?	99%
Many scholars argue what should be replaced with a ninety or ninety-five percent rule?	The seventy-five percent rule
When did Sewall Wright make his suggestion about human populations?	1978
How should populations long inhabiting separate parts of the world be considered?	different subspecies
What is required to allocate individuals in subspecies populations correctly?	inspection
What did Wright feel it wouldn't take an anthropologist to easily distinguish between of in groups?	individual
What term is it customary to use instead of subspecies?	race
What is cladistics a method of?	classification
What is a clade a taxonomic group of?	organisms
How many common ancestors does a clade have?	single
What is another term for a phylogenetic tree?	taxonomy
Which chromosome sequences are used to study ancient human migration paths?	Y
What analysis method are taxonomists fond of using in considering a population?	phylogenetic
How are allopatric populations separated?	geographically
What is a group with a common evolutionary ancestor population called?	a clade
What is a tongue twister of a word that merely means "cleanly divided"?	monophyletic
Who argued in 2003 that all clades are by definition monophyletic groups?	Rachel Caspari
What did Lieberman and Jackon find profound problems using cladistics to support concepts of?	race
What would the diverse group of East Indians, North Africans and Europeans be grouped as prior to DNA analysis?	Caucasians
Cladistics can limit and skew what?	interpretations
What is variation found in that can be labeled as races?	packages
Lieberman and Jackson suggest authors of some studies use the term race in what ways?	conceptually imprecise and careless
What did C. Loring Brace observe about about variations?	distributed along geographic gradations or clines
Why are variations distributed along clines?	isolation by distance
What is a problem common to phenotype-based descriptions of races?	they ignore a host of other similarities and differences
What is Frank Livingstone's profession?	anthropologist
What is the conclusion from the evidence that clines cross racial boundaries?	there are no races, only clines
What must one be attentive to when talking about race?	how the term is being used
On what point did Dobzhansky agree with Dr. Livingstone?	if races have to be 'discrete units,' then there are no races
What is merely "a matter of judgement"?	"the race concept."
While race difference possible to easily see, they need not be given what?	labels
Livingston and Dobzhansky disagree on whether the race concept is what?	a meaningful and useful social convention
What did two biologists point out in 1964?	cases where two or more clines are distributed discordantly
What gene distribution decreases as you move away from the equator in either direction?	melanin
What do the frequencies for the haplotype for beta-5 hemogoblin do from specific points in Africa?	radiate
To what profession do both Leonard Lieberman and Fatimah Linda Jackson belong?	anthropologists
What patterns of heterogeneity falsify any descriptions of population?	Discordant
What is the consequence of the number and geographic location ascribed to a race highly dependent on?	the importance attributed to, and quantity of, the traits considered.
What partially accounts for the appearance of light skin in humans?	mutation
What mutation did scientists discover?	skin-lighting
What do East Asians have to thank for their relatively light skin?	different mutations
Traits and gene frequencies do not always correspond to what type of location?	geographical
What thing that strongly differentiates the French from some other populations be clinal across Europe?	a selected allele
When did Coop and others find out something about a selected allele?	2009
How many major geographic patterns do the global distributions fall into?	three
What are sweeps?	major geographic patterns
Something that is found at high frequency in Europe could be what elsewhere?	absent
What can one use to look at differences between groups instead of physical differences?	genetic differences
Who was William C. Boyd?	mid-20th-century anthropologist
Boyd felt race was based on a specific differentiation of the frequency of what in a population?	genes
How numerous would the number of races be if one gene can distinguish races?	number of human couples reproducing
What may people who have lived in the same area for generations have in common?	alleles
What did Sewall Wright develop one way of measuring?	genetic differences between populations
What was Wright's method known as?	the Fixation index
What is the often stated FST for humans?	0.15
Richard Lewontin, upon looking at the FST ratios, concluded race wasn't an appropriate or useful way to describe what?	human populations
Human group variation is similar to variation observed in what other species?	mammalian
FST values greater than .25 represent very great what?	genetic variation
About how much human variation occurs between continental populations?	5%
FST values as low as what amount have been found in some studies?	0.1
What is the name of the person who thinks FST shouldn't be used as a marker of subspecies status?	Graves
FST is used to measure the degree of differentiation between what?	populations
What two researchers gave a long critique regarding the application of FST to human populations in 2003?	Jeffrey Long and Rick Kittles
What do Long and Kittles think of the implication that human populations contain on average 85% of all genetic diversity?	misleading
Non-African groups of human population may only drive from what type of sample of the African population?	non-representative
What type of bottleneck did the migration out of Africa represent?	genetic
How much human genetic diversity exists in a single African population?	100%
What type of classification system for humans did A.W.F. Edwards argue for?	characteristic genetic patterns
What might genetic clusters be shown to correspond to one day?	phenotypic variations between groups
How is the relationship between genes and complex traits understood?	poorly
Risch feels any category someone comes up with will be what?	imperfect
Risch thinks imperfect categories still have what?	utility
What groups were early samples from for genetic cluster analysis?	ancestral population
Where did the groups the genetic clusters were taken from live from each other?	extreme geographic distances
What was thought might maximize the odds of finding unique cluster patterns in groups?	large geographic distances
What human activity has only recently accelerated?	migration
Human migration tends to accelerate this type of what flow?	gene
Randomly chosen people from different groups may be more similar to each other than with members of their own what?	cluster
How many genetic markers need to be used to show people from different groups are dissimilar to each other?	thousands
Studying increasing number of groups require an increasing number of what?	markers
What should be used when using ancestry to make inferences about individual phenotypes?	caution
People are more frequently similar to members of what populations?	other populations
Cluster structure of genetic data is dependent on what initial thing?	hypotheses
If one samples a continental group, what do the clusters become?	continental
What is not a natural taxonomy of the human species?	racial classification
What are objective social constructions?	racial groupings
What are diversity partition and clustering analysis are examples of?	methodologies
What word do many social scientists instead of race?	ethnicity
What had been used to justify discrimination, apartheid, slavery and genocide in WWII?	beliefs about race
When did the civil rights movement take place?	the 1960s
What movement gained momentum worldwide in the 60's?	anti-colonial
What type of reality do some believe race is a social construct corresponding to?	objective
What organization is Craig Venter and Francis Collins associated with?	the National Institute of Health
What year was the announcement that the human genome had been mapped made in?	2000
What doesn't the genetic variation within the human species support?	notion of genetically defined races
What is a social concept, not a scientific one?	Race
What happens when scientists try to apply science to sort out social differences?	it all falls apart
Researchers from which university challenged the theory of race being only a social construct?	Stanford
Where was the challenge to the theory of racing being a social construct published?	the American Journal of Human Genetics
Neil Risch found a 99.9% agree between genetic structure and people's description of their what?	self
What is a problematic category in addition to race?	sex
What may self-identification not correlate with precisely?	biology
What country was race "Biologized" in?	Brazil
What wasn't racial identity governed by in Brazil?	rigid descent rule
What were Brazillian children never automatically identified with the type of?	racial
What may full siblings belong to?	different racial groups
What determines genotype?	ancestry
How many racial categories would be needed with all the possible combinations of outward features?	Over a dozen
What way would categories grade into each other, rather than being isolated from each other?	like the colors of the spectrum
What did race refer to instead of heredity?	appearance
What is appearance a poor indication of?	ancestry
Where is there a lot of complexity in racial classifications?	Brazil
What categories have an aspect of fluidity?	racial
What are people with high quantities of Amerindian ancestry grouped as?	caboclos
What's a rough translation of "pardos"?	hillbilly
What do people with less than 60-65% of European descent usually cluster with?	Afro-Brazilians
What percentage of Afro-Brazillian DNA is reported to be Subsaharan African?	50%
What would more people report themselves as if a more consistent report were considered?	white
What do people with a high quality of African descent classify themselves as?	mixed
Brazil's population is believed to have between what percentages of autosomal European ancestry?	65 and 80%
How much of the population of Brazil reported themselves as pardo in 2010?	42.4%
Brazil's population is thought to have greater than what percentage of European Y-DNA?	95%
What is roughly the amount of African slaves imported to Brazil?	3.5 million
What conditions did the African slaves in Brazil live in?	miserable
Most African descent in Brazil came from what sort of congress?	relations between white masters and female slaves
Between what years did Brazil welcome 5.5 million immigrants?	1821 and 1932
Between 1500 and 1760, how many Europeans settled in Brazil?	700.000
Who uses the terms racial origin and ethnic origin interchangeably?	The European Union
What does using race as a category within the law legitimize?	its existence
In what context is the historical use of race underscored by its problematic nature?	European
Race is strongly associated with laws by what type of governments?	Fascist
In what year did the European Parliament adopt a resolution to remove "race" from all official texts?	1996
What relies on the idea humans can be divided into biologically distinct races?	The concept of racial origin
What community rejects the idea there are biologically distinct races?	scientific
Why does the ECRI reject theories based on the existence of different races?	all human beings belong to the same species
What does the ECRI strive to make sure no one becomes?	excluded from the protection provided for by the legislation
The law penalizes situations where someone is treated less favourably on the ground of what?	race
France has become a more ethnically diverse country since the end of which war?	Second World War
What percentage of the French population today is non-European?	approximately five percent
What is the number of non-white citizens in the United States?	roughly 28–37%
What issue has the existence of three million non-European people in France forced onto French policy agendas?	ethnic diversity
What type of model of public policy does France maintain?	color-blind
Groups of people have been classified as belonging to difference races since what part of the U.S.'s history?	early
What did efforts to track mixing between different groups lead to?	a proliferation of categories
When did the criteria for membership in mixed race groups diverge?	in the late 19th century
When did increasing numbers of Americans consider anyone with even a drop of "Black blood" to be Black?	During Reconstruction
What is a particularly African-American experience because it's specific to only the United States?	The one-drop rule
When did the term "Hispanic" begin being used?	the 20th century
What is the word "Latino" often used as a synonym for?	Hispanic
How are the terms Hispanic and Latino not specific?	non-race specific
What is common misconception in the US about what some national origins are?	races
Anglo can refer to non-Hispanic European Americans who speak English but are not necessarily what?	of English descent
What is the name of China's only anthropology journal?	Acta Anthropologica Sinica
Who is the race concept widely used by?	Chinese anthropologists
What is race a factor of for the ethnically diverse people of China?	social cohesion
Why does race undermine social cohesion in America?	sensitive issue
What are academics in China encouraged to use that their American counterparts are not?	racial categories
What years did Kaszycka survey Eureopean anthropolgists' opinions toward the biological race concept?	2002–2003
How many factors were found to be significant in differentiating the responses of European anthropologists?	Three
What did the people educated in Western Europe reject more frequently than those educated in Eastern Europe?	race
How are views on race influenced?	ideologically
What are views on race highly dependent on?	education
What does the current literature regarding human variation lack?	consensus
What do some studies use the word race in the sense of?	taxonomic
What term do some use to mean population, clade, or haplogroup?	race
What do some eschew altogether?	the concept of race
What is a less problematic unit of analysis?	concept of population
Where is Eduardo Bonilla-Silver a Sociology professor?	Duke University
What does Bonilla-Silva contend racism is about more than anything else?	group power
Who does Bonilla-Silva think is the dominant racial group?	whites
What idea does color-blind racism thrive on?	that race is no longer an issue
What exists between the alleged color-blindness of most whites and the persistence of a system of inequality?	contradictions
What concept's use has declined significantly in the U.S. during the 20th century?	biological race
The majority of what group in the U.S. has rejected the concept of biological races?	physical anthropologists
What textbooks introducing anthropology have rejected race as a valid concept since 1932?	college
How many books out of 33, from 1975 to 1984, rejected race?	thirteen
What percentage of articles in 1996 employed a bio-race paradigm?	28 percent
What group of anthropologists overwhelmingly support the idea of human races?	forensic
What does George W. Gill think about the veracity of the idea that race is only skin deep?	simply not true
What are probably the primary forces of nature which shaped human races?	selective forces of climate
What does Gill think the complete denial of opposing evidence stems from?	socio-political motivation
What does Gill attribute the lack of presenting the perspective as a possibility to?	politically motivated censorship
What type of anthropology is "race" sometimes still used within?	forensic
What term would Brace prefer forensic anthropologists use?	regional ancestry
What can forensic anthropologists determine about the ancestors of someone from their skeletal remains?	specific region
What does Brace feel the term "black" in meaningful in?	particular context
Why is it bad that a category is merely socially constructed?	is not itself scientifically valid
How many college textbooks in biology did the authors of the study examine?	77
Up until when did physical anthropology texts still argue that biological races exist?	the 1970s
What did biology textbooks drop altogether?	their discussion of race
What were biologists trying to avoid discussing the political implications of?	racial classifications
What did Douglas J. Futuyama consider the concept of race as not only being socially dysfunctional but this as well?	biologically indefensible
What did Morning find when he looked at biology textbooks during the 1952-2002 period?	similar pattern
How many of the textbooks between 1983 and 1992 discussed race?	35%
After 1992, what did the percentage of textbooks discussing race increase to?	43%
What percentage have discussions of race in the context of medical disorders increased from zero to?	93%
What does the study argue about the fundamental message regarding the existence of races?	changed little
Who promotes the use of racially categorized data in the United States?	federal government
What has race sometimes been used in clinical settings to diagnose and treat?	medical conditions
What have doctors noted about some medical conditions in certain racial groups?	more prevalent
What fueled the recent interest in race-based medicine?	proliferation of human genetic data
What do proponents of the use of racial categories in biomedicine think it makes possible?	application of new genetic findings,
What does finding a difference in disease prevalence between two socially defined groups not necessarily imply?	genetic causation of the difference
What do some research suggest medical practices should maintain their focus on?	the individual
What is a risk of overemphasizing genetic contributions to health issues?	reinforcing stereotypes
What is makes more of a difference than race in health outcomes for "race specific" diseases?	living conditions
What have some studies found patients reluctant to accept in medical practice?	racial categorization
What does the FBI feel providing general descriptions helps to facilitate?	job of law enforcement officers
What does the FBI employ the term race to summarize?	general appearance
What does law enforcement feel appearance characteristics of individuals help them do to those individuals?	apprehend
What is more important for law enforcement in categorizing instead of DNA?	arrive at a description
What does a description of a wanted individual include beyond their racial category?	height, weight, eye color, scars and other distinguishing characteristics.
How many separate classification systems do agencies in England and Wales use?	at least two
When did individuals self-identify as belonging to a particular ethnic group?	the 2001 Census
How do police identify someone as belonging to an ethnic group?	visually
What does IC stand for?	Identification Code
What ethnicity term was one problem cited about the number of reports containing it?	Not Stated
Where has the practice of racial profiling been ruled to be unconstitutional?	United States
What is a violation of civil rights in the United States?	racial profiling
What do many consider an example of institutional racism in law enforcement?	de facto racial profiling
How has the misuse of racial categories historically impacted one or more groups?	adversely
What has impacted the debate on the legitimate use of known phenotypical characteristics?	misuse of racial categories
What impacts African American and Latino communities in disproportionate numbers?	Mass incarceration
Who is the author of "The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness"?	Michelle Alexander
What type of bars and walls beyond physical ones does Alexander think people are behind?	virtual
Who does Alexander think a second class citizenship is imposed upon disproportionately?	people of color
What type of caste system is mass incarceration compared to?	racial
What morphological features do forensic anthropologists draw on?	highly heritable
What measurement can aid in the identification of a human body?	cranial
Who noted in a 1992 article that anthropologists had generally abandoned the concept of race as valid?	Norman Sauer
What group still uses race as a valid means to represent human biological diversity?	forensic anthropologists
What are forensic anthropologists very good at identifying?	races
What does mapping clusters disentangle ancestry from?	culture
Hammer and others recently aimed to test what claim about how closely related present-day Jews are to what group?	neighbouring non-Jewish populations
What shifted depending on the locus investigated?	the degree of genetic similarity among Jews
What was suggested the reason for the degree of genetic shift among Jews was the result of?	natural selection acting on particular loci
What chromosome was focused on to circumvent some of the complications associated with selection?	Y
Thomas and others sought to distinguish between what chromosome of Jewish priests and that of non-Jews?	Y
What does the new "race science" call attention to the importance of?	ancestry
What do people desire to use science to confirm?	their claims about ancestry
What is fundamentally different from older notions of race?	race science
How were older notions of race used?	to explain differences in human behaviour or social status
What is a problem with racial assignments?	admixture
How many people have a varied ancestry?	Many
When were periods of numerous interracial relationships in the U.S.?	colonial and early federal history
Who do many people who identify as white have for ancestors?	African
What percentage of African ancestry were 30% of college students identifying as white estimated to have?	10%
What is the aggregate population of Paris?	10,550,350
From what census is this information from?	2012 census
What is the population of Paris' metropolitan area?	12,341,418
How many kilometers does the administrative region cover?	12,012 km²
As of 2014 how many inhabitants lived in the administrative region?	12 million
What is the most visited art museum in the world?	Louvre
what is the Musee de Orsay known for?	French Impressionist art
In what year was the Eiffel Tower built?	1889
How many visitors did Paris receive in 2014?	22.4 million
In what century was the Notre Dame Cathedral built?	12th
What is the name of the football club in Paris?	Paris Saint-Germain
What is the name of the rugby union in Paris?	Stade Français
How many seats are in Stade de France?	80,000
In what year did Paris host the World Cup?	2007
In what month is the Tour de France?	July
What was Paris known as in Latin?	Parisius
In what century was Christianity introduced?	3rd
Who brought Christianity to Paris?	Saint Denis
What is the name of Saint Denis burial place?	Basilica of Saint-Denis
Where was Saint Denis beheaded?	Mountain of Martyrs
who was the first king of the Merovingian dynasty?	Clovis the Frank
In what year was Hugh Capet elected as king?	987
What helped establish a successful defense in the Siege of Paris?	bridges
The domination of what helped create the Parisian dialect?	Gaul
What was the site of the royal palace in the 12th century?	Île de la Cité
Who was in charge of the construction of the Notre Dame Cathedral?	Maurice de Sully
Where was the University of Paris located?	The Left Bank
Under who's reign was the construction of Notre Dame Cathedral?	Louis VII
In what years did the English soldiers occupy Paris during the Hundred Years War?	1420 until 1436
Who tried to liberate the city in 1429?	Joan of Arc
What was the date of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre?	24 August 1572
In what year was Henri IV assassinated?	1610
Who was responsible for rebuilding Paris in the 1600's	Henry IV
In what year did Louis XIV move his court to Versailles?	1682
What monuments did Louis XIV have constructed?	Collège des Quatre-Nations, Place Vendôme, Place des Victoires, and began Les Invalides.
What was the reason behind demolishing the city walls?	To show that the city was safe against attack
In what city was the French Academy of Science founded	Paris
Where did Louis XVI and his family live?	Tuileries Palace
When did Napoleon Bonaparte gain power as the First Consul?	9 November 1799
Approximately how many people were executed during the Reign of Terror?	16,000
In what year was Louis-Phillipe over thrown?	1848
In what year did Napoleon III create new arrondissements?	1860
Who was Napoleon III's prefect of the Siene?	Georges-Eugène Haussmann
What type of art did Courbet, Manet, Monet and Renoir create?	Impressionism
What was the purpose of the 1889 Universal Exposition?	to mark the centennial of the French Revolution
Where was the Eiffel Tower revealed?	1889 Universal Exposition
What type of art was created by Charles Baudelaire and Paul Verlaine?	Symbolism
How many soldiers did Parisian Taxis transport to the front line at the First Battle of the Marne?	6,000
What are the years after the war commonly known as?	Les Années Folles
Who are some popular artists, writers and musicians that resided in Paris after the war?	Ernest Hemingway, Igor Stravinsky, James Joyce, Josephine Baker, Sidney Bechet and the surrealist Salvador Dalí.
On what date did the German army declare Paris as an open city?	14 June 1940
How many Jews were arrested following German orders?	12,884
Where were the Jews confined prior to being transported to Auschwitz?	Vel d'Hiv
How many children came back from Auschwitz?	None
On what date was the city liberated?	25 August 1944
How many police officers did the pro-independence FLN kill in August of 1961?	11
What was the result of the police officer killing?	curfew on Muslims of Algeria
How many people were killed during the demonstrations against the curfew?	at least 40
Who carried out bombings throughout Paris between 1961 and 1962?	Organisation de l'armée secrète
In what year was the Centre Georges Pompidou erected?	1977
What did Valery Giscard d'Estaing have erected?	Musée d'Orsay
How many years was Francois Mitterrand in power?	14
In what year was the Musee de quai Branly built?	2006
What did Jacques Chirac have built?	Musée du quai Branly
What was the population of Paris in 2011?	2.25 million
Who was the first socialist mayor of Paris?	Bertrand Delanoë
What is the system called that allows local residents to rent bicycles?	Vélib'
When was the Promenade des Berges de la Seine inaugurated?	June 2013
On what date did two Muslim extremists attack Charlie Hebdo?	7 January 2015
How many people were killed at the Charlie Hebdo attack?	thirteen
How many people marched on January 11 against terrorism?	1.5 million
Which Islamic organisation took responsibility for the attacks?	ISIL
How did the attackers kill themselves?	setting off their explosive vests
Where in France is Paris located?	northern central
How many kilometers is it away from London?	450
What major river is located in Paris?	Seine
What is the largest island in Paris?	Île de la Cité
What is the largest hill in Paris?	Montmartre
What road encircles Paris?	Boulevard Périphérique
How large is the metropolitan area of Paris?	2,300 km2
In what year was Paris' last annexation of outlying territories?	1860
How many arrondissements are there?	20
In what year were Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes annexed?	1929
Which current affects Paris' weather?	North Atlantic Current
How is Paris' climate categorized?	mild and moderately wet
What are the average temperatures for summer?	between 15 and 25 °C
What was the average temperature for July 2011?	17.6 °C
What is the average temperature during winter?	7 °C
Does Paris see snow?	sometimes sees light snow or flurries
How often does the temperature drop below -5 C	a few days a year
How many members are there in the Conseil de Paris?	163
How was Mayor Bertand Delanoe elected	majority of council members
How often does the council meet?	once a month
What years was Bertrand Delanoe Mayor?	2001-2014
What was the budget of the city in 2013	€7.6 billion
How much of the budget was allocated for city administration?	5.4 billion
What percent of the budget goes towards public housing and urbanism projects?	38
What is the main source of income for Paris?	taxes
What percentage of the budget is allocated for schools?	8
When did the Metropole du Grand Paris come into existence?	January 1, 2016
How large is the Metropole?	814 square kilometers
What is the population of the metropole?	6.945 million
What three departments of the inner suburbs are included in the metropole?	Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne
How many communes of the outer suburbs are included in the metropole?	seven
How many members are in the Metropolitan Council?	210
Who was the first president of the metropolitan council?	Patrick Ollier
What town was Patrick Ollier a mayor of?	Rueil-Malmaison
What party does Patrick Ollier associate with?	Republican
What is the budget for Metropole?	65 million Euros
In which district is the Regional Coucil housed?	7th
For how many years did the socialists governed the region?	seventeen
How many council members will they have in 2016 from the union of the Right?	121
Who led the Union of the Right?	Valérie Pécresse
Where are France's highest courts located?	Paris
What is the highest court in the judicial order?	Court of Cassation
Where does the Constitutional Council meet?	Montpensier wing of the Palais Royal
Where is the Coutt of Cassation located?	Palais de Justice
Where does the Consiel d'Etat meet?	Palais-Royal
Where is the headquarters for UNESCO?	Paris
Where is the head quarters for the International Federation for Human Rights?	Paris
Where is the head quarters for the European Space Agency?	Paris
Who is responsible for the security of Paris?	Prefecture of Police of Paris
Where is the headquarters for the Prefecture of Police of Paris?	Place Louis Lépine on the Île de la Cité
How many officers are in the Prefecture of Police of Paris?	30,200
When was the Compagnies Republicaines de Securite formed?	1944
How many vehicles are in the fleet?	6,000
Who remodeled Paris in the 19th century?	Baron Haussmann
Which two islands remain in Paris today?	île Saint-Louis, the île de la Cité
When was ile aux Cygnes created?	1827
What is the current height limitation in Paris in central areas?	50 m
Until 1973, what was Paris; tallest building?	Montparnasse
What is the name of the project for La Defense called that has not yet been started?	Hermitage Plaza
When was the Hermitage Plaza launched?	2009
How many towers were planned to be built?	two
When was La Madeleine built?	1808-1842
When was teh Palais Garnier Opera House built?	1875
When was the Eiffel Tower built?	1889
Who built the art museum of the Louis Vuitton Foundation?	Frank Gehry
Who built the Louvre Pyramid?	I.M. Pei
What was the population of the urban area of Paris in 2012 without a fixed residence?	28,800
What percentage of homelessness in France does Paris house?	43
What percentage of homeless people are women?	43
How many homeless shelters are in Paris?	sixty
Who funds these homeless shelters?	the city
What are they only two additions to Paris' administrative limits since 1860?	Bois de Boulogne, Bois de Vincennes
When was the Siene department created?	1790
WHen was District de la region parisienne reorganised?	1968
What was the Paris region renamed to?	"Île-de-France"
When was Paris reunited with its suburbs?	January 1, 2016
When did Paul Delouvrier become the head of the Paris region?	1961
What was a major problem with Paris being disconnected from its suburbs?	lack of suburban transportation
How many suburban villes nouvelles did Paul Delouvrier constuct?	five
Where are the quartiers sensibles located?	northern and eastern Paris
What two neighborhoods are the centers of the quartiers sensibles?	Goutte d'Or and Belleville
Why were these neighborhoods created?	Delouvrier's 1961 "ville nouvelle" political initiative
In Janurary of 2014, what was the population of Paris' city limits?	2,241,346
Where is Paris ranked in the EU by largest municipality?	fifth
What 4 cities are larger than Paris in the EU?	London, Berlin, Madrid and Rome
Who created The Paris Urban Area?	INSEE
According to the INSEE what is Paris Urban Area population?	10,550,350
What is Paris' peak population?	2.9 million
When was Paris' population peak?	1921
What year was the first population increase since 1954?	2004
What was the population in 2009?	2,234,000
What was the most populated city in the EU in 2012?	Commune of Paris
How many people lived per square kilometer in the city limits?	21,616
What three departments surrounding Paris had densities greater than 10k/k?	Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne
How many immigrants were in Paris in 2012 from Europe?	135,853
How many immigrants to Paris in 2012 were from the Maghreb?	112,369
How many immigrants in Paris in 2012 were from sub-Saharan Africa and Egypt?	70,852
How many Asians immigrated to Paris in 2012?	91,297
What percentage of jobs were market services in 2012?	59.5
What industry had the lowest percentage of jobs in Paris of 2012?	agriculture
What percentage of people worked in agriculture?	0.2
What percentage of people worked in finance and insurance?	5.9
How many salaried employees lived in the Paris Region in 2010?	5.4 million
Who is the second largest business district employer?	La Défense
How many people worked for La Defense in 2010?	144,600
What field did the majority of the employees at La Defense work in?	finance and insurance
What percentage of people worked in business support?	16
What two districts are extensions of the Paris business district?	Neuilly-sur-Seine and Levallois-Perret
What was Paris Region's GDP in 2012?	€624 billion
How many world headquarters of the 31 Fortune Global 500 companies are located in Paris?	29
What percentage of Frances GDP is made up from the Paris Region's GDP?	30
What as the Paris Region's economy shifted towards?	high-value-added service industries
Prior to now, what was Paris' biggest economy?	industry
Where is Paris economic Centre located?	west of the city, in a triangle between the Opéra Garnier, La Défense and the Val de Seine
In what districts are the majority of businesses service jobs located?	8th, 16th and 17th
Where are Paris' financial service companies majorly located?	8th and 9th arrondissement
What industry is located in the 1st, 6th, 8th and 9th arrondissements?	department store
What percent of Parisians work in hotels and restaurants?	Fourteen
How many peole work in the La Defense district?	144,600
What does Paris region manufacturing specialize in?	transportation
How much of a drop was there in manufacturing jobs between 1990 and 2010?	64
How many people does the Paris regions aerospace companies employ?	100,000
The closing of what plant in 20147 caused a major loss to the automobile industry?	Aulnay-sous-Bois Citroen
How many manufacturing workers does Paris have?	75,000
What does the southern Essonne department specialize in?	science and technology
What does south-eastern Val-de-Marne specialize in?	food processing and beverages
How many construction workers worked in Paris in 2011?	56,927
How many construction workers were employed in the metropolitan area?	246,639
What was the average net household income in Paris in 2011?	€36,085
What was the average income in the 19th arrondissement?	€22,095
What was the average in come in the 7th arrondissement?	€82,449
What was the unemployment rate in the city of Paris?	8.2
What was the unemployment rate in the Siene-Saint-Denis department?	13.1
What percentage of households earned less than 977 per month?	14
What percentage of people lived below the poverty line in Paris' wealthiest neighborhood?	7
WHat percentage of people in the 19th arrondissement lived below the poverty line?	Twenty-five
How many people visited Paris' museums and monuments in 2013?	72.1 million
What is Paris' top tourist attraction?	Notre Dame Cathedral
How many people visited the Louvre in 2013?	9.2 million
What is the most popular tourist attraction in Marne-la-Valee?	Disneyland Paris
Where are the most visited monuments located in Paris?	centre of Paris
What is housed at Les Invalides?	the tomb of Napoleon
Since when have the banks of the Seine from the Pont de Sully to the Pond'lena been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage site?	1991
How many hotels are in the City of Paris?	1,570
When did  The Hotel Meurice open?	1817
When was the Hotel du Louvre opened?	1855
Along what major road are most hotels located?	Champs-Élysées
What art was Paris famous for in the 16th and 17th centuries?	sculpture and reliefs
Who was the first painter to King Louis XIV?	Pierre Mignard
In what year was the Academie royale de peinture et de sculpture founded?	1648
Until what year was the Academie royale de peinture et de sculpture the top art school?	1793
What type of art did Paris help develop with painters like Gericault?	Romanticism
In what town did Picasso live?	Montmartre
What two towns were pinnacle for artistic production?	Montmartre and Montparnasse
Between what two years did Picasso paint La Famille de Saltimbanques and Les Demoiselles d'Avignon?	1905 and 1907
In what year was the first permanent photograph produced?	1825
Who invented the first permanent photograph?	Nicéphore Niépce
What was Eugene Atget known for photographing?	street scenes
Who was knows for photographing night scenes?	Marcel Bovis
When did poster art become an important art form?	late nineteenth century
What was the most visited art museum in Paris in 2014?	The Louvre
Where is the Mona Lisa housed?	The Louvre
What is the second most visited art museum in Paris?	Centre Georges Pompidou
What museum is known for its display of French art of the 19th century?	Musée du quai Branly
What is Musee national des arts asiatiques famous for housing?	collections of Asian art
What museum is famous for its dinosaur artifacts?	The National Museum of Natural History
When did THe Contemporary Art museum of the Louis Vuitton Foundation open?	October 2014
What famous landmark is Mysee de l'Armee lat Les Invalides located ner?	the tomb of Napoleon
How many museums does the city of Paris operate?	14
When did Philharmonie de Paris open?	January 2015
What are the two largest opera houses in Paris?	Opéra Garnier (historical Paris Opéra) and modern Opéra Bastille;
What does Opera Garnier specialize in?	classic ballets and operas
In what year were the first performances of Diagheliv's Ballet Russes?	1913
Where di the first performances of Diagheliv's Ballets Russes take place?	Théâtre des Champs-Élysées
When was the oldest Paris theater founded?	1680
What is the name of Paris' oldest theater?	Comédie-Française
Who runs Paris' oldest theater today?	French government
What famous museum is Comedie-Francaise located next to?	the Louvre
In what year was The Moulin Rouge opened?	1889
What dance was created at the Moulin Rouge?	French Cancan
In what year did the Crazy Horse Saloon open?	1951
Where did Grateful Dead play?	The Olympia Paris
What was the title of the first book printed in France?	Epistolae
Who wrote Epistolae?	Gasparinus de Bergamo
When was Epistolae published?	1470
In what language were most books printed in the middle ages?	Latin
What book inspired the renovation of Notre Dame?	The Hunchback of Notre Dame
Who wrote The Hunchback of Notre Dame?	Victor Hugo
During what period of time was Victor Hugo exiled from France?	Second Empire
Where did Jules Verne work during the day?	Theatre Lyrique and the Paris stock exchange
Where did Jules Verne do research for his stories?	National Library
Who was the winner of the 2014 Nobel prize in literature?	Patrick Modiano
In what century did Collete, ANdre Gide and Francois Mauriac dominate the literary community?	20th
In what city does Patrick Modiano live?	Paris
During what war did Modiano base most of his work off of?	World War II
What percentage of french publishing houses were in Paris in the 1970s?	80
Approximately how many bookstores are located in the 5th arrondissement?	150
How many bookstalls are located along the Seine?	250
What is the maximum amount a publishers book can be discounted?	five percent
in what century was a school of polyphony established at Notre Dame?	12th
In what year was the Conservatoire de Musique de Paris founded?	1795
Under whos reign did the lute become popular?	Francois I
Who wrote Carmen?	Georges Bizet's
Where was Frederic Chopin from?	Poland
What style of french music became populars in the 1870sto 1880s?	Bal-musette
in 1880, how many dance halls were in Paris?	150
What is a cabrette known as locally?	musette
What type of bars were accordions often played in?	Auvergnat
When did most of the jazz clubs close down?	1960s
Why did the jazz clubs close down?	musical tastes shifted toward rock and roll
Where were most jazz clubs located?	cellars
Where was the first movie projected for a paying audience in Paris?	Grand Café
What date was the first movie played in Paris for a paying crowd?	28 December 1895
In what decade did movie theaters become popular?	1930s
What is the largest cinema room today in Paris?	Le Grand Rex
Who realied the first digital cinema projection in Europe?	Philippe Binant
Who developed the technology for the digital cinema projection?	Texas Instruments
What types of films are most popular in Paris?	Hollywood-generated
When was the first digital cinema projection in Europe?	2 February 2000
What is the model for luxury Parisian restaurants?	La Taverne Anglaise
When did La Taverne Angaise open?	1786
In what century was Cafe Anglais, Cafe de Paris and Rocher de Cancale opened?	19th
Near what were most restaurants opened?	theatres
How many restaurants are there today in Paris?	9,000
When was the Michelin guide created?	1900
How many 3 star Michelin restaurants were in Paris in 2015?	nine
How many 3 star Michelin restaurants were in France in 2015?	29
When was the first cafe opened in Paris?	17th century
What is the oldest cafe in Paris?	Cafe Procope
What type of eating place is defined as a neighborhood restaurant?	bistro
When was the brasserie made popular?	Paris Exposition of 1867
What is clothing made to order for private clients called?	haute couture
Dior is from which city?	Paris
In what century did Paris become largely into fashion?	19th
What is the world's largest cosmetic company?	L'Oréal
How many centres of higher education are in Paris?	55
During which time frame were most grandes ecoles relocated?	1960s and 1970s
Where is ENA located?	Strasbourg,
Where is CESLA located?	Neuilly-sur-Seine
Who operates the public libraries in Paris?	Bibliothèque nationale de France
What is the Forney Library dedicated to?	decorative arts
When was the Sainte Genevieve Library built?	mid-1800s
What is the oldest public library in France?	Bibliothèque Mazarine
Which library contains four glass towers?	The François Mitterrand Library
What is the largest university library?	Sorbonne Library
Outside of France, where are the other three branches of the Sorbonne library located?	Malesherbes, Clignancourt-Championnet, Michelet-Institut d'Art et d'Archéologie, Serpente-Maison de la Recherche, and Institut des Etudes Ibériques
In what arrondissement is the Sorbonne library in Paris located?	5th
What is the most predominant religion in France?	Roman Catholic
How many parishes and curates were there in 2011?	106
How many catholic schools are in Paris?	110
How many students attend catholic schools?	75,000
How many evangelical churches are there in Paris?	74
How many parishes of the LDS church are in Paris?	two
When was the American Church in Paris founded?	1814
What is the principal Anglican church in Paris?	Saint George's Anglican Church
Who built the Marais-quarter Agodudas Hakehilos Synagogue?	Hector Guimard
When was the Marais-quarter Agoudas Hakehilos Synagogue built?	1913
When did a large number of Sephardic Jews settle in Paris?	1960s
What percentage of France's Jewish population survived the holocaust?	75
What is the former Cameroon pavilion?	The Pagode de Vincennes Buddhist temple
Where is the biggest Buddha statue in Europe?	The Pagode de Vincennes Buddhist temple
When did the Hindu temple on Rue Pajol open?	1985
How tall is the biggest Buddha statue in Europe?	more than nine metres high
How many seats are in the State de France?	80,000
What was the State de France built for?	1998 FIFA World Cup
What is the most popular football club in Paris?	Paris Saint-Germain F.C.
What is the rugby club in Paris?	Stade Français
Who oversees the transit network in Paris?	The Syndicat des transports d'Île-de-France
How many bus lines does the STIF oversee?	347
What was the STIF formerly known as?	Syndicat des transports parisiens
How many bus lines does the Optile Consortium manage?	1,176
Where does line T1 run from?	Asnières-Gennevilliers to Noisy-le-Sec
Where does line T2 run?	Pont de Bezons to Porte de Versailles
How many lines are in the rail network?	nine
where does T5 run?	Saint-Denis to Garges-Sarcelles
Who operates these lines?	Régie Autonome des Transports Parisiens
Where is the 4th busiest international air transport hub in the world?	Paris
How many passengers did Paris see in 2014?	96.5 million
What is the oldest air port in Paris?	Paris-Le Bourget
What airport does Ryanair use?	Beauvais-Tillé Airport
Where is the hub for Air France?	Charles de Gaulle Airport
What is the busiest airport in Paris?	Charles de Gaulle Airport
Where is Orly airport located?	southern suburbs of Paris
WHen did the Canal de l'Ourcq start providing Paris with water?	1809
Who was Eugene Belgrand under?	Napoleon III
How many km of underground passageways are dedicated to teh evacuationof Paris' waste liquids?	2,400
Who created Paris' reservoir system?	Eugène Belgrand
How many municipal parks and gardens does Paris have?	421
When was the Tuileries Garden created?	1564
Who redid the Tuileries Garden in 1664?	André Le Nôtre
Who was the Luxembourg palace built for?	Marie de' Medici
Who created the Jarden des Plantes?	Guy de La Brosse
Who was Paris' first director of parks and gardens?	Jean-Charles Alphand
How many new parks have been created in Paris since 1977?	166
WHen was the Parc de la Villette created?	1987
What park has floating gardens?	Promenade des Berges de la Seine
When was the Promenade des Berges de la Seine built?	2013
What is Paris' largest cemetary?	les Innocents
When were inner city burials banned?	1786
During what years were the bones moved from Cimetiere des Innocents to the catacombs?	1786 and 1814
Where can view the network of tunnels to the catacombs?	the official tour of the catacombs
Who was Prefect Nicholas Frochot under?	Napoleon Bonaparte
When were the 3 new cemeteries open?	1804
What is the largest of the cemeteries created in the 20th centuries?	Cimetière parisien de Saint-Ouen
How many people are employed at AP-HP?	90,000
How many hospitals are in Paris?	44
How many patients visit the hospitals annually?	5.8 million
Who provides emergency care in the city of Paris?	Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris
What are France's two most prestigious newspapers?	Le Monde and Le Figaro
What is France's oldest operating news agency?	Agence
When did Agence open in Paris?	1835
What television station is operated by the French government?	France 24
What is the most viewed television network in France?	TF1
Where is TF1 located?	Boulogne-Billancourt
What is France's public radio broadcaster?	Radio France
What is the name of France's national postal carrier?	La Poste
What is the word for a beardless, athletic youth?	kouros
What is one of the most important and complex of the Olympian deities in classical Greek and Roman religion?	Apollo
Who are the parents of Apollo?	Zeus and Leto
Who is Apollo's twin sister?	Artemis
What name is Apollo known by in Etruscan mythology?	Apulu
Who was described at the prophetic deity of the Delphic Oracle?	Apollo
What is the name of Apollo's son?	Asclepius
Who created the lyre for Apollo?	Hermes
What was the term for hymns sung to Apollo?	paeans
Who was the Titan goddess of the moon?	Selene
In Hellenestic times, Greeks identified Apollo Helios as what name?	Helios
What was the name of Apollo's sister?	Artemis
What is the name of the popular assembly in Sparta?	Apella
Apellon is derived from what Doric month?	Apellaios
What is offered at the initiation of young men during familly-festival apellai?	apellaia
What Doric word originally meant wall or fence for animals?	apella
What Doric word means assembly?	apella
What is the Ancient Macedonian word for stone?	pella
What is the Greek word for "to destroy?"	apollymi
Who is a god of plague?	Aplu
What is the meaning of Akkadia Apllu Enlil?	the son of Enlil
What title was given to the god Nergal?	Akkadian Aplu Enlil
Who was the Trojan priest of Apollo?	Chryses
Who was the god of light?	Apollo
Who was Apollo's mother?	Leto
Who was the patron goddess of Lycia?	Leto
What word literally means "born of a wolf?"	Lukēgenēs
Since Apollo was known as god of the sun, what was another name for Apollo?	Sol
The epithet Delphinius is associated with what animal?	dolphins
Who is Apollo's son?	Acraepheus
What epithet has historically been confused with "mouse?"	Smintheus
What is the literal word for latrus?	physician
Where did Apollo have a temple in the agora?	Elis
Where was a temple dedicated to Apollo Medicus?	Rome
What is the literal meaning of "healer?"	Paean
What word literally means "warding off evil?"	Alexicacus
What world literally means "founder?"	Archegetes
What word literally mens "ancestor?"	Genetor
What word means "to avert?"	Agyieus
Which epithet has historically been associated with ambiguous?	Loxias
Which epithet did Apollo have as god of music and arts?	Musagetes
Which epithet did Apollo have as god of prophecy and truth?	Manticus
Which epithet did Apollo have as god of healing and of prophecy?	Iatromantis
As god of archery, Apollo was known by what name?	Aphetor
What name literally means "far-shooting?"	Hecaërgus
Who was the son of Amphion and Niobe?	Ismenius
Who struck his parents with an arrow?	Ismenius
Who was Apollo's twin sister?	Artemis
To whom was the Delos sanctuary dedicated?	Artemis
Who discerned three components in the prehistory of Apollo worship?	Walter Burkert
Who brought the art of inspection of "symbols and omina?"	Apollo
The inspiration oracular-cult was probably introduced from where?	Anatolia
Which group created the legalism, the supervision of the orders of the gods, and the demand for moderation and harmony?	The Greeks
What were magicians also called?	seer-doctors
Who is the physician of the Gods in the Iliad?	Paean
What is a comon epithet of Apollo as a healer?	paion
In classical times, what was Apollo's strong function in popular religion?	keep away evil,
What is a word for "defent from evil?"	alexikakos
Who was Apollo's son?	Asclepius
About the 4th Century BCE, what became merely a formula of adulation?	paean
About the 4th Century BCE, what was the object of paean?	to implore protection against disease and misfortune
What does the word Pella mean?	stone
What represents Apollo as a Northern intruder?	Homeric hymn
What played an important part in the cult of the god?	Stones
Who was the adversary of Zeus in the titanomachy?	Typhon
Who did the narrator confuse with Phyton?	Typhon
Who was represented as a dragon?	Python
Who is Apollo's sister?	Artemis
It was believed that this woman could bring death with her arrows.	Artemis
In Greek mythology, who was the leader of the nymphs?	Artemis
What was the name for "the double-axe men?"	Labryaden
What is another name for the double-axe?	labrys
Who was the Minoan "Mistres of the animals?"	Britomartis
Who was Apollo's sister?	Artemis
Who did scholars beieve carried on the rituals in a consistent procedure?	Pythia
Who is a mythical seeress of Anatoian origin?	Sibyl
What Greek tradition seems to be confirmed by recent studies?	existence of vapours and chewing of laurel-leaves
Who describes Delphi and Dodona as frenzied women?	Plato
What two women were said to be obsessed by "mania?"	Delphi and Dodona
What Greek word is connected with mantis?	mania
Who was Apollo's mother?	Leto
What origin was Leto?	Lydian
Where was Leto worshipped?	Asia Minor
What is the origin of Sibyl?	Anatolia
Who is the Cretan seer that purified Athen after the pollution brought by the Alcmeonidae?	Epimenides
Who told the story of the Cretan seer Epimenides?	Plutarch
What group was probably heir to the shemanic religions of Asia?	Epimenides
Who was a tutelary god of Wilusa?	Appaliunas
When were Greek festivals celebrated?	at the full moon
When were the feasts of Apollo celebrated?	seventh day of the month
What age ran from 1700 to 1200 BCE?	The Late Bronze Age
Who was a god of plague?	Hittite and Hurrian Aplu
Who is the mouse God?	Apollo Smintheus
What word means "the son of?"	Aplu
which two cult sites had widespread infuence?	Delos and Delphi
Who tried to revive the Delphic oracle?	Julian the Apostate
In what did Apollo confirm that all deities are aspects of servants of an all-encopassing highest deity?	theological oracles
What buildings were originally rectangle wood structures?	peripteral temples
Why did mathematical relations become necessary?	in order to keep the original forms
Why were the first buildings narrow?	to hold the roof
Who believed that behind the appearance of things, there was a permanent principle of mathematics?	Pythagoras
Who kidnapped Eileithyia?	Hera
Who was the goddess of childbirth?	Eileithyia
How long was the necklace offered to Hera?	nine yards
What was the necklace made of?	amber
What was the day of the new moon?	The seventh
What was the name of the chthonic dragon?	Python
which spring emitted vapors that caused the oracle at Delphi to give her prophecies?	Castalian Spring
Who was Apollo's mother?	Leto
Where did Apollo kill Python?	the sacred cave at Delphi. Apollo
Who was a parent of Python?	Gaia
Who is Apollo's son?	Asclepius
Why did Zeus strike down Asclepius with a lightning bolt?	for resurrecting Hippolytus from the dead
How long was Apollo sentenced for killing Cyclopes?	one year of hard labor
Who was the daughter of Peneus?	Daphne
Who is Daphne's father?	Peneus
Who shot Daphne with a leaden arrow?	Cupid
Who was Leucothea's mother?	Orchamus
Who is Leucothea's sister?	Clytia
Who did Leucothea fall in love with?	Leucothea
Who ordered Leucothea to be buried alive?	Orchamus
Who was the daughter of Phlegyas?	Coronis
Who owas King of the Lapiths?	Phlegyas
How was Apollo informed of the affair between Coronis and Ischys?	A crow
Who was the son of Elatus?	Ischys
Who was one of Apollo's male lovers?	Hyacinthus
What hit Hyacinthus in the head, killing him?	discus
Who blew the discus off course, killing Hyacinthus?	Zephyrus
What item did Apollo create and name after his lover?	flower
Who argued about whether the matricide was justified?	Apollo and the Furies
Who says the bond of blood between mother and son is more meaningfu than the bond of marriage?	Erinyes
Who holds that the bond of marriage is sacred?	Apollo
Who was accused of matricide?	Orestes
Who challenged Apollo to a trial of skill?	Pan
Who was a faithful follower of Pan?	Midas
Who was the mountain-god?	Tmolus
Who was chosen as umpire of the trial of skill?	Tmolus
What instrument did Apolo play?	lyre
What instrument did Marsyas know how to play?	flute
Who could not sing at the same time he played the flute?	Marsyas
What is said to have turned into the river Marsyas?	Marsyas' blood
Where was Apollo's first temple at Rome established?	Flaminian fields
When was the Second Punic war?	212 BCE
What is another name for the Ludi Apollinares?	Apollonian Games
Who was god of colonization?	Apollo
When was the height of colonization?	750–550 BCE
What does Lykegenes mean?	born in Lycia
Who was the god of wine?	Dionysus
In literary contexts, who represents harmony, order and reason?	Apollo
Where did Apollo go in winter?	Hyperborea
Whose masterpieces are a mixture of naturallism with stylization?	Praxiteles
In whose depictions can the evolution of Greek sculpture be observed?	Praxiteles
Who seems to be released from any art and religious conformities?	Praxiteles
Who asserted that a divine reason gave order to the seeds of the universe?	Anaxagoras
Who extended the Greek beilef of idea forms to his metaphysical theory of forms?	Plato
What is one Greek word that has the same root as the word idea?	eidos
What is the modern term given to those representations of stnding male youths that first appear in the archaic period in Greece?	Kouros
What is another word for male youth?	Kouros
Who was the immortal god of ideal balance?	Apollo
The period between 640-580 BC was known as what?	early archaic period
What was the name of the Dipylon master?	Daedalus
Who created the New York kouros?	Daedalus
Who is said to be the builder of the labyrinth?	Daedalus
During what period was art's main theme the representation of motion in a specific movement?	Minoan period
These free-standing statues were sometimes rendered from immestone, bronze, ivory and terracotta but were usually made from what material?	marble
What period ran from 520-485 BC?	late archaic period
What was the harbour of Athens?	Piraeus
What did Piraeus Apollo hold in his left hand?	the bow
What did Piraeus Apollo hold in his right hand?	a cup of pouring libation
Who wrote that beauty consists in the proportion not of the elements?	Polykleitos
In what type of art does the god hold the cithara in his left arm?	Apollo Citharoedus statue type
What type of art is modeled after a supposed Greek bronze original made in the second quarter of the 5th Century BCE.	neo-Attic Imperial Roman copies of the late 1st or early 2nd century
The statues of who were thought to incarnate his living presence?	Apollo
Representations of illusive imaginative reality had deep roots in what period?	Minoan
What people saw the mountains, forests, sea and rivers as inhabited by concrete beings?	Greeks
Who seemed to have been dominated by geometrical pattern and order?	The artists
What rely on presenting scenes directly to the eye for their own visibe sake?	These representations
While each scene has its own character and completeness, it must fit into what?	the general sequence to which it belongs
Who is often depicted with a kithara or bow in his hand?	Apollo
What is the name of a marble sculpture that was rediscovered in the late 15th century?	The Apollo Belvedere
Who made the Apollo Belvedere?	Leochares
When did Leochares make The Apollo Belvedere?	between 350 and 325 BCE
How many States renounced their preferred political party?	three
Which state switched sides and embraced the Democratic party after previously choosing the Republican party?	New Hampshire
How many votes did Kerry receive, in the Electoral College?	252
How large of a gap was there between Bush's and Kerry's votes?	the smallest ever
Which candidate, in the 2004 election, had the majority of the popular vote?	Bush
What even occured during Bush's presidency that made him become a wartime president?	terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001
How long into Bush's presidency did tragedy occur on American soil?	eight months
Did Bush become disfavorable during the time of the 9/11 attacks?	surged to near 90%
How long did it take for the US military to respond by infiltrating Afghanistan?	Within a month
By which month, were the Taliban no longer controlling Kabul?	December
Who did Bush feel was important to remove from power, after removing the Taliban from Kabul?	Saddam Hussein
What does WMD stand for?	weapons of mass destruction
When did Iraq agree to allow UN inspectors into the country to check for weapons of mass destruction?	November 2002
Did Bush have the support of the UN, when he decided to infiltrate Iraq on March 20, 2003?	without UN authorization
After the Iraqi government and it's forces were defeated, were investigators able to locate the WMD?	they failed to find the predicted WMD stockpiles
By what date did Bush obtain the number of votes required to become the 2004 Republican nominee?	March 10, 2004
When did Bush accept the Republican nomination?	September 2, 2004
Whom did Bush want to stand beside him as Vice President?	Dick Cheney
Which two topics did Bush remain steadfast on, during his campaign?	terrorism and building an ownership society
In New York State, which party was the Bush/Cheney duo candidates of?	Conservative Party
Who became the Democratic nominee, half way through 2003?	Howard Dean
Dean's admiration for internet campaigning accredited his strength as what?	a fund raiser
What did Dean's backers become known as?	Deaniacs
What government position has Howard Dean previously held?	governor
Which of Bush's policies did Dean criticize most notably?	the 2003 invasion of Iraq
Which Democratic nominee declared his intention to enter into the presidential race, in the fall of 2003?	Wesley Clark
What did Wesley Clark's initial campaign ads depend upon?	biography
What were Wesley Clarks's core issues?	leadership and patriotism
What shortcoming was noticeable, from the start, for Wesley Clark?	few detailed policy proposals
Was Wesley Clark influential in gathering the Democratic backing?	did not flock to support his campaign
Who had the least amount of backers, between Kerry and Dean?	Kerry
Which state was expected to show the least amount of support for Kerry going into the caucuses, before Iowa?	New Hampshire
What act showed that Kerry's fight for the White House was in trouble?	he fired campaign manager Jim Jordan
Who took over for Jim Jordon, when he was fired?	Mary Beth Cahill
What regulation did Kerry not follow to try to save his campaign?	mortgaging his own home to lend the money to his campaign
Who, at the start of the primaries, had the most single campaign contributors?	Lyndon LaRouche
Who had the highest amount of single campaign contributors, at the final quarter of the primaries?	John Kerry
Who earned the fewest individual contributions as of the April 15th filing date?	Gephardt
What agency provided statistical information regarding the Presidential Candidates' individual contributors?	Federal Election Commission
How many candidates remained by the end of the Iowa caucuses, in January 2004?	nine
Which two candidates had surprising results despite Howard Dean being the strong front-runner?	John Kerry, who earned 38% of the state's delegates and John Edwards
Which candidate slipped into third place, following the Iowa caucuses?	Dean
Preceding the Iowa caucuses, which candidates used naysaying tactics in their campaigning?	Dean and Gephardt
Which candidate dropped out of the race, leaving the field to nine candidates?	Bob Graham
Which candidate, after dropping out, went on to endorse Kerry?	Gephardt
Which troubled candidate did Carol Moseley Braun end up endorsing, after she dropped out?	Howard Dean
The continual playing of Dean's post-rally speech by the media stirred what type of controversy?	whether Dean was the victim of media bias
What tag did the media attach to Dean's post-rally speech?	"Dean Scream"
Did those in attendance at Dean's speech know about the "Dean Scream"?	they were not aware
Which candidate went on to win the South Carolina primary?	John Edwards
Which candidate won the Oklahoma primary?	Clark
Which candidate dropped out of the race, following losing the Oklahoma primary?	Lieberman
Which candidate received heighted support after winning caucuses and primaries in many states?	Kerry
After Clark and Dean dropped out, which candidate was considered to be the only real contender against Kerry?	Edwards
Which candidate was the fore-runner after definitively winning in the primaries and Minnesota caucuses?	Kerry
Which candidate won his state primary, despite having already dropped out of his race?	Dean
Which candidate finished in second place in the Georgia primary?	Edwards
Besides Georgia, what other state primary did Edwards win?	South Carolina
Which candidate dropped out of the race, next after Edwards?	Sharpton
Who did John Kerry choose to be by his side as the potential Vice President?	John Edwards
How many candidates did John Kerry name as potential prospects to be his running mate?	three
What was the Kerry/Edwards slogan that was released prior to the start of the convention in Boston?	"stronger at home and more respected in the world."
Which part of Kerry's Boston speech made reference to his military experience?	"I'm John Kerry and I'm reporting for duty."
Which famous line from Kerry's speech was later featured in one of his later television ad campaigns?	"the future doesn't belong to fear, it belongs to freedom"
What was the primary focus of Bush's campaign?	national security
How did Bush try to convey that he was the stronger, tougher candidate?	presenting himself as a decisive leader and contrasted Kerry as a "flip-flopper."
What phrase did Kerry use to try to express that he was more concerned for America?	"Stronger at home, respected in the world."
What does Kerry feel Bush aliented the American people with?	his foreign policy
The stategy that Bush used against Kerry was compared to what other similar strategy in the past?	just as his father did with Dukakis in the 1988 election
Who was accused on not fulfilling their military service, during the fall of 2004?	Bush
What shifted attention away from the coverage regarding Bush's controvery regarding his required service?	a segment on 60 Minutes
Which news agency came under review resulting in the firing of their producer?	CBS News
Which time period came into the spotlight, during the fall of 2004?	the late 1960s and early 1970s
What did the documents that were aired during the 60 Minutes segment come to be known as?	Killian documents
Where did the first debate, between Kerry and Bush take place?	University of Miami
Who was considered to have been the winner of the debate?	Kerry
Who was the moderator of the first debate between Kerry and Bush?	Jim Lehrer
What was thought to be the main focal point of the debate?	foreign policy
How did the opinion regarding Kerry change, after being delared the winner of the debate?	strengthening what had come to be seen as a weak and troubled campaign
Where was the second debate for presidency held?	Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri
Was the second debate held in a rigid, formalistic manner?	town meeting format, less formal
Was there a specific topic as the main focus for the second debate?	taking questions on a variety of subjects from a local audience
Who was the moderator of the second debate, held at the Washington University?	Charles Gibson
How did Bush try to make light of himself after being made fun of for his demeanor during the first debate?	joking at one point about one of Kerry's remarks, "That answer made me want to scowl."
How many debates were there in total, between Kerry and Bush?	third
Where was the final debate, between Kerry and Bush held?	Arizona State University
What was the next biggest competitor for television viewers, next to the debate?	Major League Baseball playoffs broadcast simultaneously
Who did Kerry publicize as a lesbian while discussing gay rights, some time after the debate?	Vice President Cheney's daughter
What did Cheney refer to him as, after hearing Kerry's comments about his daughter?	"a pretty angry father"
Who received a certified ballot from the Electoral College, despite his name being spelled incorrectly on the ballot?	John Edwards
Had there ever been a time where an elector voted for the same candidate to be both president and vice president?	This was the first time in U.S. history
Which candidate won the unanimous vote for vice presidency?	All ten electors in the state cast ballots for John Edwards for vice president
What is different in comparison between the 1800 electoral system and the system in place in 2004?	under that electoral system only votes for the president's position were cast, with the runner-up in the Electoral College becoming vice president
In the 1800 election, why did Thomas Jefferson get the second vote?	it violated Electoral College rules
Why was there tension the day after the election?	It was clear that the result in Ohio, along with two other states who had still not declared (New Mexico and Iowa), would decide the winner
Despite an apparent lead by Bush early on, what was thought to be a concern?	provisional ballots that had yet to be counted, initially reported to number as high as 200,000
How would it be determined who would win, in the event of an electoral tie?	The result of an electoral tie would cause the election to be decided in the House of Representatives with each state casting one vote, regardless of population
Which state became the most important to secure Bush's presidential election?	the outcome of the election hinged solely on the result in Ohio
Who did Bush lose the popular vote to in the 2000 election for presidency?	Al Gore
Was there any debate about the voting process in Ohio?	a motion was made contesting Ohio's electoral votes
What was the decision regarding the motion to re-count the votes, after each House finalized their debates?	During the debate, no Senator argued that the outcome of the election should be changed by either court challenge or revote
Who was the lone supporter of the motion, from the Senate?	Senator Boxer
Why did Senator Boxer say she voted the way she did?	Senator Boxer claimed that she had made the motion not to challenge the outcome, but to "shed the light of truth on these irregularities."
How many people from the House of Representatives did not vote?	Not voting were 52 Republicans and 80 Democrats
What did Kerry say affected the ability to know if the results of the Ohio vote was unbiased?	"the widespread irregularities make it impossible to know for certain that the [Ohio] outcome reflected the will of the voters."
Which Democratic official supported Kerry's theory about the Ohio votes?	Howard Dean
What was said about the devices used to collect the votes, in Ohio?	the machines were not reliable
Who was targeted for defrauding the electoral process, in Ohio?	the Republicans are willing to do things that are unethical to manipulate elections
Who was called in to watch over the presidential election in 2004?	the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) sent a team of observers to monitor the presidential elections in 2004
Was this the only occasion the OSCE was invited to preside over a presidential election?	It was the first time the OSCE had sent observers to a U.S. presidential election, although they had been invited in the past.
What were the findings of the OSCE team?	mostly met the OSCE commitments included in the 1990 Copenhagen Document
What type of values did the OSCE determine were adhered to during the election process?	long-standing democratic tradition
What finance act affected the 2004 election?	the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002
Where did the moniker McCain-Feingold Bill come from?	its sponsors in the United States Senate
How did the 527 groups come up with their title?	Named for a section of the Internal Revenue Code
What stipulation enabled the 527 groups to campaign for funds?	as long as they do not coordinate their activities with political campaigns
What is one of the named 527 groups from the 2004 election?	MoveOn.org
How were viewers able to determine who endorsed political campaign ads, they saw in advertisements??	required to include a verbal disclaimer identifying the organization responsible for the advertisement
What was disallowed in advertising during the two months prior to the general election?	60 days before the general election), such organizations' ads were prohibited from mentioning any candidate by name
Official advertisements generally contained what phrase?	"I'm [candidate's name], and I approve this message."
Independent advertisements generally contained what phrase?	"[Organization name] is responsible for the content of this advertisement"
What was the tag line requirement before?	Previously, television advertisements only required a written "paid for by" disclaimer on the screen.
What action suggested by a state, would have affecting the outcome of the electoral votes?	ballot initiative in Colorado, known as Amendment 36
What unique change to the electoral voting process did Colorado suggest should happen?	under the amendment Colorado would have assigned presidential electors proportionally to the statewide vote count, which would be a unique system
Which two states designated their assigned votes based on their districts?	Nebraska and Maine assign electoral votes based on vote totals within each congressional district)
Did everyone agree that Amendment 36 was a good idea?	Detractors claimed that this splitting would diminish Colorado's influence in the Electoral College
Did Amendment 36 get passed?	the amendment ultimately failed
What was the original name of IBM?	Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company
What does IBM stand for?	International Business Machines
In what year was CTR created?	1911
What was the unofficial name given to IBM by analysts?	Big Blue
Who created the IBM name?	Thomas J. Watson
In what year did the company that was to become IBM form?	1911
What was the name of the company that eventually became IBM?	Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company (CTR)
In what year did IBM get its name?	1924
What nickname was given to IBM?	Big Blue
What is one parent company of the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company?	Computing Scale Company
How many employees did IBM have in 2012?	435,000 worldwide
What was the ranking in terms of market cap for IBM in 2012?	fourth largest
In 2011 Forbes, by revenue, ranked IBM at what rank globally?	31st largest
At what rank was IBM rated as a global brand by Interbrand?	№2
In 2012 Fortune ranked the largest US firms by number employees, what was IBMs rank?	second largest
Under what name do research laboratories operated by IBM work under?	IBM Research
How many research labs does IBM have world wide?	12 research laboratories worldwide
In 2013 how many years had IBM generated the most patents by a business?	22 consecutive years
How many Nobel Prizes have been won by IBM employees?	five Nobel Prizes
This IBM invention is known by the acronym UPC, what is the full name?	Universal Product Code
What was IBM's operating margin in 2004?	16.8%
What were the net profit margins of IBM in 2004?	9.0%
IBM's net profit margins were 16.5% in what year?	2013
IBM's operating margin in 2013 was what?	24.3%
IBM focusing on markets like business continuity, business intelligence, security, and cloud computing is an example of IBM doing what?	exiting commoditizing markets
In what year did IBM acquire Kenexa?	2012
IBM made an acquisition in 2009, name it.	SPSS
IBM span off its printer manufacturer in 1991, what was its name?	Lexmark
IBM sold two product lines to Lenovo, name them.	personal computer and x86 server
What was the name of the company that IBM Micro Electronics was offloaded to?	GlobalFoundries
On what date did the companies that became the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company get consolidated?	June 16, 1911
Name the individual that consolidated the companies that were to become the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company.	Charles Ranlett Flint
In what year did the companies owned by Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company finally integrate?	1933
Where was the CTR Business office?	Endicott
In 1933 the four companies owned by CTR had how many employees?	1,300 employees
In what year did Thomas J. Watson, Sr. join CTR?	1914
Thomas J. Watson Sr. was fired from what company?	National Cash Register Company
What was the favorite slogan of Thomas J. Watson Sr.?	THINK
The revenues did what under the first 4 years of Watson being president?	more than doubled to $9 million
The name International Business Machines was first used in what year?	1917
What what was the name of the subsidiary working in Germany during World War 2?	Dehomag
Records for how many people were maintained by IBM in 1937?	26 million
What service did IBM provide for the Nuremberg Trials?	translation services
What year did IBM open its first office in Bahrain?	1947
What was the eventual name of the company that IBM operated in Saudi Arabia?	Saudi Business Machines
Thomas Watson Sr. stepped down in what year?	1952
In 1956 the company demonstrated the first example of what?	artificial intelligence
What computer did Arthur L. Samuel program to play checkers in 1957?	an IBM 704
In 1957 the FORTRAN language was created, what is FORTRAN short for?	FORmula TRANslation
In 1961 who became the president of IBM?	Albert L. Williams
One company that IBM acquired in 2002 is?	PwC consulting
In 2003 IBM hosted an online discussion with how many employees?	50,000 employees
What technology did IBM use for its 2003 internet-based discussion?	Jam technology
What did IBM use to analyze the results from the online discussion?	eClassifier
How many employees took part in the subsequent online discussion in 2004?	52,000 employees
IBM sold its personal computer business to what company?	Lenovo
In what year did IBM sell its personal computer business?	2005
What was the design for low cost data encryption named?	Secure Blue
SPSS Inc. was acquired in what year?	2009
This program was awarded the National Medal of Technology and Innovation.	Blue Gene
IBM acquired digital assets of this company on October 28, 2015.	The Weather Company
What will IBM use to analyze weather and make predictions?	Watson
When did the sale of Weather Company assets close?	January 29, 2016
The Weather Channel entered into what with IBM?	long-term licensing agreement
Bain Capital is a holding company of which company?	The Weather Company
IBM has how many members on its Board of Directors?	14
What board member resigned in November 2010?	Cathie Black's
What year did William R. Brody join the IBM Board of Directors?	'07
Kenneth Chenault is affiliated with what company?	American Express
Who is the most recent member to join the IBM Board of Directors?	Andrew N. Liveris
How large of a drop in sales did IBM report for fiscal year 2013?	5% drop
What date did IBM announce that its executives would forgo bonuses for fiscal year 2013?	January 21, 2014
IBM committed to an expansion totaling this dollar amount in 2014?	$1.2bn
How many new data centers did IBM commit to building?	15
Who is the chief executive of IBM?	Virginia Rometty
What building did Van der Rohe create for IBM?	330 North Wabash building in Chicago
The 330 North Wabash building served as what post World War 2?	center of the company's research division
The 330 North Wabash Building was recognized with what award?	1990 Honor Award
IBM has towers in which cities?	Montreal, Paris, and Atlanta
IBM has worked with architects and designers such as Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, I.M. Pei, and Van der Rohe, name one  more.	Eero Saarinen
Who was the CEO in 1914?	Thomas J. Watson
The Quarter Century Club began in this year.	1924
What is the name of IBM's internal magazine?	Business Machines
In 1925 the first meeting of this group occurred.	Hundred Percent Club
What is the Hundred Percent Club composed of?	IBM salesmen who meet their quotas
In what year did IBM begin to provide group life insurance?	1934
IBM created a school house in 1933, what was its name?	IBM Schoolhouse at Endicott
IBM employees created a magazine in 1935, what was its name?	Think
What program did IBM launch in 1942?	program to train and employ disabled people
What year did IBM hire its first black salesman?	1946
Who published IBM's first equal opportunity policy letter?	Thomas J. Watson, Jr
In what year was IBM's first equal opportunity policy letter published?	1952
In 1961 IBM's nondiscrimination policy was expanded to include what?	sex, national origin, and age
Starting in 1963 IBM started a program by naming 8 of these.	IBM Fellows
How many inventors were honored at IBM's first Invention Award Dinner?	34
What date did Thomas Watson, Jr. send out a letter about IBM hiring the best people regardless of race, gender, or origin?	September 21, 1953
IBM publicized its hiring policy to help negotiations in two states where in the U.S.?	the U.S. South
What kind of workplaces did IBM commit to not building?	separate-but-equal
IBM expanded their nondiscrimination policy in 1984 to include what?	sexual orientation
In what year did IBM add sexual orientation to their nondiscrimination policy?	1984
IBM began supporting this in 1998.	Linux
300 Linux kernel developers work here.	the IBM Linux Technology Center
IBM created the software framework known as?	Eclipse
What is a notable legal case involving open source and IBM?	SCO v. IBM
What does RDBMS refer to?	relational database management system
IBM runs what website for software developers?	DeveloperWorks
In 2007 what happened to developerWorks?	was inducted into the Jolt Hall of Fame
DeveloperWorks has content about open industry standard technologies like Java and SOA, what is one other industry standard technology it has resources for?	Linux
IBM products such as WebSphere and Rational are covered on DeveloperWorks, what other three IBM products are covered?	Lotus, Tivoli and Information Management
The Jolt Hall of Fame inducted DeveloperWorks in what year?	2007
What kind of processor was in the Xbox 360?	PowerPC tri-core processor
How quickly did IBM take to create the Xbox 360 processor?	less than 24 months
Playstation 3 featured which microprocessor?	Cell BE microprocessor
Who helped IBM develop the Playstation 3 microprocessor?	Toshiba, and Sony
What year did the Nintendo Wii U, partly developed by IBM, debut?	2012
What will Open Client Offering run on?	Linux, Microsoft Windows and Apple's Mac OS X
What is an alternative to the Office document format from Microsoft?	Open Document Format software
What percentage of its desktop PCs does IBM plan to install Open Client on to?	5%
Which platforms did IBM begin offering the IBM Client for Smart Work on?	Ubuntu and Red Hat Enterprise Linux
What web browser does the Open Document Format have compatibility with?	Mozilla Firefox
What is the name of the IBM project that redirected $1 billion each year to increase energy efficiency?	Project Big Green
Secure Blue was launched in what year?	2006
What type of hardware is Secure Blue?	encryption hardware
Who was the IBM ceo in November 2008?	Sam Palmisano
What framework did IBM announce on March 1, 2011?	Smarter Computing framework
What is the name of the program that IBM uses to search for new start-up companies to solve world problems?	SmartCamp
How many SmartCamp events does IBM hold worldwide?	17
Who has IBM partnered with to allow retail shoppers to easily donate money?	Pennies
Charities of which nation benefit from the IBM partnership with Pennies?	UK
What company is known for the electronic charity box?	Pennies
What location is the birthplace of IBM?	Endicott
How many gallons of liquid cleaning agent leaked from an IBM facility in 1979?	4,100 gallons
How long did IBM use liquid cleaning agents for circuit board manufacturing?	more than two decades
Starting in 1980 how many gallons of chemicals did IBM pump into the air?	78,000 gallons
IBM was identified by what department as a major source of pollution?	Department of Environmental Conservation
What is economic liberalism sometimes also referred to?	New Right
Does the Liberal Party of Australia consider itself socialist or anti-socialist?	anti-socialist
Who was the Liberal Party of Australia's longest-serving leader?	Robert Menzies
Who founded Australia's liberal party?	Robert Menzies
Whom are referred to as "The forgoten people?"	the middle class
In what year were the Australian Democrats founded?	1977
Which former liberal founded the Australian Democrats in 1977?	Don Chipp
Did Mezies and Malcom Fraser raise, mainain, or lower tariff levels?	generally maintain
Which group is currently known as the "National Party"?	the Country Party
What is the "New Right"?	a conservative liberal group who advocated market deregulation, privatisation of public utilities, reductions in the size of government programs and tax cuts
Were utilities publically or privately owned in Menzie's economy?	publicly
Which group was predecessor to the Liberals?	United Australia Party (UAP)
From where did the ideology of the Liberals stem?	anti-Labor groupings in the first Commonwealth parliaments
What did the Commonwealth Liberal Party merge to form?	Nationalist Party of Australia
In what year was the Nationalist Party of Australia formed?	1917
What economic event influenced the 1931 Election?	the Great Depression
How many consecutive elections did the Lyons Government win?	three
What event caused Robert Menzies to become Prime Minister?	Lyons' death in 1939
What years did Robert Menzies serve as Prime Minister?	1939 to 1941
To what are Menzies' "Forgotten People" radio talks compared to?	Franklin D. Roosevelt's "fireside chats"
How did Roosevelt refer to the middle class?	"backbone of Australia"
Was the meeting at Canberra a group of people supporting or opposed to the Australian Labor Party?	opposed
Where was the second anti-Labor Party held in 1944?	Albury, New South Wales
Where was the formation of the Liberal party officially announced?	Sydney Town Hall
Where did the name "Liberal" come from?	in honour of the old Commonwealth Liberal Party
What was the name of the Liberal Party's youth division?	Young Liberals
How many members were in the Young Liberals by Sept 1945?	more than 90,000
How many years did the Liberals stay in office after the 1949 election?	a record 23 years
What promises did Menzies make in the 1949 election?	end rationing of butter, tea and petrol and provided a five-shilling endowment for first-born children
During what period did Australia experience long-term economic growth?	the post-war boom period of the Menzies Government (1949–1966)
What was a key political topic in the 1950s and 1960s?	Anti-communism
What actions showed Menzies' anti-Communist beliefs?	committed troops to the Korean War and attempted to ban the Communist Party of Australia in an unsuccessful referendum during the course of that war
Over what did the Labor party divide?	concerns about the influence of the Communist Party over the Trade Union movement,
Which treaty was Australia's first military alliance outside of the British Commonwealth?	ANZUS Treaty
Which areas were involved in the ANZUS Treaty?	Australia, New Zealand and the United States
What does the acronym SEATO stand for?	South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty
Which group is a counterpart to NATO?	the South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty (SEATO)
Where was the signing of the ANZUS Treaty held in 1951?	San Francisco
What did the Immigration Act's entry permit system include?	economic and skills criteria
Which ruling allowed indigenous Australians the right to vote?	Menzies' Commonwealth Electoral Act
Who was the first women to serve on the Australian Cabinet?	Dame Enid Lyons
Government under whom experienced the conversion to decimal currency?	Holt
Which of Holt's stances received some public opposition?	commitment to the growing War in Vietnam
Which Referendum allowed Indigenous Australians to be counted in the Census?	1967 Referendum
What overhelming percent of Australians voted for the 1967 Referendum?	90%
Which government put an emphasis in supporting the arts?	The Gorton Government
Which government established equal pay for men and women?	The Gorton Government
What year did the Gorton Government stop replacing troups in Vietnam?	end of 1970
Which continent did Gorton wish to pursue closer ties with?	Asia
Who commented that Gorton was not fit to be Prime Minister?	Defence Minister Malcolm Fraser
Was Gorton impeached, voted out, or did he resign?	he resigned
Which countries did Gorton maintain close relationships with?	United States and Britain
Who became the first indigenous Austrailian in Parliament?	Neville Bonner
How long did Bonner serve as a Liberal Senator?	12 years
How was Bonner appointed his position?	chosen by the Liberal Party to fill a Senate vacancy in 1971
On what day did the 1975 constitutional crisis deadlock end?	11 November 1975
How did the gridlock between Whitlam and Fraser end?	the Whitlam government was dismissed by the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr
Who won the 1975 election by large margin?	Fraser
Which document allowed Indigenous peoples the right to some traditional lands?	Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976
What environmental consequence affected the Australian economy by 1983?	a severe drought
Which party did Don Chipp seperate to form in 1977?	Australian Democrats
Who did Frazer eventually lose to in 1983?	Bob Hawke
How was Howard different from Paul Keating?	he supported traditional Australian institutions like the Monarchy in Australia, the commemoration of ANZAC Day and the design of the Australian flag
In what ways was Howard similar to Paul Keating?	pursued privatisation of public utilities and the introduction of a broad based consumption tax
Which government supported the US's war Afghanistan and Iraq?	The Howard Government
Under what agreement did the Australian government support the US?	the ANZUS treaty
Which parties merged in Queensland in 2008 to form the new Liberal National Party of Queensland?	the Liberal and National parties
In March 2012, which party won by an historic landslide?	the new Liberal National Party of Queensland
Who led the new Liberal National Party of Queensland through the election in March 2012?	former Brisbane Lord Mayor, Campbell Newman
How close was the race betwen Turnbull and Abbott in 2009?	42 votes to 41
Who was elected to the Parliamentary Liberal Party after the 2007 Federal Election?	Dr Brendan Nelson
To whom did Nelson lose the party to in 2008?	Malcolm Turnbull
Who is the Australian Liberal Party's leader?	Malcolm Turnbull
Who was Turnbull elected to replace?	Tony Abbott
Who is the Australian Party's deputy leader?	Julie Bishop
What was the former name of the Turnbull Government?	the Abbott Government
Who was the first indigenous Australian elected to the House?	Ken Wyatt
In what year was the first indigenous Australian elected to the House of Representatives?	2010
In what year was the first Aboriginal Senator elected?	1971
How many state divisions exist in the Liberal Party's organisation?	six
Which politician purposely created strong state divisions to a weaker national party?	Menzies
Who makes party policy?	almost entirely by the parliamentary parties, not by the party's rank-and-file members
Was Menzies for or against nationalizing the banking system in Australia?	strongly against
What helped the Liberals to victory in December 1955?	the formation of the anti-Communist Democratic Labor Party (DLP) and the consequent split in the Australian Labor Party early in 1955
When did Menzies resign from Parliament?	26 January 1966
Which two title holders fought for political power in the early 1990s?	former Treasurer John Howard competing with former Foreign Minister Andrew Peacock
What was the Australian unemployment rate in 1992?	11.4%
What discussion proved an example of the difficulty of explaining what foods were and were not included in the Goods and Services Tax?	the infamous birthday cake interview
How long was Tom Playford in political power?	from the 1933 election to the 1965 election
How many consecutive losses has the Liberal party faced since the 2002 election?	a record five
During what years did the dismantling of the Playmander begin?	1968 election to the 1970 election
What was William Scott Wilson's occupation?	translator
What are samurai usually called in Japanse?	bushi (武士?, [bu.ɕi]) or buke (武家?)
Where is the first known use of 'samurai'?	Kokin Wakashū
When is the first known use of 'samurai'?	905–914
What did samurai mean nearly the same thing as?	bushi
What were samurai affiliated with?	a clan
How much of Japan were samurais?	less than 10%
Where do samurais' teachings live on?	everyday life and in modern Japanese martial arts
What class were samurais?	middle and upper echelons of the warrior class
When was the Battle of Hakusukinoe?	663 AD
Who was the Battle of Hakusukinoe against?	Tang China and Silla
What was the effect of the Battle of Hakusukinoe?	a Japanese retreat from Korean affairs
Who led the Taika Reform?	Prince Naka no Ōe (Emperor Tenji)
When was the Taika Reform?	646 AD
In what period did Emperor Kammu rule?	early Heian period
When was the early Heian?	the late 8th and early 9th centuries
Who did Kammu fail to conquer?	Emishi
What was the full title for Shogun?	sei'i-taishōgun
Who introduced the Shogun concept?	Emperor Kammu
When was the Genpei war?	late 12th century
Who was given the right to appoint shugo?	Minamoto no Yoritomo
What was Minamoto's position?	clan leader
Who opened the Kamakura Bakufu Shogunate?	Minamoto no Yoritomo
When did the Kamakura Bakufu Shogunate open?	1192
What rebellion happened in 1160?	Heiji Rebellion
Who fought in the Heiji Rebellion?	the rival Minamoto and Taira clans
How long were the toryos' terms supposed to be?	four-year
What clans were most regional clans' chiefs also a member of?	Fujiwara, Minamoto, or Taira clans
Who was the first warrior to become imperial advisor?	Taira no Kiyomori
Who established the first samurai-led administration?	Taira no Kiyomori
Who succeeded the Taira clan?	the Minamoto
What role did the Emperor have in the samurai-controlled government?	figurehead
How did the Taira clan expand power?	had its women marry Emperors
When did the Gempei War begin?	1180
When did the Gempei War end?	1185
Which clans fought in the Gempei War?	The Taira and the Minamoto
What does the Shimonoseki Strait divide?	Honshu and Kyushu
When was the Kamakura Shogunate established?	1192
Which Chinese dynasty was founded by Mongols?	Yuan
How many troops did the Yuan send to invade Japan?	40,000
How many ships did the Yuan send to invade Japan?	900
Where did the Yuan invade Japan?	northern Kyūshū
How many samurai did Japan defeat the Yuan invasion with?	10,000
What was built around Hakata Bay?	a great stone barrier
When did Japan begin building the Hakata Bay barrier?	1276
When did Japan finish building the Hakata Bay barrier?	1277
How long was the Hakata Bay barrier?	20 kilometers
What happened to diplomatic envoys the Mongols sent to Japan?	executed
When did Toyotomi Hideyoshi first send an army to Korea?	1592
When did Toyotomi Hideyoshi send an army to Korea a second time?	1597
How many troops did Toyotomi Hideyoshi send to Korea?	160,000
When was the Battle of Sacheon?	1598
When did Toyotomi Hideyoshi die?	1598
Which military leader avoided sending his soldiers to Korea?	Tokugawa Ieyasu
What force were most commanders opposed to the Korea invasion part of?	Eastern Army
Which commander loyal to Hideyoshi was in the Eastern Army?	Katō Kiyomasa
Where did the Eastern and Western armies battle?	Battle of Sekigahara
Which army won the Battle of Sekigahara?	Eastern Forces
Who used arquebuses a lot?	Oda Nobunaga
What did Oda Nobunaga value?	innovation
Who disarmed Japan's Buddhist monks?	Oda Nobunaga
When did Oda Nobunaga die?	1582
Who caused Oda Nobunaga's death?	Akechi Mitsuhide
When were samurai becoming less warrior-like?	During the Tokugawa shogunate
When had samurai last been used in battle?	the early 17th century
What was another name for the Tokugawa era?	the Edo period
What was the samurai's long sword called?	katana
What was the samurai's short sword called?	wakizashi
Who were most samurais' lords?	daimyo
Whose teachings did all samurai read?	Confucius and Mencius
What did Bushido transcend?	social class, time and geographic location
When was Bushido formalized?	before the Edo Period
Who formalized Bushido?	several influential leaders and families
Which force invaded Japan in 1853?	U.S. Navy
Who lead the US Navy's invasion of Japan?	Commodore Matthew Perry
What was Perry's goal in Japan?	force Japan to open its borders to trade
What technology helped the downfall of samurai?	arquebus
When was the samurai military modernized?	1854
Where did Japan open a military school in 1855?	Nagasaki
What kind of military school did Japan open in 1855?	Naval
What nationality of engineers did Japan hire to build naval arsenals?	tradition
How many steam warships did Japan have in 1867?	eight
Who established a western-style army in Japan?	Emperor Meiji
When was a western-style army established in Japan?	1873
What did samurai become in 1873?	Shizoku
Who had samurai been allowed to kill?	commoners who paid them disrespect
In what century were the Meiji reforms?	19th
What group made up most of Japan's first exchange students?	Samurai
Who started Mitsubishi?	Iwasaki Yatarō
What was Iwasaki's relationship to samurai?	great-grandson of a samurai
What kind of schools did samurai start?	private schools for higher educations
Who did samurai write for?	newspaper companies
What philosophies were the samurai influenced by?	Buddhism and Zen, and to a lesser extent Confucianism and Shinto
What type of meditation did samurai do?	Zen
What caused some samurai to stop fighting?	The Buddhist concept of reincarnation and rebirth
What was the contribution of Confucianism to samurai?	to stress the importance of the lord-retainer relationship
When was Hojo Shigetoki born?	1198
When did Hojo Shigetoki die?	1261
What were gunki?	13th and 14th century warrior writings
When was Shiba Yoshimasa born?	1350
When did Shiba Yoshimasa die?	1410
What does a samurai has his heart in the wrong place dislike?	battle
What debt should samurai not forget?	the great debt of kindness one owes to his master and ancestors
What virtues should samurai not be dismissive of?	loyalty and filial piety
When was Kato Kiyomasa in power?	the Sengoku Era
When did Japan begin invading Korea?	1592
When did Japan finish invading Korea?	1598
What did Kato Kiyomasa think samurais' duty was?	to "...grasp the long and the short swords and to die"
What concept did Kato Kiyomasa think should be studied every day?	Bushido
Who did Torii Mototada serve?	Tokugawa Ieyasu
When was Torii Mototada born?	1539
When did Torii Mototada die?	1600
How many people were in Ishida Mitsunari's army?	40,000
How many soldiers defended Torii's last stand?	2,000
Who was Takeda's rival?	Uesugi Kenshin
What did Uesugi encourage?	the "way of the warrior as death"
What was Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki's occupation?	Japanese historian
When was Takeda born?	1521
When was Uesugi born?	1530
What religious order was St. Francis Xavier in?	Jesuit
When was St. Francis Xavier born?	1506
When did St. Francis Xavier die?	1552
When did Xavier try to convert Japan to Christianity?	1549–1551
Who were the Japanese regarded as braver than?	the people of China, Korea, Ternate and all of the other nations around the Philippines
Where was Malacca?	Malaysia
Where was Goa?	India
Who impressed Xavier by taking notes in church?	Anjiro
In what language did Anjiro speak to Xavier?	Portuguese
How did Anjiro think the Japanese would accept Christianity?	en masse
Who wrote 'Ideals of the Samurai'?	William Scott Wilson
Who were the models for future generations of samurai?	The warriors in the Heike Monogatari
Where did Japanese warriors come to literary maturity?	the Heike Monogatari
Whose culture included tea ceremonies?	samurai
What kind of painting did samurai do?	monochrome ink
What was Japanese culture influenced by?	Chinese arts
Who brought Chinese arts to Japan?	Zen monks
When was Muso Soseki born?	1275
What did Nobunaga mean?	an adult name (nanori) given at genpuku, the coming of age ceremony
What did Kazusanosuke mean?	a title of vice-governor of Kazusa province
What did Saburo mean?	a formal nickname (yobina)
What did Oda mean?	a clan or family name
What was Oda Nobunaga's full name?	Oda Kazusanosuke Saburo Nobunaga
How did the samurai treat concubines?	akin to a marriage
How did the samurai view kidnapping concubines?	shameful, if not criminal
Who thought being a concubine was better than being a wife?	many wealthy merchants
Why did merchants prefer that their daughters not marry samurai?	her family's money erased the samurai's debts
What happened if a commoner concubine had a son?	the son could inherit his father's social status
How common was divorce for samurai?	rare
What could samurai do instead of divorce if their wife couldn't produce a son?	adoption of a male heir
Why did samurai avoid divorcing for reasons of dislike?	it would embarrass the person who had arranged the marriage
What financial concern prevented divorce?	After a divorce samurai had to return the betrothal money
What did samurai wives spend most of their time on?	Maintaining the household
What did okugatasama mean?	one who remains in the home
What did samurai wives' duties include when their husbands were away?	manage all household affairs, care for the children, and perhaps even defend the home forcibly
What was a naginata?	a polearm
What was tantojutsu?	the skill of the knife
What characteristics did samurais want their wives to have?	humility, obedience, self-control, strength, and loyalty
Who did samurai wives have to teach?	the children (and perhaps servants, too)
Who did samurai wives have to take care of?	elderly parents or in-laws that may be living under her roof
Who was a woman supposed to be subservient to?	her husband
What defined the samurais' code?	Confucian law
Who was Ashikaga Yoshimasa?	8th shogun of the Muromachi shogunate
Who was Ashikaga Yoshimasa's wife?	Hino Tomiko
Why did Ashikaga let his wife take over?	lost interest in politics
Who was Nene?	wife of Toyotomi Hideyoshi
Who was Yodo-dono the concubine of?	Toyotomi Hideyoshi
In what period did Japanese women begin being more educated?	Tokugawa
What were added to marriage criteria in the Tokugawa period?	intelligence and education as desirable attributes
What types of advanced books did some Japanese women read?	philosophical and literary classics
When had most samurai wives learned to read?	the end of the Tokugawa period
Who was the first Western samurai?	William Adams
Who made William Adams a samurai?	Shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu
What was William Adams's Japanese name?	Anjin Miura
What did hatamoto mean?	bannerman
How many servants did William Adams have?	eighty or ninety
What nationality was Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn?	Dutch
Around when was Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn born?	1556
What was Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn's Japanese name?	Yayousu
What permission allowed trade between Japan and Indo-China?	a Red Seal Ship
How did Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn die?	drowned after his ship ran aground
What nationality was Edward Schnell?	Prussian
What duties did Edward Schnell have?	military instructor and procurer of weapons
Who did Edward Schnell work for?	the Aizu domain
What was Edward Schnell's Japanese name?	Hiramatsu Buhei
Where did Edward Schnell live?	Wakamatsu
What type of armor did Japanese wear in the 7th century?	a form of lamellar armor
What was the first samurai armor called?	yoroi
What were the small scales in yoroi called?	kozane
What were kozane made of?	iron or leather
What was a full chest armor called?	dou
Why were there armor changes in the 1500s?	the advent of firearms, new fighting tactics and the need for additional protection
What type of armor was replaced?	kozane dou
What new type of armor replaced the old?	plate armor
What was the new armor called?	Tosei-gusoku
When was samurai armor last used?	1877
What did 'samurai' mean at first?	those who serve in close attendance to nobility
What did 'samorapu' mean?	to watch, to keep watch, to observe, to be on the lookout for something; to serve, to attend
What did 'saburahu' mean?	to serve, to attend
What did 'saburahi' mean?	servant, attendant
When was the word 'samurahi' used?	the Edo period
Who were the bushi class?	ancient Japanese soldiers from traditional warrior families
Where did the bushi live?	mainly in the north of Japan
Where did the imperial family live?	Kyoto
What does Bushido mean?	the "way of the warrior"
What was a bukeyashiki?	the mansion of a warrior
What was a synonym for seppuku?	hara kiri
What was the reason for seppuku?	allowed a disgraced samurai to regain his honor by passing into death
How idealistic were samurai?	as practical on the battlefield as were any other warrior
How were samurai unrealistically portrayed?	romanticized
Who was an example of a disloyal samurai?	Akechi Mitsuhide
Who was an example of an excessively loyal samurai?	Kusunoki Masashige)
Some feudal lords shifted loyalties from Toyotomi to whom?	Tokugawa
What sometimes overrode samurais' loyalty to the daimyo?	loyalty to the Emperor was seen to have supremacy
What is Jidaigeki?	historical drama
Who is Akira Kurosawa?	One of Japan’s most renowned directors
Who directed 'Seven Samurai'?	Akira Kurosawa
What Japanese movie is 'Star Wars: A New Hope' said to be similar to?	Seven Samurai
What western was inspired by 'Seven Samurai'?	The Magnificent Seven
Who is Eiji Yoshikawa?	one of the most famous Japanese historical novelists
Why are Eiji Yoshikawa's books popular?	for their epic narratives and rich realism in depicting samurai and warrior culture
What are Japanese comic books called?	manga
What are Japanese animation called?	anime
Who said America hyperbolizes the samurai?	Moscardi, N.D.
What kind of animation did Afro Samurai have?	hack-and-slash
What kind of music did Afro Samurai have?	gritty urban
Who created Afro Samurai?	Takashi Okazaki
Who made Afro Samurai into an animated TV show?	Studio Gonzo
When did Afro Samurai first air?	2007
On what channel did Afro Samurai air?	Spike TV
Who was the star voice actor of Afro Samurai?	Samuel L. Jackson
In what company's comics did Silver Samurai appear?	Marvel
What is Silver Samurai's weapon?	an energy charged katana
How many comic books has Silver Samurai appeared in?	over 350
Who starred in The Last Samurai?	Tom Cruise
Who did Tom Cruise play in The Last Samurai?	US Army Captain Nathan Algren
What is the purpose of testing software?	finding software bugs
Why is it so difficult to locate bugs in software?	tests for even simple software components is practically infinite
What can come from one bug being fixed?	it can illuminate other, deeper bugs,
What can testing not completely find?	all the defects
While looking for bugs, what else can testing do?	furnishes a criticism or comparison
What does the software compare during testing against?	oracles—principles or mechanisms
What make up the oracle during testing?	specifications, contracts, comparable products, past versions
What is the primamry reason for testing software?	to detect software failures
What can testing software not fully completely establish?	cannot establish that a product functions properly under all conditions
What does the scope of testing the software also look at?	examination of code as well as execution of that code
Which two teams would you normally separate when writing and testing software?	testing organization may be separate from the development team
What is the first step that leads to a software failure?	programmer makes an error
What is the result of the programmer making a mistake?	defect (fault, bug)
When can software defects in dead code cause problems?	run on a new computer hardware platform
What is the primary issue with running software testing?	testing under all combinations of inputs and preconditions (initial state) is not feasible
What types of software bugs are difficult to find during testing?	defects that occur infrequently
What other non-functional dimensions can cause software to underperform and cause other problems?	usability, scalability, performance, compatibility, reliability
Although software developers are unable to test everything, what do they run to keep the testing to a minimum?	use combinatorial test design
What does the use of combinatorial testing consist of?	get greater test coverage with fewer tests
What two types of testing are involved with combinatorial testing as mentioned here?	speed or test depth
What determines the cost of fixing a bug?	the earlier a defect is found
Ho many more times would the cost be if the problem is found after the software's release?	10–100 times more
What could possibly lessen the cost of fixing buggy software?	cloud-based services
Name three approaches software testers take when testing their software?	Reviews, walkthroughs, or inspections
What is the term that is used to described executing programmed code with a given set of test?	dynamic testing
When can dynamic testing occur?	before the program is 100% complete
What are commonly used techniques during dynamic testing?	stubs/drivers or execution from a debugger environment
What is another term used for White-box testing?	clear box testing
What is involved with White-box testing?	by seeing the source code
Which two procedures are used to design test cases in White-box testing?	testing an internal perspective of the system, as well as programming skills
What is the main difference between black-box testing and white-box testing?	seeing the source code
What are the software testers aware of?	aware of what the software is supposed to do
What are the first three methods mentioned that make up black-box testing??	equivalence partitioning, boundary value analysis
What term is used to test functionality of the software accordingly with the application requirements?	Specification-based testing
What are the test cases built around?	specifications and requirements
When building test cases which of the two methods used is more common over the other?	functional
What is one huge advantage to using the black-box method?	no programming knowledge is required
What can black-box testing sometimes be referred to with the in-ability to see the code?	like a walk in a dark labyrinth without a flashlight.
What is a good reason to have testers and developers separate?	tester likely has a different set and may emphasize different areas of functionality
What does grey-box testing involve?	having knowledge of internal data structures and algorithms
What does a grey-box tester not need to run their test?	not required to have full access to the software's source code
What does not qualify as grey-box testing?	Manipulating input data and formatting output
What does a grey-box tester implement when they have limited information?	intelligent test scenarios
What dopes a typical grey-box tester sets up?	an isolated testing environment
What does the tester execute while performing certain actions?	SQL statements
What are the four recognized levels of testing software?	unit testing, integration testing, component interface testing, and system testing
What are these test (level testing) typically grouped by?	software development process, or by the level of specificity of the test
What is defined in the SWEBOK guide as to testing the main levels?	unit-, integration-, and system testing
What are the other levels classified by?	the testing objective
What is the main reasoning behind Unit testing that involves synchronization of the application on a broad spectrum?	reduce software development risks, time, and costs
Who performs the Unit testing phase?	software developer or engineer
What does Unit testing look to eliminate?	construction errors
By elimination construction errors, what is the expected end result?	increase the quality of the resulting software
What is it called to check data passed between units?	component interface testing
What is it called when data is being passed?	message packets
What is an option  of component interface testing  used while sending message packets?	keep a separate log file of data items being passed
What is a variation of black-box testing?	Component interface testing
What is the term used to test software during a pre-release?	Operational Acceptance
What does Operational Acceptance focus on?	operational readiness of the system
What is Operational Acceptance limited to while testing?	limited to those tests which are required to verify the non-functional aspects of the system
What is the most common reason for software failure?	compatibility with other application software
What do developers commonly do when creating software that can lead to failures?	lack of backward compatibility
What is the most common cause for software failure?	lack of its compatibility with other application software
What often lacks in software developed when its released that can eventually lead to errors?	a lack of backward compatibility
What does backwards compatibility always seem to be the cause of errors and bugs after a release?	test software only on the latest version of the target environment
Finding defects once a change in code had already happened is called?	Regression testing
What happens to software after a major change in code that leads to regression??	stops working as intended
What is a common method used during regression testing?	re-running previous sets of test-cases
What determines how deep a tester will go during regression?	phase in the release process and the risk of the added features
If changes need to occur during the softwares early release with regression testing how much of an impact does this have on the team as related to other testing?	typically the largest test effort in commercial software development
What typically comes after the Alpha stage in the development and testing of software?	Beta testing
To whom is the beta testing released to?	limited audience outside of the programming
What is it called when a public test continues indefinitely?	perpetual beta
What method is used to cause a system to fail?	Destructive testing
What does Destructive testing verify?	software functions properly even when it receives invalid or unexpected inputs
What is one example of failure testing?	Software fault injection
What method is used to test software under a specific load?	Load testing
What two methods can be used when using Load Testing?	data or a large number of users
What is called to test software functions when certain components increase in side?	Volume testing
What is Stable testing also called?	endurance testing
What method is used to test components under unexpected workloads?	Stress testing
What method is used that involves synchronization of a application?	Development Testing
When is development testing used?	construction phase of the software development lifecycle
What does Development testing look to eliminate?	construction errors
Which two current movements adhere to the "test-driven software development"?	extreme programming and the agile software development
Under the development of agile software and extreme programing what is written first?	unit tests are written first
What is the goal of Unit testing?	achieve continuous integration where software updates can be published to the public frequently
What three components make up Bottom Up Testing?	modules, procedures, and functions
Bottom Up Testing helps facilitate the testing of what?	the testing of higher level components
What does Bottom Up Testing also help with once the process has been repeated over and over again at all levels?	makes it easier to report testing progress in the form of a percentage
If the number of states is unknown, what group does this fall into?	Class II
There are three classes, what has been concluded and proven for all classes?	each class is strictly included into the next
If the number of states are unknown and the finite state of the machine is failing for a single trace, which group does this fall into?	Class III
With several certifications out there that can be aquired, what is the one trait they all share?	requires the applicant to show their ability to test software
What has the inability for the applicant to show how well they test led to?	testing field is not ready for certification
What four traits can a certification not measure?	individual's productivity, their skill, or practical knowledge
What makes up part of the SQA?	Software testing
What is the primary concern for the software specialist and auditors?	software development process
What type of software would have a better defect tolerance?	video game
What ingredient makes glass colorful?	metallic salts
What in combination with glass fibers is used to make fiberglass?	organic polymer plastic
What quality of silicate glass allows it to be used for windows?	transparency
What type of glass products can be used for sending information?	optical fibers
In what product are glass fibers used to hold dead air?	thermal insulating material
What element is used in glass to keep it from becoming too hot?	Iron
How does barium affect glass?	increases the refractive index
What property of thorium oxide has caused it to no longer be used in eyeglasses?	radioactivity
What is another name for lead glass?	flint glass
What is the benefit of thorium oxide in addition to its refractive index?	low dispersion
What causes glass to dissolve in water?	soda
Why is lime often added to glass?	better chemical durability
What percentage of soda-lime glass is silica?	70 to 74
What is a benefit of fused quartz?	excellent thermal shock characteristics
What besides viscosity is a drawback of fused quartz?	high melting-temperature
What happens during refining?	removal of bubbles
What method is used for making windows?	float glass process
What is used on the surface of window glass to make it smooth?	nitrogen
What is added to the glass of jars to improve water resistance?	alumina and calcium oxide
Who were the inventors of the float glass process?	Alastair Pilkington and Kenneth Bickerstaff
What can be used to make glass less refractive?	boron
What is the refraction index of typical glass?	1.5
What is a toxic additive that increases refraction?	lead oxide
What are high-index glasses erroneously called?	crystal
Why are high-index glasses valued?	for their diamond-like optical properties
Which kinds of glass existed the furthest in the past?	silicate glasses
What kind of glass are containers made from?	soda-lime glass
What is sand mostly made of?	silica
What can a very strong and transparent glass be made from?	pure silica
What types of glass is the word commonly used to mean?	silicate glasses
What does glass lack, allowing it to be transparent?	internal subdivisions
What force gives glass its surface texture?	surface tension
What, in contrast to glass, doesn't let light pass through?	polycrystalline materials
What type of glass absorbs some light?	colored
What kind of glass exists in nature?	obsidian
Obsidian is what type of glass?	volcanic
What was obsidian used to make in prehistoric times?	cutting tools
When are the oldest beads thought to have been made?	mid third millennium BCE
What glass-like material is made with a method related to glazing?	faience
What can give glass a faint green tinge?	iron(II) oxide
What can prevent a green color in glass?	Manganese dioxide
What other than additives can give glass a yellow color?	reducing combustion atmosphere
What chemical compounds can make glass nearly black?	iron polysulfides
Charged ions can be used to produce what in glass?	Color
What word does "glass" come from?	glesum
Where did glasswork begin relatively late?	China
In what year did glassmaking begin in Asia?	1730 BCE
What city was a center of glass production for the Romans?	Trier
In what current country is Trier located?	Germany
When did stained glass make a big comeback?	19th-century
When did stained glass begin to be used for places of worship?	10th-century
When did big windows of stained glass become less common?	the Renaissance
What 13th-century building is an example of stained glass walls?	Sainte-Chapelle
What did technological changes allow regular homes to have?	larger windows
What type of glass is used in cars?	laminated
When did eyeglasses originate?	late Middle Ages
The walls of skyscrapers are often made of what material?	glass
What type of power systems use glass?	solar
What type of scientists rely on glass for distant observations?	astronomers
What famous lampmaker used glass?	Louis Comfort Tiffany
When did glassworkers begin to consider their products fine art?	1960
What type of glass did many Art Nouveau artists use?	cameo glass
When did mass production of glass art begin?	early 20th-century
What early civilization made cameo glass?	Roman Empire
What makes glass melt at a lower temperature?	lead(II) oxide
How much less viscous is lead glass compared with soda glass?	100 times
Pb2+ causes lead glass to have what?	high electrical resistance
Lead oxide makes it easier to dissolve what?	other metal oxides
What components of glass for networks?	silicon, boron, germanium
What type of components change the network's shape?	modifiers
What type of component can both make and change networks?	intermediates
What type of chemical attachment connects ions to the network?	covalent bond
What component gives glass the ability to conduct electricity?	alkali metal ions
How can glass be prevented from corroding?	dealkalization
What types of ions does typical glass have?	alkali and alkaline earth ions
Reaction with what causes dealkalization?	sulfur or fluorine compounds
What can alkaline ions in glass harm, in addition to electrical resistance?	loss tangent
What material is useful in glassmaking because of its slow evaporation?	sodium selenite
What containers are used for melting?	platinum crucibles
Why are different materials used in a lab than are used in factory production?	the cost factor has a low priority
What is the reason for crushing the glass and melting it again?	homogeneity
Why is glass annealed?	to prevent breakage
Who coined the term "splat cooling"?	W. Klement
What are thick alloys made in layers called?	bulk metallic glasses
What does Liquidmetal Technologies use for their alloys?	zirconium
What type of metal makes better alloys than traditional steel?	amorphous steel
At what university was Klement a student?	Caltech
Who showed that q-glass could be produced from a melt?	NIST researchers
What shows that there is an inner surface between glass and melt?	nucleation barrier
What is q-glass?	an isotropic non-crystalline metallic phase
What kind of microscope shows that q-glass grows as separate particles?	Transmission electron
What word means that ceramics don't absorb liquids?	vitreous
What hardens glass-ceramics?	heat treatment
What materials do glass ceramics have a lot in common with?	non-crystalline glass and crystalline ceramics
How high of a temperature change can glass-ceramics handle?	1000 °C
Because of their heat resistance, glass-ceramics are especially suitable for what?	countertop cooking
What is the most economically significant property of glass-ceramics?	impervious to thermal shock
What ingredients give glass-ceramics its useful heat tolerance?	lithium and aluminosilicates
What proportion of crystalline ceramics yields a product with a CTE of around 0?	~70%
What were the areas at the center of an old sheet of glass called?	bull's-eyes
In early 20th century glass production, the glass was thickest at what part of the sheet?	the center
Currently window glass is made as what?	float glass
How was the bull's-eye used?	for decorative effect
What was the benefit of installing glass with the thick side at the bottom, in addition to avoiding water accumulation?	stability
Who used to make window panes?	glassblowers
What is the name for the glassmaking method that involved spinning it into sheets?	crown glass process
The thickness at the bottom of glass panes was once taken as evidence that glass had features of what state of matter?	liquid
When does glass stop moving like a liquid?	once solidified
How is "glass" defined in physics?	a solid formed by rapid melt quenching
What is the tendency to make a glass when cooled called?	glass-forming ability
What must happen quickly for glass to form?	cooling
What predicts glass-forming ability?	rigidity theory
What does glass not have, leading some to think it is a liquid?	first-order phase transition
What theory isn't completely valid for glass?	equilibrium theory of phase transformations
Transition in glass is comparable to what?	a second-order phase transition
Atomically, glass is similar to what?	a supercooled liquid
What acts like a liquid but is under the freezing temperature?	A supercooled liquid
Despite its atomic structure, cooled glass acts like what?	a solid
In cooled glass, what types of movement stop?	rotational and translational
What drives the wider acceptance of renewable energy technologies?	Public policy and political leadership
Denmark has a committment to 100 percent renewable energy by what year?	2050
How many countries now have renewable energy policies?	144
How much was the total investment in renewable energy in 2012?	$244 billion
Why did the total investment in renewable energy go down in 2012?	dramatically lower solar prices
What  six were the top countries for investment in recent years?	China, Germany, Spain, the United States, Italy, and Brazil
Who has shown support for ambitious renewable energy goals?	EU member countries
What group polled the 27 EU member states in 2010?	Eurobarometer
The goal was to increase the share of renewable energy in the EU by 20 percent in what year?	2020
By the end of 2011, total renewable power capacity worldwide exceeded what number?	1,360 GW
Renewables contributed what percentage to our energy consumption?	19 percent
Renewables contributed what percentage to our electricity generation?	22 percent
Who was the UN under-secretary in 2011?	Achim Steiner
Between what years did worldwide renewable energy capacity grow at rates of 10 to 60 percent annually?	2004 through 2009
Who is Achim Steiner?	UN under-secretary general
Which group projected that solar plant may produce most of the world's electricity within 50 years?	International Energy Agency
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet most of the world's demand for electricity by what year?	2060
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet how much of the world's energy needs by 2060?	half
Who led the world in renewable energy production in 2013?	China
Since what year has production of solar cells in China expanded 100-fold?	2005
What is the main driver of reduced costs?	market expansion
What is getting cheaper as a result of technilogical change?	Renewable energy technologies
As of what year have there been substantial reductions in the cost of solar and wind technologies?	2011
What group stated that "cost reductions in critical technologies, such as wind and solar, are set to continue?"	IEA
What is the most economic solution for new grid-connected capacity in areas with good resources?	Renewable energy
What happens as the scope of economically viable applications increases?	the cost of renewable power falls
What are now often the most economic solution for new generating capacity?	Renewable technologies
What is one problem with biomass?	material directly combusted in cook stoves produces pollutants
What can be economically competetive but may still require deployment support?	First-generation biomass technologies
What is a fully maturing technology which offer a ready disposal mechanismm?	Biomass for heat and power
What is the term referring to electricity generated by hydropower?	Hydroelectricity
What is the most widely used form of renewable energy?	Hydroelectricity
Hydroelectricity accounts for what percentage of global electricity generation?	Hydroelectricity
Electricity production is expected to increase by what percentage each year for the next 25 years?	3.1%
Hydropower is produced in how many countries?	150
Which country is the largest hydroelectricity producer?	China
What is the average cost of electricity from a hydro plant larger than 10 megawatts?	3 to 5 U.S. cents per kilowatt-hour
How many hydroelectricity plants are larger than 10 GW?	three
What was the geothermal capacity in 1975?	1 GW
What was the geothermal capacity in 2008?	10 GW
In the Phillipines, geothermal represented what percentage of the total power mix at the end of 2008?	17 percent
Where have the majority of photovoltaic power stations been built?	Europe
Where is Charanka Solar Park?	India
Where is the Agua Caliente Solar Project located?	USA
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm currently under construction?	Riverside County, California
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm?	San Luis Obispo County, California
Who is building The Califoria Valley Solar Ranch?	SunPower
Global wind power installations increased by how much in 2010?	35,800 MW
China has how much wind power installed?	42,300 MW
In Denmark, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?	19%
In Spain, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?	9%
In Germany, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?	6%
How is the wind industry in the USA able to produce more power at lower cost?	by using taller wind turbines with longer blades
How tall are new wind turbines that are being built in Indiana, Michigan and Ohio?	300 feet to 400 feet above the ground
Wind turbines in the USA can now compete with what type of fuel?	conventional fossil fuels like coal
Prices have fallen as low as what price?	4 cents per kilowatt-hour
Where is the Ivanpah Solar Power Facility located?	California's Mojave Desert
What is the world's largest solar-thermal power plant project currently under construction?	Ivanpah Solar Power Facility
Where is the PS20 solar power tower located?	Spain
Nearly all gasoline sold in the U.S. is mixed with what percentage of ethanol?	10 percent
What act calls for 7.5 billion US gallons of biofuels to be used annually by 2012?	The Energy Policy Act of 2005
Name one company that sells flexible-fuel cars?	GM
What can be made from plant matter composed primarily of inedible celllose fibers thta form the stems and branches of most plants?	Cellulosic ethanol
What are potential sources of cellulosic biomass?	Crop residues
What is a promising cellulose source that can be sustainably produced in many regions?	Dedicated energy crops
As of 2008, geothermal power development was underway in more than how many countries?	40
What is one new technology attributed to the growth of geothermal power?	Enhanced Geothermal Systems
What is operational in the USA, Australia, Germany, France and The United Kingdom?	Demonstration EGS projects
The PV industry has seen drops in module prices since what year?	2008
What is a sign that further price reductions are likely in coming years?	technological advancements
What cost is often regarded as marking the achievment of grid parity for PV?	$1.00/W installed cost
Why do utility operators often reject renewable resources?	because they are trained to think only in terms of big, conventional power plants
Why do consumers often ignore renewable power systems?	because they are not given accurate price signals about electricity consumption
Who argued that some of the problems facing renewable energy are more about culture and institutions than engineering and science?	Benjamin K. Sovacool
Lester Brown states that the market does not incorporate what?	the indirect costs of providing goods or services into prices
Who believes that the market does not value nature's service adequately?	Lester Brown
What can help over come the problems with the market?	Tax and subsidy shifting
What involves lowering income taxes while raising levies?	Tax shifting
Several Western European companies are shifting taxes in a process known as what?	environmental tax reform
What is the purpose of tax shifting?	to create a more responsive market
Besides tax shifting, what is another need?	subsidy shifting
What was the result of publicly funded links among computers in government labs and reserach institutes?	the Internet
What helped create the modern wind power industry?	federal tax deduction and a robust state tax deduction in California
As of 2012, what accounts for about half of new nameplate electrical capacity?	renewable energy
What involves the deployment of three generations of renewable energy technologies dating back more than 100 years?	Renewable energy commercialization
Name one second-generation technology that is market ready.	wind power
What group advocates leveling the playing field?	International Solar Energy Society
How does the International Solar Energy Society propse to level the playing field?	by redressing the continuing inequities in public subsidies of energy technologies and R&D
What is the key to stabilizing the earth's climate?	development of climate-benign energy sources
What country is reducing its coal subsidy?	Germany
What country has been increasing its support for the fossil fuel and nuclear industries?	United States
Some countries have phased out all subsidies for what substance?	coal
Setting national renewable energy targets can be an important part of what?	renewable energy policy
The European Union has prescribed an indicative renewable energy target of what percent?	12 per cent of the total EU energy mix
Name one outher country with defined national or regional target?	Australia
What determines the extent to which renewable energy is to be incorporated into a country's generation mix?	Public policy
Who has the authority to carry out a number of functions that havae implications for the feasiblity of renewable energy projects?	Energy regulators
Why have energy sector regulators become a key facilitator of renewable energy investments?	Since policies are not self-implementing
What is the driving force behind voluntary green electricity within the EU?	liberalized electricity markets
What states that EU Member States must ensure that the origin of electricity produced from renewables can be guaranteed?	RES Directive
In the US, what is the main tool to track and stimulate voluntary actions?	Green-e program
What made a strong economic case for investing in low carbon technologies?	Stern Review
In what year did a number of events push renewable energy up the political agenda?	2006
What is driving increasing rates of investment in the renewable energy industry?	climate change concerns coupled with recent high oil prices
What helped the industry weather the 2009 economic crisis better than other sectors?	New government spending, regulation, and policies
What suggests that the commercialization of clean energy will hellp countries deal with economic malaise?	commercialization of clean energy
Which company became invovled in a political controversy?	Solyndra
What company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy?	Solyndra
What plays a major role in the energy mix of many countries?	renewable energy
What is becoming increasingly economic in both developing and devloped countries?	Renewables
As of 2012, prices for what commodity continued to drop?	renewable energy technologies
Who is United Nations' Secretary-General?	Ban Ki-moon
Ban Ki-moon states that renewable energy has the ability to lift the poorest nations to new levels of prosperity?	renewable energy
Who is chair of UN Energy?	Kandeh Yumkella
Who is chairman of Bank of America?	Charles Holliday
In 2012, solar electricity consumption increased by what percentage?	58 percent
Use of wind power in 2012 increased by what percentage?	18.1 percent
How much was the worldwide investment in solar power in 2012?	$140.4 billion
Analysts expect the market to triple by what year?	2030
In what year did investment in renewables exceed fossils?	2015
What motivated the incentive to use 100 percent renewable energy?	global warming
How many nations already have renewable energy contributing to more than 20 percent of energy supply?	at least 30 nations
Who developed a series of stabilization wedges?	Professors S. Pacala and Robert H. Socolow
Who is a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford University?	Mark Z. Jacobson
What is a barrier to implementing the renewable energy plan?	social and political
Who stated that energy costs with a wind, solar, water system should be similar to today's energy costs?	Mark Z. Jacobson
Jacobson says producing all new energy with wind power, solar power and hydropower is feasible by what year?	2030
Why is renewable energy an attractive option?	can supply significantly greater amounts of electricity than the total current or projected domestic demand
In what country is the National Research Council located?	United States
Sufficient domestic reneewable resources exist for what reason?	to allow renewable electricity to play a significant role in future electricity generation
For what is Palermo known?	history, culture, architecture and gastronomy
How old is the city of Palermo?	2,700 years old
On what island is Palermo located?	Sicily
In what year was Palermo founded?	734 BC
What name was Palermo originally founded as?	Ziz
What group of people founded Palermo?	the Phoenicians
What did the Greeks name Palermo?	Panormus
During which years was Palermo ruled by the Arabs?	831 to 1072
What types of churches attract tourists to Palermo?	Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque
Which town is Sicily's primary industrial and commercial center?	Palermo
What are Palermo's four main industrial sectors?	tourism, services, commerce and agriculture
What geographic form is Palermo surrounded by?	mountains
What geographic form is Palermo surrounded by?	mountains
Which author desribed Monte Pelegrino as "The most beautiful promontory in the world?"	Johann Wolfgang von Goethe,
Which is the tallest mountain in Sicily?	La Pizzuta
Where is Monte Pellegrino in relation to other peaks?	geographically separated from the rest of the range by a plain
How can former rivers be recognised presently?	the streets that were built on them follow their shapes
What is the only remaining waterway in Palermo?	Oreto river
Which two former rivers in Palermo are currently building sites?	Papireto river and the Kemonia
What did Phoenicans name their settlement in 734BC?	"Ziz."
Besides Ziz, what other two major settlements belonged to the Phoenicians	Motya and Soluntum
Why cant artifacts from the Phoenicians be easily excavated?	remains of the Phoenician presence in the city are few and mostly preserved in the very populated center of the downtown area
What is the current name of the road the Phoenicians used for trading?	Corso Calatifimi
Why was the first settlement named Paleapolis?	in order to distinguish it from a second settlement built during the 5th century BC, called Neapolis
What were the walls of Neapolis meant to do?	prevent attacks from foreign threats
Which district was named for the walls surrounding it?	Cassaro
In which War did Greeks and Phoenicians fight over control of Sicily?	Sicilian Wars
Why did the Sicilian Wars end?	Carthage and Syracuse stopped warring and united in order to stop the Romans from gaining full control of the island during the First Punic War
Who conquered Panormos and briefly turned it into a Greek colony?	Pyrrhus of Epirus
Why did the Greeks name Palermo Panormos?	meaning "all port" due to the shape of its coast.
How had the Vandals earned their strong reputation?	occupied all the Roman provinces in North Africa by 455
Whom took control of the Vandal's territory after 488?	Ostrogoths
How was Theodoric different than the Germanic Goths?	Theodoric supported Roman culture and government
What name was the Eastern Roman Empire also known by?	Byzantine Empire
How long did Muslim control of Palermo last?	120 years
What did the Arabs introduce that continues to be relevant to Palermo's culture today?	agricultural crops
How were the indigenous Palermo population treated under Muslim rule?	reduced into near slavery
Who is considered a hero by natives for ending Muslim control of Palermo?	Robert Guiscard
What was the family name who returned Palermo to Christianity after reconquest in 1072?	Hautevilles
Where was the Kings Court held in the Kingdom of Sicily?	Palazzo dei Normanni
How did the Kingdom of Sicily compare monetarily with the other European staes?	one of the wealthiest states in Europe
What year did Sicily become ruled by the Holy Roman Empire?	1194
What happened to Muslims during Holy Roman rule?	emigrated or were expelled
What was Palermos population in 1330?	51,000
During what years did Austria rule Palermo?	1720 and 1734
After what treaty did Savoia gain control of Italy?	Treaty of Utrecht (1713)
For what event did Charles III choose Sicily as the location?	his coronation
Where did the Royal Court reside?	Naples
Where did the capital city move in 1817?	Naples
Whose son died on the way to Palermo and is buried there?	Charles III
Who led the first insurrection in Europe in 1848?	Giuseppe La Masa
Who was the first president of Palermo?	Ruggero Settimo
Who regained control of Palermo in 1849?	The Bourbons
Sicily and Palermo became part of what Kingdom in 1861?	Kingdom of Italy
Who was blamed for the week long rebellion of 1866?	anarchists and the Church, specifically the Archbishop of Palermo
Which families help to start cultural, industrial, and economic growth in Palermo?	Florio, the Ducrot, the Rutelli, the Sandron, the Whitaker, the Utveggio
In what style were the villas in the new expanded Palermo?	Art Nouveau
Which theatre was designed by Giovan Battista Filippo Basile ans opened in 1897?	Teatro Massimo
To what does the term "Sack of Palermo" refer?	speculative building practices that have filled the city with poor buildings
Why did Palermo substancially grow in size?	reduced importance of agriculture in the Sicilian economy has led to a massive migration to the cities
What did Palermo expansion lack?	t parks, schools, public buildings, proper roads and the other amenities that characterise a modern city
What is Palermo's climate classification?	hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa).
How do Palermo's temperatures compare to the rest of Europe?	one of the warmest cities in Europe
How many did snow fall in Palermo between 1940and the 2000s?	eleven
How much sun does Palermo see each year?	2,530 hours
Where does the first of Palermo's circuits suround?	ancient core of the punic City - the so-called Palaeopolis (in the area east of Porta Nuova) and the Neopolis
What was the name of the primary east-west road within the walls of Palaeopolis?	Via Vittorio Emanuele
On what road was the eastern edge of the walled city?	Via Roma
What was the purpose of Castello a Mare?	to protect the port at La Cala
What was used to block passage through the La Cala port?	A huge chain
During which historical period was the wall circuit expanded?	medieval
What is a heliometer?	solar "observatory"
What name is given to the bronze line on the floor of a heliometer?	la Meridiana
Which direction does la Meridiana run?	precisely N/S
What image is projected on the floor of the heliometer?	the sun
How many people were living in the Palermo area in 2010?	1.2 million
What percentage of Palermo residents were female in 2010?	52.6%
What is the average age of a Palermo resident?	40.4
Why has Palermo's population declined from 2001 to 2010?	population flight to the suburbs
On what does Palermo's economy rely?	tourism and services, but also has commerce, shipbuilding and agriculture
Palermo is the home of what mafia?	the Sicilian Mafia
Has the level of crime in Palermo risen or declined?	gone down dramatically
What negative qualities does Palermo carry?	high unemployment levels, high corruption and a significant black market empire
Which port is Sicily's primary port?	The port of Palermo
How many passengers travel by Palermo ferry annually?	2 million
How many passengers do Palermo's ferries carry each year?	2 million
For what is the "tourist marina" dedicated?	sailing yachts and catamarans
What cities do the ferries of Palermo travel to?	Cagliari, Genoa, Livorno, Naples, Tunis
Who is the popular patron saint of Palermo?	Santa Rosalia
When is Palermo's most important religious event of the year held?	14 July
Who is said to have ended the Black Death in 1624?	Santa Rosalia
What is The Festino?	procession which goes through the main street of Palermo to commemorate the miracle attributed to Santa Rosalia
What is the symbol for Zinc?	Zn
What is the atomic number for Zinc?	30
What is zinc chemically close to?	magnesium
What is the oxidation state for zinc?	+2
How many stable isotopes does zinc have?	five
What is the symbol for zinc?	Zn
What is zinc's atomic number?	30
What other element on the periodic table is zinc similar to?	magnesium
What is the most common zinc ore?	sphalerite
What is used to extract zinc during the production process?	electricity
What two metals are mixed to create Brass?	copper and zinc
When was brass first used?	10th
Where was zinc first produced on a large scale?	India
When was zinc introduced to Europe?	end of the 16th century
Where is the oldest evidence of pure zinc?	Zawar
Brass is an alloy of what two elements?	copper and zinc
The earliest uses of brass has been attributed to what ancient location?	Judea
We have evidence of zinc production dating back to the 6th century thanks to what mine?	Rajasthan
What early process was used to make zinc?	distillation process
What were the names given to zinc by early alchemists?	"philosopher's wool" or "white snow"
Who named the element zinc?	Paracelsus
What was zinc named after?	Zinke
Who is credited with discovering zinc?	Andreas Sigismund Marggraf
What two people discovered the electrochemical properties of zinc?	Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta
Where can you find zinc chloride?	deodorants
Who is credited as giving zinc its name?	Paracelsus
What does the name zinc or zinke mean?	(prong, tooth)
Who discovered pure metallic zinc?	Andreas Sigismund Marggraf
What is the most common use for zinc?	(hot-dip galvanizing
What is a common use for zinc chloride?	deodorants
How many people are affected by zinc deficiency?	two billion
What can consumption of excess zinc cause?	ataxia, lethargy and copper deficiency
Where can you find enzymes with a zinc atom in the reactive center?	biochemistry,
What can a lack of zinc cause in children?	growth retardation, delayed sexual maturation, infection susceptibility, and diarrhea
What is extremely important to prenatal and postnatal development?	Zinc
What can cause symptoms in children ranging from diarrhea to retarded growth?	Zinc deficiency
In what substance can you find a zinc atom within its reactive center?	alcohol dehydrogenase
What causes symptoms such as lethargy and copper deficiency?	excess zinc
What color is zinc?	bluish-white
Is iron more dense than zinc?	It is somewhat less dense than iron
At what temperature does the metal become malleable?	100 and 150 °C
At what temperature to zinc become brittle?	210 °C
What is the boiling point of zinc?	907 °C
In it's pre commercial state, what color is zinc?	bluish-white
What is the crystalline structure of sync?	hexagonal
What happens to zinc when it is manipulated to the temperatures between 100 and 150 Celsius?	becomes malleable
At what temperature can zinc be pulverized?	210 °C
How many radioisotopes of zinc have been discovered?	Several dozen
What is the longest half life of the isotopes?	243.66
What does the superscript m represent?	metastable isotope
How many excited states does 61Zn have?	three
How many excited states does 73Zn have?	two
What is the most long lived radio isotope?	65Zn
What is the half life of 72Zn?	46.5 hours
How many nuclear isomers does zinc have?	10
What does the superscript "m" indicate?	metastable isotope
What does a metastable isotope do to return to ground state from an excited state?	emitting a photon in the form of a gamma ray
What oxidation state dominates zinc?	+2
What indicates the formation of ZN2Cl?	The volatilization of zinc in combination with zinc chloride at temperatures above 285 °C
what are the only two oxidation states known for zinc?	+1 or +2
What oxidation state dominates the chemistry of zinc?	+2
What are the only two oxidation states known for zinc compounds?	+1 or +2
Because zinc has a filled d-shell, its compounds are usually what?	diamagnetic and mostly colorless.
The ionic radii of what two elements are almost identical?	zinc and magnesium
What is the determining factor where zinc and magnesium are very similar chemically?	ionic radius
Whit what donors does zinc form stable complexes?	N- and S-
What is necessary to stabilize the low oxidation state of zinc(l) compounds?	bulky ligands
What core do most zinc(l) compounds contain?	[Zn2]2+
What confirms the dimeric structure of the compound?	diamagnetic nature of the ion
When a solution of metallic zinc is cooled in molten ZnCl2, what is formed?	yellow glass
What is not known for binary compounds of zinc?	noble gases
ZnO can be dissolved in what kind of solutions?	strong basic and acidic solutions
What applications do chalcogenides have?	electronics and optics.
Zn(OH)2 is dissolved to form what in strong alkaline solutions?	zincates
Zinc oxide is believed to be mentioned in what ancient text?	The Charaka Samhita
Active zinc mines in India date back to what period?	Mauryan period
What process occurred around the 12th century?	smelting of metallic zinc
When was the Rasaratna Samuccaya written?	13th century AD,
What are the two uses of zinc ore mentioned in the Rasaratna Samuccaya?	metal extraction and another used for medicinal purposes
Who is attributed as first documenting zinc?	Paracelsus
Why is it possible that the name zinc could be derived from the German zinn?	imply "tin-like"
Why would zinc possibly be derived from the German word zinke?	metallic zinc crystals have a needle-like appearance
What are some of the other terms for zinc?	Indian tin, tutanego, calamine, and spinter.
Who first patented the process that creates an oxide usable in the retort process?	William Champion's brother, John,
Before John Champion, what was the only element used to produce zinc?	calamine
Who built the first horizontal retort smelter?	Johann Christian Ruberg
What did Galvani name the effect he created of causing the frogs legs to twitch?	animal electricity
The discoveries made by Galvani lead to what three important things?	electrical batteries, galvanization and cathodic protection.
What is used to produce the metal zinc?	extractive metallurgy.
What is froth flotation used for?	get an ore concentrate
What is the first step in zinc metal production?	grinding the ore
What percentage of the ore concentrate is zinc?	50%
Large amounts of sulfur dioxide and cadmium vapor are produced due to what?	The production for sulfidic zinc ores
Smelter slag contains a significant amount of what?	heavy metals
Why does the Geul River contain heavy metals in a significant amount?	mining operations leach significant amounts of zinc and cadmium
What is the ratio that anthropogenic and natural emissions occur at?	20 to 1
What two compounds is zinc more reactive than?	iron or steel
What forms as zinc corrodes?	protective surface layer of oxide and carbonate
How is zinc applied?	electrochemically or as molten zinc
What is used on many common items, such as chain link fences?	Galvanization
What makes zinc an efficient sacrificial anode?	relative reactivity of zinc and its ability to attract oxidation
Connecting anodes made from zinc to buried pipe creates what?	cathodic protection
What does attaching a zinc disc to a ships iron rudder do?	protect metals that are exposed to sea water from corrosion
Why does zinc protect metals exposed to sea water from corroding?	will slowly corrode, whereas the rudder stays unattacked
What has zinc replaced in pipe organs?	lead/tin alloy
Zinc, copper and aluminum alloys have use in what part of machinery?	machine bearings
Zinc in the main metal used in making which american currency?	one cent coins
What is zinc coated with to influence the look of pennies?	thin layer of copper
Aside from die casting, what are alloys of zinc mixed with copper, aluminium and magnesium used for?	spin casting
Alloys of zinc mixed with copper, aluminium and magnesium are marketed as what?	Zamak
What is possible to produce thanks to the low melting point and low viscosity of zinc aluminium alloy?	small and intricate shapes
What brand name of alloy is supposed to be as strong as steel while still being malleable as plastic?	Prestal
What is used to mold Prestal?	die casts made of ceramics and cement.
What can be done when small amounts of lead are added to alloys?	cold-rolled into sheets
What is made with an alloy of 4% aluminium mixed with 96% zinc?	stamping dies
Why are alloys used to make stamping dies rather than metal?	too expensive
Why isn't unalloyed zinc used in construction applications?	too brittle
In what form is 1/4 of zinc used in the US?	zinc compounds
What kind of zinc compound is used in manufacturing rubber?	Zinc oxide
What protects the polymers in rubber from ultraviolet radiation?	Zinc oxide
Why is zinc oxide useful in photocopying products?	semiconductor
What kind of process is the zinc zinc-oxide cycle?	thermochemical
What is added to wood in order to preserve it?	Zinc chloride
What is the feature of zinc sufide that makes it useful in television screens?	luminescent pigments
What kind of lasers are crystals of zinc suflde used in?	mid-infrared
Where is zinc pyrithion used?	antifouling paints.
What is the most abundant zinc isotope?	64Zn
What does 65Zn produce?	intense gamma radiation
Why is zinc oxide used in nuclear reactors?	anti-corrosion agent
What is used to study how alloys containing zinc wear out?	65Zn
What consumable product is zinc included in?	vitamin and mineral supplements
What property of zinc is believed to protect against skin aging?	antioxidant
What is the benefit of zinc after injury?	speed up the healing
What kind of cancer cells may zinc prove to kill?	prostate
What type of agent is zync useful as against prostate cancer?	chemotherapeutic
What could overuse of zinc possibly cause?	prostate cancer
Where does zinc naturally buildup in the body?	prostate.
What does organozinc chemisty describe?	physical properties, synthesis and reactions.
What is the zinc equivalent of the Grinard reaction?	The Barbier reaction
When will organomagnesium halide formation fail?	presence of just about any water
What are dimethylzinc, dietylzinc and diphenylzinc?	Commercially available diorganozinc compounds
What role does zinc play in fingers, twists and clusters?	structural
What are proteins that druing replication and transcription of DNA, recognize base DNA?	transcription factors,
How many amino acids do the Zn2+ ions bind to?	four
What does the transcription factor wrap around?	DNA helix
What is the most common supplement in the US?	zinc oxide
Why is zinc carbonate poorly absorbed in the body?	nearly insoluble
What is the recommended daily dose of zinc supplement in healthy adults?	20 mg/day
What is the Tolderable Upper intake of zinc?	40 mg/day
Zinc oxide is used to fortify what product?	cereals
In what product did  various compounds of zinc show little difference in absorption?	maize tortillas
What compound is better absorbed than zinc gluconate?	zinc picolinate
What is the best absorbed dietary zinc compound?	zinc glycinate
Symptoms ranging from diarrhea to eye lesions are from what?	mild zinc deficiency
What is a symptom of both zinc deficiency and excess?	depresses immunity
What is required for animals with zinc deficiency to gain the same weight as animals with sufficient zinc?	twice as much food
What is one way that vegetarians and vegans obtain zinc?	plant sources
What is found in whole grains that can interfere with zinc absorption?	phytates
Where is zinc chelator phytate found?	seeds and cereal bran,
What kind of diet may require more than 15mg of zinc daily?	diet is high in phytates,
What are two billion people in the world deficient in?	zinc
800,000 children worldwide die each year due to what?	deficient in zinc
What is recommended by the WHO for malnutrition and diarrhea?	zinc supplementation
Why shouldn't zinc be given alone to those with several deficiencies?	zinc interacts with other micronutrients.
In what type of soil is zinc deficiency most common?	high-pH soils
Growing plants in zinc deficient soil makes them more susceptible to what?	disease.
Excess zinc has what effect on plants?	toxic
How is zinc primarily added to soil?	weathering of rocks
What kind of deficiency is common from taking 100-300mg of zinc daily?	copper
What kind of complications were seen in men taking 80mg zinc a day?	urinary
Having an excess of 500ppm of zinc in soil interferes with what?	ability of plants to absorb other essential metals
What is caused by inhaling freshly formed zinc oxide?	zinc shakes or "zinc chills"
People have claimed that the excessive use of what common product has caused disability and death?	denture cream
What can zinc cause damage to in the nose?	nerve receptors
Why was zinc being used in the 1930's?	polio infections
What did the FDA order removed from stores in 2009?	zinc-based intranasal cold products
What product is suggest as a potent heat shock response inducer?	antimicrobial zinc pyrithione
What coin, as of 1982, is now primarily made of zinc?	pennies
What is a concern with the new zinc pennies?	zinc toxicosis
Ingesting zinc can cause lack of muscle movement and coordination called what?	ataxia
Why have people reported zinc intoxication?	ingestion of zinc coins
What are dogs known to ingest?	Pennies
What does the zinc coins ingested by dogs cause?	zinc toxicity
In what animal is zinc toxic to the point of poisonous?	parrots
What has been a cause of mass parrot poisonings attributed to zinc?	juices stored in galvanized cans
Who influenced many 19th century neoclassical architects?	Étienne-Louis Boullée and Claude Nicolas Ledoux
What do geometric architecture emulate of the universe?	eternality
What Edmund Burke concept is linked to Boullee's ideas?	sublime
What concept did Ledoux address?	architectural character
As a concept of neoclassical architecture, what should be immediately communicated to viewer?	building should immediately communicate its function
What century were most four influential books published?	18th century
Who wrote Vitruvius Britannicus?	Colen Campbell
In what century did Palladian architecture become well established?	18th-century
When was "The Designs of Inigo Jones" book published?	1727
Who was the "architect earl"?	Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington
When was Chiswick House designed?	1729
What was the original building that Chiswick House design was reinterpretation?	Palladio's Villa Capra
What is 1734 design is considered one of the finest example of Palladian architecture in England, built in Norfolk?	Holkham Hall
What additional influences were incorporated into neoclassical architecture by mid 18th century?	Ancient Greece
What englishman excavated pompeii?	Sir William Hamilton
In what city did a generation of French art students study that propelled neoclassical architecture and incorporation broader styles?	Rome
What other countries adopted the style of neoclassical?	Sweden and Russia.
When was the second wave of neoclassical architecture?	Napoleonic Empire
What term is used to express the first wave of neoclassicism in France?	Louis XVI style
What is the second wave of neoclassicism in France called?	"Directoire" or Empire
Up until Napoleaoic regimes, what style remained popular in Italy?	The Rococo style
What rediscoveries inspired interior designs of neoclassicism?	Pompeii and Herculaneum.
What tightly controlled book brought appeal for classic interior to masses?	Le Antichità di Ercolano (The Antiquities of Herculaneum).
What are some examples of the changes of interior of neoclassicism from ancient rediscoveries?	pedimented window frames turned into gilded mirrors, fireplaces topped with temple fronts
What were William Kent's interior designs based from?	basilica and temple exterior architecture turned outside in
What were interiors seeking to recreate?	authentically Roman
What colors were utilized for interiors?	"Pompeiian red" or pale tints, or stone colours
Who brought Louis XVI style to the court?	Marie Antoinette
What types of techniques were used to style motifs?	flatter, lighter motifs, sculpted in low frieze-like relief or painted in monotones
What were styles in France initially?	Parisian
Who began the new phase of neoclassical design?	Robert and James Adam
Where were the inspirations for the new phase of neoclassicism centered?	Italy and Dalmatia
What book outlines the new trends of neoclassicism in this phase?	The Works in Architecture
During the later 18th century the trend of neoclassic design attempted to simplify what styles?	rococo and baroque styles
This new style was an attempt to give what different feel to design?	lighter and more elegant feel
From around 1800 an influx of etchings and engravings came from where?	Greek architectural
What was this new phase of neoclassicism?	Greek Revival
Prior to what century had there been little contact between western europe and greek civilization?	18th century
Who led an expedition to Greece in 1751?	James Stuart and Nicholas Revett
What was the first Greek building in England?	garden temple at Hagley Hall (1758–59)
Whose winning design for public competition began the dominance of Greek style architecture?	William Wilkins
What monument was created in 1818?	Burns Monument at Alloway
When was the General Post Office built?	1824–29
In what year was the British Museum built?	1823–48
When was the National Gallery constructed?	1832–38
How would the Empire style of France be characterized by comparison?	more grandiose
What was the origination of the Imperial Roman Style?	Napoleon I
What was the corresponding style to Empire in Britain?	Regency
In the US, the style during this time of Neoclassical Empire was known as what?	Federal style
What other architecture style did neoclassical share similarities and vocabulary?	Late Baroque architecture
What qualities were more emphasized in neoclassical versus Baroque?	planar qualities, rather than sculptural volumes
In addition to being flatter, how were individual features handled with neoclasic?	isolated rather than interpenetrating
How broad was the reach of high neoclassicism?	international movement
What ancient civilization utilized neoclassicism in city planning?	ancient Romans
What basic civil planning system for streets is rooted in neoclassicism?	grid system
What are 2 benefits of leveraging neoclassicism for civil planning?	very logical and orderly
What direction did British architecture go in mid 18th century?	Ancient Greco-Roman ideal
What were Robert Wood's influential Greek monuments from mid 18th century?	Palmyra and Baalbec
Who began the revolution of Greek influenced architecture in Britain?	James 'Athenian' Stuart
What brothers were instrumental in this Greek movement of neoclassicism?	Adam Brothers
What author's 20th century writing caused interest in pure neoclassical design?	Albert Richardson
In what period did Percy Thomas design public building in neoclassical?	interwar period
Sir Edwin Lutyens' city planning in what city marked a shift in design?	New Delhi
What new design was trending after neoclassical?	Gothic Revival
What is the name of the first wave of neoclassicism in France?	Louis XVI style
France's second phase of neoclassic is known as what?	Directoire and "Empire"
What architect typifies the first style of neoclassical in England?	Robert Adam
Structure of whom characterize England's second phase of neoclassical?	Sir John Soane
Who styled the court in France for more modern design after 1771?	Marie Antoinette
What is the earliest example of Greek architecture in France?	Charles de Wailly's crypt in the church of St Leu-St Gilles (1773–80
How concerned was France with Greek architecture?	Greek architecture was of very little importance to the French
Who's influence brought about Greek revival in France?	Laboustre
In which wave of neoclassical was the greek revival in France?	second Empire
In what town is the oldest neoclassical architecture in Hungary?	Vác
What French architect designed important neoclassical structures in 1760s?	Isidor Marcellus Amandus Ganneval
Who designed the Esterhazy Palace?	Charles Moreau
Who is famous for Cathedral Eger and Esztergom?	József Hild
When was Malta introduced to neoclassical architecture?	late 18th century
What was the ruler at the time of neoclassical introduction?	Hospitaller
When was RNH Bighi built?	1832
In what year did the St Paul's Pro-Cathedral get built?	1844
In what are of architecture is neoclassical currently classed?	New Classical Architecture
What is the term for sincere traditional-style architecture that sticks to regional architecture?	Traditional Architecture
What is another name for New Classical Architecture?	Neo-Historicism/Revivalism, Traditionalism
What is the award for major contributions to traditional of classical architecture in 21st century?	The Driehaus Architecture Prize
When was the lull in neoclassical architecture?	roughly post-World War II until the mid-1980s
What is the movement that caused resurgence of neoclassicism?	New Urbanism
Many post modern designs feature classic elements in what way?	ironic
What recent architect began to take elements of classicism seriously?	Thomas Gordon Smith
Who has stirred controversy for development and design of Chelsea Barracks?	Prince Charles
What family was funding the development of former Chelsea Barracks?	Qatari Royal family
What new library illustrates the traditional style of neoclassicism?	Quinlan Terry's Maitland Robinson Library at Downing College
What is the name of the library that illustrates the unconventional style of neoclassical?	ADAM Architecture's Sackler Library
Is neoclassical design current in Britain?	a number of architects are active in the neoclassical
Was CBC one of the first or last stations to adopt a 24 hour schedule?	last
When did stations previously sign off the air?	early morning hours (typically from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.)
What did private stations air when programming was not ticketed?	infomercials
What does CBC use unallotted airtime for?	local news, primetime series, movies and other programming from the CBC library
Which French station has refused to adopt a 24 hour schedule?	Ici Radio-Canada Télé
In what year did the network end American programming?	1998
What foreign programming is shown on the CBC after 1998?	a handful of British programs, and a few American movies and off-network repeats
Which recent (2007-2008) shows helped the network regain popularity?	Little Mosque on the Prairie and The Border
Which company owns the rights to National Hockey League broadcasts?	Rogers Communications
Where are affiliates of HNIC aired?	a separate CRTC-licensed part-time network operated by Rogers
Where are HNIC broadcasts aired?	on CBC-owned stations
What did the 11pm broadcast of The National omit?	analysis and documentary segment
Which title is CBC's flagship newscast?	The National
When did CBC discontinue its late-night broadcast of The National?	October 2006
During hockey season, when does the late night news update occur?	during the first intermission of the second game of the doubleheader on Hockey Night in Canada
What times are generally reserved for local newscasts?	from 5:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.
When do most other stations view their local newscasts?	weekend evenings
When does CBC News Now air?	weekday at 6:00 a.m. and noon
What year did HNIC begin being broadcasted on CBC?	1952
What did CBC air during the NHL lockout?	various recent and classic movies
On what nights does CBC generally reserve broadcasting for hockey?	Saturday
What did CBC call it's movie showings during the NHL Lockout?	Movie Night in Canada
CBC was eclusive carrier of what other sport during the 2004-2005 season?	Curling
What is CBC Country Canada now called?	Cottage Life Television
Who became the new exclusive carrier of curling broadcasts during the 2008-2009 season?	TSN
On what day was it announced CBC had lost exclusve rights to curling broadcasting?	June 15, 2006
Which American newscast was taken off the air only two weeks after CBC began showing it?	The One
Why did CBC move The National in some areas?	to simulcast the American version of The One over the summer
For what purpose did CBC make significant changes to their broadcasting?	to attract a younger audience to the network
What year did the CBC begin contributing funds to the show Doctor Who?	2005
When did CBC end its Doctor Who contributions?	the end of fourth season, broadcast in 2008
Which Doctor Who spinoff did CBC contribute to?	Torchwood
Which Australian series has CBC taken interest in?	Janet King and Love Child, and the comedy-drama series Please Like Me
What stations did CBC broadcast in HD in 2005?	Toronto (CBLT-DT) and Montreal (CBMT-DT)
Where is CBC available for free?	over-the-air
What is required to view over-the-air broadcasts?	a regular TV antenna and a digital tuner
What station does not identify itself by its call letters?	Toronto's CBLT
Who owns and operates most of the CBC television stations?	CBC itself
What are the first two letters of nearly all CBC stations?	"CB"
What is the last letter of nearly all CBC stations?	"T"
Which stations break convention and begin with "CF" instead of "CB"?	CBC North
What are private affiliates?	stations which are owned by commercial broadcasters but predominantly incorporate CBC programming within their schedules
Minimally, how many hours are devoted weekly to network programming in CBC's private affiliates?	40
Which broadcast do affiliates generally carry?	10 p.m
Which CBC affiliate joined E! in February 2006?	CHBC-TV in Kelowna
Which affiliate left CBC due to an agreement with CHBC?	CFJC-TV in Kamloops
What two affiliates joined E! in late August, 2008 after which transmitters were not replaced?	CKPG-TV Prince George and CHAT-TV Medicine Hat
CJFC, CHAT, and CKPG are owned by whom?	Jim Pattison Group
What was Canada's date for the switch between analog and digital transmission?	August 31, 2011
What did CBC announce on August 31, 2011?	it will not extend its association with any of its private affiliates
In March 2011, CBC and CKPR agreed to continue working together for how many additional years?	five
Who purchased CFTK and CJDC in March 2012?	Bell Media
When did CBC shut down its analogue transmitter?	September 2010
Which CBC location has a lapsed area of coverage after 2010?	South-Western Ontario
Which US city can receive broadcasts from CBC's London transmitter?	Ashtabula, Ohio
Why is CBC's coverage preferable to other networks in the US?	more complete and consistent
Did CBC air more or less live Olympic events than NBC?	more
Why was NBC criticized over its Olympic coverage?	tape delaying events to air in primetime
What was the deadline for converstion to digital transmission from analogue?	August 31, 2011
How many of CBC's mandatory transmitters were updated before the deadline?	only about half
Which two large metropolitan areas lost CBC and Radio-Canada broadcasts?	London, Ontario (metropolitan area population 457,000) and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan (metro area population 257,000)
When was CBC's anologue upgrade extension set to expire?	August 31, 2012
At the deadline, which area lost broadcast entirely?	Barrie, Ontario
Did Barrie, Ontario lose signal for CBC, Radio-Canada, or both?	both
How many people were intended to be served by digital transmitters, according to CBC's application?	113,930 people
How many people were previously served by analogue transmitters before the upgrade?	303,465
In what area of Victora was CBC and Radio-Canada available?	only some northeastern parts
How many transmitters does currently CBC operate after 2012?	27
When did the CBC announce service would be discontinued to analogue transmitters?	July 31, 2012
How much did CBC say they would save by ceasing analogue operation?	$10 million
How many transmitters did CBC intend to upgrade before August 2011?	15
For what reason did CBC attribute to delayed upgrades?	financial reasons
How many transmitters did CBC plan to upgrade total?	27
On which day did CBC release an updated announcement stating they were striving to update all 27 transmitters?	On December 16, 2010
On what date did CBC say it was striving to update its analogue transmitters by?	August 31, 2011
Why did the CTRC send out a bulletin to broadcasters?	reminding broadcasters that analog transmitters had to be shut off by the deadline in mandatory markets
What percent of the previous population would a new digital transmitter have served in Fredicton in comparison to the analogue transmitter?	62.5%
Was CBC's application for a digital transitter in Fredricton approved or rejected?	rejected
What did CBC say would allow broadcasting to continue?	if the CRTC were to "allow CBC Television to continue providing the analogue service it offers today
On what day did the CRTC agree to allow CBCs broadcasting transmitters to remain active for another year?	August 18, 2011
Where could CBC's channels need to be relocated in order to continue operating?	2 to 51
Which of CBC's channels were required to be relocated or reduced in power?	52 to 69
On what date did the CTRC approve the shut down of CBC's analogue transmitters?	July 17, 2012
On what date were CBC's remaining analogue transmitters shut down?	July 31, 2012
How many analogue transmitters were shut down on July 31, 2012?	620
What are the Appalachian mountains called in French?	les Appalaches
What are the Appalachian mountains?	a system of mountains in eastern North America
When did the Appalachian mountains form?	roughly 480 million years ago
In what era did the mountains form?	Ordovician Period
How many provinces are in the mountain range?	thirteen provinces
What is one of the provinces?	the Atlantic Coast Uplands
Which province is often left out?	the Adirondack provinces
What set of mountains in the range have a different geological history?	the Adirondack Mountains
What country do the Appalachian mountains extend into?	Canada
How large is the zone in Canada?	100 to 300 mi
Where does it start in Canada?	Newfoundland
Where does it end in the US?	Central Alabama
What island is included in the range?	Saint Pierre and Miquelon
What does the term Appalachian refer to?	several different regions associated with the mountain range
What states comprise of the southern Appalachian mountains?	Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, Maryland, West Virginia, and North Carolina
What area did the Narvaez expedition explore?	northern coast of Florida
When did the Narvaez expedition explore Florida?	1528
What did they transcribe Florida's name as?	Apalchen
What was the name eventually used for?	as a name for the tribe and region spreading well inland to the north
What area is usually grouped with the Appalachians?	dissected plateau to the north and west of the mountains
What mountains does that region include?	Catskill Mountains
What is the plateau known as in West Virginia?	Cumberland Plateau
What does the Great Appalachian Valley do?	divides the mountain system into two unequal portions
What is common among all the mountains in the range?	has no axis of dominating altitudes, but in every portion the summits rise to rather uniform heights
What is the climate like on the summits?	None of the summits reaches the region of perpetual snow.
How tall are the mountains in Newfoundland?	3,000 ft
How tall are the mountains in Nova Scotia?	vary from 1,000 to 2,700 ft
How tall are the mountains in Maine?	exceed 4,000 ft
How tall are the mountains in New Hampshire?	many summits rise above 5,000 ft
How many summits in PA are over 2,500 ft?	over sixty summits
How tall are the summits of Mount Davis and Blue Knob?	over 3,000 ft
How tall are Eagle Rock and Dans Mountain?	3,162 ft (964 m) and 2,882 ft
How tall is the Pinnacle?	3,007 feet
How many peaks are over 4,000 feet in WV?	more than 150 peaks
Where do the Blue Ridge Mountains begin?	southern Pennsylvania
What are the typical elevations of the Blue Ridge Mountains?	2,000 ft
How tall is Quirauk Mountain?	2,145 ft
How tall are the Blue Ridge Mountains in Virginia?	2,000 ft
What is the tallest Appalachian mountain in Virginia?	Mount Rogers
Where did the mountains lay before the French and Indian War?	on the indeterminate boundary between Britain's colonies along the Atlantic and French areas centered in the Mississippi basin
What happened after the French and Indian War?	the Proclamation of 1763 restricted settlement for Great Britain's thirteen original colonies in North America to east of the summit line of the mountains
What was the general opinion of the law?	it was strongly resented by backcountry settlers throughout the Appalachians
What did the law likely lead to?	the American Revolutionary War
What did the backcountry settlers want to secure?	their settlement of Kentucky
Where did a lot of Germans settle?	between the Susquehanna and Delaware Rivers
What dialect was created because of this?	Pennsylvania German language
Where did these Germans eventually occupy?	all of the Shenandoah Valley
What is one typical bird found in the range?	wild turkey
How many species of tree squirrel are commonly found in the range?	five species
What is the most commonly seen species?	gray squirrel
What does the squirrel share its habitat with?	larger fox squirrel
What is found more in the northern portions?	red squirrel
Which species is commonly found more in spruce-fir forests?	Appalachian northern flying squirrel
What trees are typically found in the dryer portions?	oak
What species of tree was pretty much eliminated?	The American chestnut
What does the tree live on?	sapling-sized sprouts
What trees replaced chestnut trees?	oaks
What kind of oaks are in the central and southern portions?	black, northern red, white, chestnut and scarlet oaks
What other tree is common there?	hickories
What trees are located in drier portions?	chestnut oak
What is a property of objects which can be transferred to other objects or converted into different forms?	energy
In SI units, energy is measured in what measurement?	joules
Mechanically, one joule is defined as what?	the energy transferred to an object by the mechanical work of moving it a distance of 1 metre against a force of 1 newton
Common energy forms include what?	kinetic energy of a moving object
In Newtonian physics, there is a universal law that says energy can be neither created nor what?	destroyed
What law states, in part, that energy can change from one form to another?	Newtonian physics
How can the total energy of a system be calculated?	by adding up all forms of energy in the system
The limit to the amount of heat energy that can do work in a cyclic process is known as what?	available energy
What can be fully converted into work in a reversible isothermal expansion of an ideal gas?	heat
What states that the system doing work always loses some energy as waste heat?	second law of thermodynamics
Give one example of energy transformation.	generating electric energy from heat energy via a steam turbine
What transforms nuclear potential energy to other forms of energy?	Sun
What is another example of energy transformation?	lifting an object against gravity using electrical energy driving a crane motor
What is determined by an object's movement through space?	kinetic energy
What usually consists partly of kinetic and partly of potential energy?	thermal energy
What is a function of the position of an object within a field?	potential energy
What is dependent upon electrical potential energy?	Elastic energy in materials
Where is chemical energy stored and released?	from a reservoir of electrical potential energy between electrons
Some types of energy are a varying mix of potential and what other kind of energy?	kinetic
What is a term for living force?	vis viva
What is defined as the product of mass of an object and its velocity squared?	vis viva
Who proposed the idea of the Latin: vis viva?	Gottfried Leibniz
In what century did Leibniz propose the idea of Latin: vis viva?	late 17th century
Who shared Leibniz's view that thermal energy consisted of random motion of the constituent parts of matter?	Isaac Newton
Who was possibly the first to use the term "energy" instead of vis viva?	Thomas Young
When did Thomas Young use the term "energy" instead of vis viva?	1807
Who coined the term "potential energy?"	William Rankine
Who discovered the link between mechanical work and the generation of heat?	James Prescott Joule
When was the law of conservation of energy first postulated?	19th century
Who largely formalized the developments that led to the theory of conservation of energy?	William Thomson
What aided the rapid development of explanations of chemical processes by Clausius, Gibbs and Nernst?	Thermodynamics
Who developed the concept of the introduction of laws of radiant energy?	Jožef Stefan
What states that the conservation of energy is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not change over time?	Noether's theorem
What is another energy-related concept?	Lagrangian
Who is the Lagrangian named after?	Joseph-Louis Lagrange
What is defined as the kinetic energy minus the potential energy?	Lagrangian
Is the Lagrange formalism or the Hamiltonian more convenient for non-conservative systems?	Lagrange formalism
When was Noether's theorem created?	1918
What states that any differentiable symmetry of the action of a physical system has a corresponding conservation law?	Noether's theorem
What has become a fundamental tool of modern theoretical physics and the calculus of variations?	Noether's theorem
In the context of chemistry, what is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of it's atomic, molecular or aggregate structure?	energy
What is not possible unless the reactants surmount an energy barrier known as the activation energy?	Chemical reactions
What is the probability of molecule to have energy greater than or equal to E at the given temperature T?	e−E/kT
Who created the population factor e-E/kT?	Boltzmann's
What is the exponential dependence of a reaction rate on temperature?	Arrhenius equation
In biology, what is an attribute of all biological systems from the biosphere to the smallest living organism?	energy
What is often said to be stored by cells in the structures of molecules of substances such as carbohydrates, lipids and proteins?	Energy
What does H-e stand for?	Human energy conversion
How many watts is in one official horsepower?	746 watts
What is also captured by plants as chemical potential energy in photosynthesis?	Sunlight
What do plants release during photosynthesis?	oxygen
What may be triggered suddenly by a spark?	Release of the energy stored during photosynthesis
What are two low-energy compounds?	carbon dioxide and water
What does any living organism rely on to be able to grow and reproduce?	an external source of energy
How many daily calories are recommended for a human adult?	1500–2000
Where are food molecules oxidised to carbon dioxide and water?	mitochondria
What states that energy tends to become more evenly spread out across the universe?	The second law of thermodynamics
What are remarkably inefficient in their use of the energy they receive?	living organisms
Complex organisms can occupy this, that are not available to their simpler brethern?	ecological niches
This drives many weather phenomena, save those generated by volcanic events.	Sunlight
When may sunlight be stored as gravitational potential energy?	after it strikes the Earth
What is an example of a solar-mediated weather event?	hurricane
What occurs when large unstable areas of warm ocean, heated over months, give up some of their thermal energy suddenly to power a few days of violent air movement?	hurricane
What releases stored elastic potential energy in rocks?	Earthquakes
What does radioactive decay of atoms in the core of the Earth release?	heat
What drives plate tectonics and may lift mountains via orogenesis?	thermal energy
What is mechanical potential energy?	elastic strain
What is driven by various kinds of energy transformations?	stellar phenomena
What releases another store of potential energy which was created at the time of the Big Bang?	nuclear fusion of hydrogen in the Sun
What theory states that space expanded and the universe cooled too rapidly for hydrogen to completely fuse into heavier elements?	Big Bang
Hydrogen represents a store of potential energy that can be released by what?	fusion
In quantum mechanics, what is defined in terms of the energy operator as a time derivative of the wave function?	energy
What equates the energy operator to the full energy of a particle or a system?	The Schrödinger equation
What describes the space-and-time dependence of a slowly changing wave function of quantum systems?	The Schrödinger equation
What is it called when the rest mass of individual particles is destroyed but the inertia equivalent of the system of the two particles remains?	electron–positron annihilation
What is the inverse process called?	pair creation
What is the process in which the rest mass of particles is created from energy of two or more annihilating photons?	pair creation
What states that there are strict limits to how efficiently heat can be converted into a work in a cyclic process?	Carnot's theorem
What is the direction of transformations in energy?	what kind of energy is transformed to what other kind
What is often determined by entropy considerations?	direction of transformations in energy
Why are certain larger transformations not permitted?	because it is statistically unlikely that energy or matter will randomly move into more concentrated forms or smaller spaces
Name an example of a heavy isotope?	uranium
Name another example of a heavy isotope.	thorium
What is a process ultimately using the gravitational potential energy in the creation of these heavy elements before they were incorporated into the solar system and the Earth?	nucleosynthesis
In the case of a chemical explosion, what is transformed to kinetic energy and thermal energy in a short time?	chemical potential energy
When does energy give rise to weight?	when it is trapped in a system with zero momentum
Mass is also equivalent to what?	certain amount of energy
Who created the formula E = mc2?	Albert Einstein
In what year did Einstein create E = mc2?	1905
What quantifies the relationship between rest-mass and rest-energy within the concept of special relativity?	E = mc²
Matter may be converted to what?	energy
Energy may be converted to what?	Matter
Why is a loss of energy difficult to measure by weight?	mass equivalent of a unit of energy is minuscule
Where are examples of energy transformation into matter found?	high-energy nuclear physics
Thermodynamics divides energy information into what two kinds?	reversible processes and irreversible processes
What divides energy transformation into two kinds reversible processes and irreversible processes?	Thermodynamics
A reversible process is one in which this does not happen.	dissipation
As the universe evolves in time, more and more of its energy becomes trapped in what?	irreversible states
What is it referred to when more and more of energy becomes trapped in irreversible states?	inevitable thermodynamic heat death of the universe
In this heat death of energy, what does not change?	energy of the universe
According to what, energy can neither be created nor destroyed by itself?	conservation of energy
The total inflow of energy into a system must equal what?	total outflow of energy from the system, plus the change in the energy contained within the system
What can neither be created nor destroyed by itself; it can only be transformed?	energy
What shows that the conservation of energy is a mathematical consequence of translational symmetry of time?	Noether's theorem
What is the quantity which is canonical conjugate to time?	energy
This mathematical entanglement of energy and time results in what?	the uncertainty principle
What states it is impossible to define the exact amount of energy during any definite time interval?	uncertainty principle
What are simply lowest quantum mechanical energy state of photons?	Virtual photons
What is responsible for electrostatic interaction between electric charges?	Virtual photons
What results in Coulomb law?	electrostatic interaction between electric charges
What can be considered for the special case of systems which are closed to transfers of matter?	Energy transfer
The portion of energy which does not do work during the transfer is called what?	heat
Give one example of how energy can be transferred between systems?	transmission of electromagnetic energy via photons
What asserts that energy is always conserved and that heat flow is a form of energy transfer.	first law of thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics asserts that what is always conserved and that heat flow is a form of energy transfer?	energy
What is a commonly used corollary of the first law?	for a system subject only to pressure forces and heat transfer (e.g., a cylinder-full of gas) without chemical changes
What is the principle that is vitally important to understanding the behaviour of a quantity closely related to energy?	entropy
What is entropy?	measure of evenness of a distribution of energy between parts of a system
What is the mathematical result when an isolated system is given more degrees of freedom?	second law of thermodynamics
Who defeated the native Prussians during the 13 century?	Teutonic Knights
What other groups during this period for form minorities?	Poles and Lithuanians
The Balts were gradually converted into which religion?	Christianity
Which ethnic group become dominant following the 13 century just a few hundred years later?	Germans
Around when did the Old Prussian language become extinct?	17th or early 18th century
Why were the prince electors able to proclaim themselves King of Prussia?	Because the duchy was outside of the core Holy Roman Empire
In what year were the prince electors elect them selves as King?	1701
What time period did East Prussia and West Prussia join to become Prussia?	Prussia
What year did the Kingdom of Prussia become the leading state of the German Empire?	1871
What well known treaty would eventually would grant West Prussia to Poland?	Versailles
What year did the Nazi's fall in World War II?	1945
How many died trying to defend the province in Kaliningrad?	300,000
Which group took possession of Prussia in the 13th century?	Teutonic Knights
Which two areas were slowly Germanized during the 13th century?	Old-Prussian (north) and Polish (south) toponyms
What did the knights of expansionist polices eventually lead to?	several wars
What year was the Second Treaty of Thorn enacted?	1466
Who converted to Lutheranism and secularized the Prussian branch of the Teutonic Order?	Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach
In what year did The Teutonic Order lose Eastern Prussia?	1525
What did Albert establish himself as?	first duke of the Duchy of Prussia
In what year did Maximilian III die?	1618
What happened as a result of Maximilian's death?	Albert's line died out
Who revoked the King of Poland's sovereignty over Prussia in 1660?	Frederick William
Brandenburg was part of what dominating force?	Holy Roman Empire
What jurisdiction was the Prussian lands under?	Teutonic Order
Who elected there self as King of Prussia in 1701?	Frederick III
What did the former Duchy of Prussia become known as?	Altpreußen ("Old Prussia")
What wiped out one third of East Prussia's population during the early 1700's?	the plague and famine
What was lost in Prussia's history during the Plague?	speakers of Old Prussian
What military overran much of East Prussia?	Russian troops
In what year was Royal Prussia annexed?	1772
In what year was the territory of Warmia incorporated?	31 January 1773
What was ratified in 1773 in Prussia?	The Polish Partition Sejm
What defeat led to Prussia having to swear its allegiance to Napoleon?	Battle of Jena-Auerstedt
What city did King Frederick William use to flee Prussia?	Königsberg
What year did Napoleon end of the War of the Fourth Coalition?	1807
Who instigated the Prussian reforms?	Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein and Karl August von Hardenberg
What was included in the reform?	emancipation of the serfs and Jews
In what year was East and West Prussia first united?	1824
When did East and West Prussia split again?	1878
Was the population of the Prussian province in 1900?	1,996,626 people
Which religious group made up the majority of the population in Prussia?	Protestants
Due to Germanization which three groups saw a decrease in Prussia?	Masurians, Kursenieki and Prussian Lithuanians
Which country invaded east Prussia in World War I?	Russian Empire
Why did the Russian army face such little resistance when moving through Prussia?	German Army had been directed towards the Western Front
In what year did the battle of Tannenberg take place?	1914
In what year did Germany become a republic?	1918
What was implemented that separated East Prussia from Germany?	Treaty of Versailles
What was implemented to provide transport to East Prussia?	The Seedienst Ostpreußen
Who was the leader of the East Prussian Nazi Party?	Erich Koch
What large plans did Koch have?	mass-scale industrialization of the largely agricultural province
What even occurred during the summer of 1932 in Konigsberg?	attack on the headquarters of the Social Democrats
Who was killed in the attack of the Social Democrats?	Gustav Sauf
How were East Prussians able to pay for land improvements and road construction?	publicly funded emergency relief programs
What was the name of the initiative to help with the new projects in East Prussia?	Erich Koch Plan
What did Koch report to Hitler in 1933?	that unemployment had been banished entirely
In what year did the Nazi's alter around one-third of the toponyms of the area?	1938
Around how many places were renamed when the Nazis entered Prussia?	1,500
What would happen if some didn't comply with the Nazi's with their demands?	sent to concentration camps
How many people lived in Easy Prussia in 1939?	2.49 million
Of the population in East Prussia, what percentage of those were German?	85%
How many East Prussian Jews were around in 1939?	3,000
What happened to those Jews who remained?	deported and killed in the Holocaust.
In what year was the Regierungsbezirk Zichenau annexed?	1939
What other parts of East Prussia were transferred after the annexation of Zichenau?	Suwałki to Regierungsbezirk Gumbinnen and Soldau to Regierungsbezirk Allenstein
Despite all the propaganda that ws presented to the East Prussians what did German populations want within the country?	reunification with Germany
What two countries were East Prussia partitioned into after World Was II?	Poland and the Soviet Union
What was the city of Konigsberg renamed in to in 1946?	Kaliningrad
What happened to most of the German population during the war in what is current day Kaliningrad?	evacuated during the war
How many Germans were living in East Prussia in 1945?	800,000
Around how many camps were set up by the Germans during the way?	45 camps
How many forced labourers were in the largest camp?	48,000
What were the children that were left behind in East Prussia that was occupied by the Russians referred to as?	Wolf children
In what year did the Polish government officially take over the administration in East Prussia?	1945
How was the pre-war population in East Prussia referred to as?	Germanized Poles
How much did the Ukrainians make up in population as a percentage in East Prussia?	18.5%
What year did East Prussia become an official province of Russia?	1946
In who's honor was the city named Kaliningrad from  Konigsberg?	Mikhail Kalinin
Between August 24th and October 26th how many German's left the Oblast to the Soviet Occupation zone?	42,094
What happened to the Curonians who lived in the area in East Prussia?	expelled by the Soviet Union
What did the Russians consider Curonians?	fascists
Where did most of the Curonians flee to in 1958?	West Germany
Once the German populations was removed, what three groups  settled into the nothern area?	ethnic Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians
In the Soviet section to the north, what did they want to expel from their land?	eliminating all remnants of German history
What else happened in the northern part of East Prussia in the now Russian area?	names were replaced by new Russian names
What has since been considered in Kalinigrad?	reverting Kaliningrad's name to its historic name of Königsberg
What city was completely rebuilt after the Russians and Germans had bombed it?	Kaliningrad
How was the removal of the Germans in East Prussia usually handled by the Russians?	violent and aggressive
What were common task of the corporation formed by the urban and rural districts?	schools, traffic installations, hospitals, cultural institutions, jails
What was the name of the corporation that looked over common task?	Provinzialverband
What has since happened from 1919 that involve the provincial diets?	elected by the citizens of the provinces
The Ottoman Empire is also known as what three other names?	Turkish Empire, Ottoman Turkey or Turkey
When was the Ottoman empire founded?	1299
Who founded the Ottoman empire?	Oghuz Turks
Where was the Ottoman empire founded?	northwestern Anatolia
Conquests by who began the transformation of the Ottoman sultanate into an Empire?	Murad I
Under the reign of who did the Ottoman empire control much of Southeastern Europe?	Suleiman the Magnificent
During what centuries was the Ottoman empire in control of much of Southeast Europe?	16th and 17th centuries
How many provinces did the Ottoman empire control at the start of the 17th century?	32 provinces
Along with provinces what type of states did the Ottoman empire have control over?	vassal states
What regions of Africa were under control of the Ottoman empire?	North Africa, and the Horn of Africa
What was the capital of the Ottoman empire?	Constantinople
What Ottoman empire controlled lands contributed to the centre of transactions between East and West ?	lands around the Mediterranean basin
When did the Ottoman empire decline?	into the late nineteenth century
What nation did the Ottoman empire align with in the 20th century?	Germany
What led to the decline of the Ottoman empire?	military setbacks against European powers
An anglicization of the name Osman I results in what word?	Ottoman
What house was the founder of the Ottoman empire?	House of Osman
What was another name for the Ottoman Dynasty?	House of Osman
What is the origin of Osman's name?	Arabic
In a literal sense what was the Ottoman empire referred to as?	The Supreme State of the Ottomans
Who was the father of Osman I?	Ertuğrul
How many horsemen did Osman I's father bring to aid the Seljuks of Rum?	400 horsemen
When did the Turkish Seljuk Sultanate of Rum reach its demise?	14th century
What did the divided Anatolia end up being referred to as?	Ghazi emirates
To the edge of what empire did Osman I push Turkish settlements?	Byzantine Empire
Which city did Osman's son capture?	Bursa
In what year did Osman's son capture an Anatolian city?	1324
What was the name of the son of Osman that captured an Anatolian city?	Orhan
What city was captured from the Venetians in 1387?	Thessaloniki
In what year did the Ottoman's have a victory at Kosovo?	1389
What was an objective of Turkey after its expansion into the Balkans?	conquest of Constantinople
What empire were the controlled lands surrounding Constantinople formerly controlled by?	Byzantine
What leader invaded Anatolia from the east?	Timur
Timur was the founder of what?	Timurid Empire
What battle between Timur and the Ottoman empire took place in 1402?	Battle of Ankara
Who recovered Ottoman empire territories in the Balkans in the 1430s to the 1450s?	Murad II
Władysław III of Poland was also the king of what?	Hungary
What battle took place on 10 November 1444?	Battle of Varna
In what battle did Murad II leave as the victory in 1448?	Second Battle of Kosovo
On what date were the armies under Władysław III defeated by Murad II?	10 November 1444
Who was the son of Murad II?	Mehmed the Conqueror
What city was conquered on 29 May 1453?	Constantinople
What did the Orthodox Church get to keep in exchange for accepting the authority of the Ottoman empire?	its autonomy and land
The Orthodox population of Constantinople preferred Ottoman rule instead of what?	Venetian rule
What was the main obstacle to the expansion of the Ottoman empire into the peninsula of Italy??	Albanian resistance
During what years was Suleiman the Magnificent alive?	1520–1566
In what year did Suleiman the Magnificent capture Belgrade?	1521
Suleiman the Magnificent had an important victory in what battle in 1526?	Battle of Mohács
After a victorious battle in 1526 in what present-day nation was Turkish rule expanded to?	Hungary
In what siege was Suleiman the Magnificent stopped when attacking Vienna in 1532?	the Siege of Güns
France and the Ottoman Empire united against what?	Habsburg rule
Where did the French lay conquest in 1553?	Corsica
The conquest of Nice was an effort by Suleiman and what French king?	Francis I
What were the names of the Ottoman admirals who commanded the conquest of Nice?	Barbarossa Hayreddin Pasha and Turgut Reis
What ruler recognized the Ottomans in 1547?	Ferdinand
Who argues that there was steep decline and stagnation after the death of Suleiman?	Stephen Lee
In what year did Suleiman die?	1566
By what year was it argued that the Ottoman empire was merely "a shadow" of what it was in 1566?	1699
Beginning and ending with what years does Lee argue that the rules of the Empire were incompetent?	1566 to 1703
What factor caused inflation in the Ottoman empire?	war
Poor rule by what class of people strained the empire?	Sultans
Europeans gained on the Ottoman empire in what type of technology?	military technology
What types of conservative beliefs slowed the expansion of the empire?	religious and intellectual
What battle took place in 1683?	Battle of Vienna
The empire ceased its expansion into what area after a battle in 1683?	Europe
Avoiding the strength of Ottoman trade was accomplished with the discovery of what?	new maritime trade routes
What did the Portuguese discover in 1488?	the Cape of Good Hope
Where did the Ottoman and Portuguese have Naval wars in the 16th century?	the Indian Ocean
Who did the Ottomans ally with in the Indian Ocean?	The Somali Muslim Ajuran Empire
New coins were a proclamation of independence by the Somali Muslim Ajuran Empire from whom?	the Portuguese
Which Spaniard led a battle in 1571?	Philip II
What battle did the Spanish win in 1571?	Battle of Lepanto
What siege occurred in 1565?	Siege of Malta
In what year did Venice sign a peace treaty with the Ottomans?	1573
After signing a peace treaty with Venice, in what region did the Ottoman empire expand?	North Africa
What was the late 16th century war against Habsburg Austria known as?	The Long War
During what years did the Ottoman war against Habsburg Austria occur?	1593–1606
What were ottoman irregular sharpshooters known as?	Sekban
What was the population of the Ottoman empire at the beginning of the 17th century?	30 million people
A war occurring from 1603 to 1618 resulted in what treaty?	Treaty of Nasuh Pasha
Who recaptured Iraq in 1639?	Murad IV
Who had control over Iraq before it was recaptured in 1639?	the Safavids
When was Kösem murdered?	1651
What years define the Köprülü Era?	1656–1703
What territory was conquered by the Köprülü Vizierate in 1669?	Crete
Which Grand Vizier attempted a siege of Vienna in 1683?	Grand Vizier Kara Mustafa Pasha
What was the war that took place from 1683 to 1687 known as?	the Great Turkish War
Which polish king led the fight against the Ottoman empire in the Battle of Vienna?	Jan III Sobieski
What was the alliance against the late 17th century Ottoman empire known as?	the Holy League
What treaty was signed 26 January 1699?	Treaty of Karlowitz
Oltenia is also known as what?	Little Walachia
The Austro-Turkish war took place over what years?	1716–1718
The Austro Turkish War culminated in the signing of what treaty?	Treaty of Passarowitz
The Treaty of Belgrade was the result of a war known as what?	Austro-Russian–Turkish War
What port was lost by the Ottoman empire as a result of the Treaty of Belgrade?	port of Azov
What is one university that was formed in the early 18th century of the empire?	Istanbul Technical University
What type of school was established in the empire in 1734?	an artillery school
In 1754 what man convinced the Grand Vizier to allow the use of the printing press?	Ibrahim Muteferrika
Who was the Ottoaman Grand Vizier in 1726?	Nevşehirli Damat İbrahim Pasha
In what year did an Ottoman press produce its first book?	1729
Which group supported by Russia entered Balta in 1768?	Ukrainian Haidamaks
Near what region was Balta bording?	Bessarabia
During what years was the Russo-Turkish war?	1768–1774
The Russo-Turkish War resulted in what treaty?	Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca
The culmination of the Russo-Turkish war granted what to the citizens of Ottoman controlled Provinces in Moldavia?	freedom to worship
During what years did the Serbian Revolution occur?	1804–1815
What Serbian monarchy was acknowledged in 1830?	Suzerainty of Serbia
There was a war proclaimed against the Ottoman Sultan in 1821, who declared it?	the Greeks
Some parts of the Ottoman Empire gained independence in what year?	1829
What did Europeans refer to the Ottoman empire as in the 19th century?	the "sick man"
How many primary schools existed for Christians in the Ottoman empire in 1861?	571
How many Christian pupils were in ottoman schools in 1861?	140,000
Greeks in Istanbul owned how many wholesale companies in 1911?	528
There were how many wholesale companies in Istanbul in 1911?	654
Jews and Christians were offered protection in the form of what assistance by Europe?	consuls and citizenship
During what years did the Crimean War take place?	1853–1856
On what date did the Ottoman empire issue foreign loans to deal with the cost of the war?	4 August 1854
Roughly 200,000 individuals of what group left Crimea during the war?	Crimean Tatars
Roughly 90% of what group were pushed from their homes or ethnically cleansed during the Caucasian Wars?	Circassians
Where did Circassians settle to when leaving their homes in the Caucasus?	Turkey
What historian wrote that banks were the single greatest threat to mid-east independence?	Eugene Rogan
In what year did the Ottoman Empire declare bankruptcy?	1875
What was the administration that the empire used to control its debt called?	Ottoman Public Debt Administration
Who served on the debt controlling administration of the Ottoman Empire?	European men with presidency alternating between France and Britain.
European capital in the Ottoman empire resulted in what?	the detriment of local Ottoman interests
Who held back the Bulgarian uprising in 1876?	Ottoman bashi-bazouks
What war occurred from 1877 to 1878?	Russo-Turkish War
Bulgaria became independent within the Empire as the result of what war?	The Russo-Turkish War
What nation attained full independence as a result of the Russo-Turkish war?	Romania
Millions of Muslims left the empire and migrated to what places?	Anatolia and Eastern Thrace
When did the Balkan Wars take place?	1912–13
What was the sole territory that the empire kept in the Balkans after 1913?	East Thrace (European Turkey)
How many Muslims fled the Balkans with the Ottoman armies?	400,000
Which individual estimated millions of Muslim deaths in the Balkans in the late 19th and early 20th century?	Justin McCarthy
What era kicked off the end of the Ottoman empire?	Second Constitutional Era
What was the revolution that sparked the end of the Ottoman Empire?	the Young Turk Revolution
The restoration of what happened in 1876?	the Ottoman constitution
What were two major parties established by Young Turk members?	Committee of Union and Progress,” and “Freedom and Accord Party”
What territories were annexed by Austria-Hungary in 1908?	Bosnia and Herzegovina
Where did the Ottoman empire begin its part in the first world war?	Middle Eastern theatre
The Battle of Gallipoli and the Siege of Kut resulted in what?	Ottoman victories
The Arab Revolt began in what year?	1916
What was the date that the Armistice of Mudros came to be signed?	30 October 1918
When did the Turkish War of Independence take place?	1919–22
When did the Russian Caucasus Army advance into eastern Anatolia?	In 1915
What ethnic group was deported by the Ottoman Government from eastern Anatolia?	ethnic Armenian
How many ethnic Armenians are believed to have died in the Armenian Genocide?	1.5 million
Armenian women and children were deported on death marches through what desert?	the Syrian desert
Two other ethnic minorities were massacred during Ottoman ethnic cleansing, what were they?	Greek and Assyrian minorities
What was the highest ranked person in the Ottoman Empire until the 19th century?	Sultan was the highest position
On type of system were the civil administrations of the empire based on?	local administrative units based on the region's characteristics
Who had control over the clergy in the Ottoman empire?	the state
What was the main responsibility of the Ottoman state as it relates to lands?	to defend and extend the land of the Muslims
What type of practice guided the Ottoman state in its responsibilities?	orthodox Islamic practice
What was another name for the Ottoman Empire?	House of Osman
What was the other longest ruling House in Europe known as?	House of Habsburg
From what origin did the Ottoman empire come to be?	Turkish
How many times was the the sitting sultan in the House of Osman removed?	eleven occasions
When was the reign of sultan Mehmed VI?	1918–1922
The Ottoman Caliphate claimed by Murad Ir epresented what in Islam?	The highest position
The person with this what title was believed to be the embodiment of the Ottoman government?	pâdişâh or "lord of kings"
What was the importantance of the imperial Harem?	one of the most important powers of the Ottoman court
What was the purpose of the palace educational system?	eliminating the unfit potential heirs, and establishing support among the ruling elite for a successor
What was the name of the boarding school for Christians during the Ottoman Caliphate?	Enderûn
The sultan of the ottoman empire had what honorific?	the supreme monarch
What was the council that handled state politics named?	Divan
What type of people were initially in the Divan?	elders of the tribe
At a later point other groups were admitted into the Divan, what groups?	military officers and local elites
A Grand Vizar began to be appointed in what year?	1320
What was the name of the secular legal system under the Ottoman Caliphate?	Qanun (or Kanun)
What was religious law known as?	Sharia
What did the Ottoman Empire attempt to balance in its legal policies?	central and local authority
How many court systems did the Ottoman empire have?	three court systems
What were the laws of the court system based upon?	Turkic Yassa and Töre
What were the primary courts of the empire?	Islamic courts
From what works was Sharia developed?	the Qur'an; the Hadīth
Whose words contributed to the Islamic Sharia law system?	the prophet Muhammad
Where were the empire's law schools?	in Istanbul and Bursa.
What other religious groups went to Islamic courts?	Jews and Christians
Who was the one that presided over the empire's Islamic Courts?	Qadi
At what juncture did the Qadi focus less on precedent?	closing of the ijtihad, or Gate of Interpretation
What was one thing the Ottoman legal system lacked?	an appellate structure
What did Qadis focus on in some areas?	local customs and traditions
What is another word for Qadi?	judge
Reforms in the Ottoman court system were based on what model?	French models
How many tiers did the Ottoman court system adopt?	three
What was the new Ottoman court system known as?	Nizamiye
What code regulated marriage?	the Mecelle
In what century did the first Osman I organized military unit form?	13th century
From where did tribesmen that formed a unit organized by Osman I originate?	the hills of western Anatolia
There were four corps of the Ottoman Army, what were they?	Janissary, Sipahi, Akıncı and Mehterân
The Ottoman army was among the first to use what two pieces of weapons technology?	muskets and cannons
In what conflict did the Ottoman Turks use falconets?	Siege of Constantinople
On what continent did the Ottoman Navy contribute most?	European continent
What region did the Ottoman Navy conquer in the early 16th century?	North Africa
Egypt was added to the Ottoman Empire in what year?	1517
In what year did the Ottoman empire lose Greece?	1821
The Ottoman empire lost what territory in 1830?	Algeria
Which sultan distrusted his admirals during the Russo-Turkish war?	Sultan Abdülhamid II
Who was the reformist that had the backing of Ottoman admirals during the Russo-Turkish war?	Midhat Pasha
Where was the Ottoman fleet left to decay?	the Golden Horn
When was the Young Turk Revolution?	1908
What Ottoman group wanted to form a stronger navy in the early 20th century?	the Committee of Union and Progress
What was the first date that the Ottoman empire had an air-based military unit?	June 1909
Where was the first Ottoman Aviation school?	Yeşilköy
On what date was the Aviation School founded?	3 July 1912
What happened at the aviation school in May 1913?	the world's first specialized Reconnaissance Training Program was started
What new military academy was formed in June 1914?	the Naval Aviation School (Bahriye Tayyare Mektebi)
The goal of developing Bursa and Istanbul was an intentional act to create what?	commercial and industrial centres
Who was Mehmed's successor?	Bayezid
Who did Mehmed and Bayezid encourage to come to Istanbul?	the Jews from different parts of Europe
What group were Jews being persecuted by in Europe?	their Christian counterparts
Persecution of Jews in Spain occurred after what event concluded?	the conclusion of Reconquista
The economic goal of the state was to serve as what for the ruler?	consolidation and extension of the ruler's power
In what regions concepts was the Ottoman economic system based on?	the Middle East
What was a way to reach the economic goals of the Ottoman economic system?	making the productive classes prosperous
What was the final goal of the state economic system?	to increase the state revenues without damaging the prosperity of subjects
What did the state economic system hope to avoid?	the emergence of social disorder
Two of the most developed economic organizations under the Ottoman Empire were what?	the treasury and chancery
What were the scribes of the chancery known as?	men of the pen
Part of the scribal bureaucracy were trained what?	ulama
What did the scribal bureaucracy become?	a professional body
The Ottoman Empire had the most developed economic organizations among Islamic Governments until which century?	the 17th century
What serviced as the foundation for the structure of the economy of the Ottoman empire?	its geopolitical structure
The Ottoman Empire caused navigators from which two nations to find another route to the Orient?	Spanish and Portuguese
Who once used the spice route that the Ottoman Empire controlled?	Marco Polo
When were direct trade links established with India?	1498
When did Christopher Columbus sail to the Bahamas?	1492
What is believed to have caused the opening of new sea routes during the Ottoman Empire?	change in relations between the Ottoman Turks and central Europe
The formation of sea routes bypassing the Middle East may have led to the decline of what?	the Ottoman Empire itself
What is another name for the Treaty of Balta Liman?	The Anglo-Ottoman Treaty
What did the Treaty of Balta Liman do for Ottoman markets?	opened the Ottoman markets directly to English and French competitors
In what direction did land routes lose their importance?	East
The development of what caused people to expand areas of cultivation in the Ottoman Empire?	commercial centres and routes
What dominated all economic and political interests?	interests of the state
What were the types of economies that were being developed in western Europe?	capitalist and mercantile economies
The expansion of international trade through the Empire was the result of what?	developing commercial centres and routes
The rise of ports caused what in populations?	the clustering of populations
Steamships and railroads rose with what else?	The rise of port cities
In what year did urbanization in the Ottoman empire begin to increase?	1700
What were two improvements that made cities more desirable to live in?	Improvements in health and sanitation
What was the population of Salonica in 1800?	55,000
The annexation of what two regions resulted in large groups of Muslim refugees coming into the empire?	the Crimean and Balkan regions
Muslims representing 200,000 of what group fled to Dobruja?	Crimean Tartars
How many refugees fled Russia to the Ottoman Empire from 1783 to 1913?	3.8 million
What are the people from the Balkans who emigrated to Turkey called?	Muhacir
In what year did the Ottoman Empire end?	1922
What was the official language of the Ottoman Empire?	Ottoman Turkish
What were the main influences of the official language of the Empire?	Persian and Arabic
What language was spoken by most people in Anatolia?	Turkish
Which languages influenced by the empire was spoken in Iraq?	Arabic
What language was used for religious uses in the Empire?	Arabic
What was the public's literacy rate in leading up to the early 19th century in the empire?	about 2–3%
At the end of the 19th century what was the literacy rate for the public in the Empire believed to be?	15%
What did people resort to when they needed to communicate with the government?	people had to hire scribes
What were hired scribes known as?	"special request-writers" (arzuhâlcis)
What was the second language of those that weren't ethnically Turkish?	Turkish
The Empire had a Christian majority until what time?	the second half of the 15th century
What group ruled the empire until the 15th century?	a Muslim minority
What group began to decline within the Empire in the late 19th century?	the non-Muslim population
Muslims accounted for what amount of the population of the Empire in the 1820s?	60%
In 1914 what portion of the Empire weren't Muslims?	19.1%
The Muslim sect known as the Druze is considered what?	heretical
What was Sultan Selim I's nickname?	the Grim
In what year did Sultan Selim I order the massacre of 40,000 people whom he considered heretics?	1514
What group did Sultan Selim I consider heretics and subsequently slaughter?	Anatolian Alevis (Qizilbash)
Under Sultan Selim I the empire swallowed what sultanate in Egypt?	Mamluk Sultanate
What system deemed non-Muslims subjects of the empire but unbound by Muslim law?	the millet system
What code had been active for 900 years in the Byzantine empire?	Justinian's Code
What were non-Muslims also known as in the Islamic Ottoman State?	zimmi
Being a non-muslim in the Empire resulted in what as it related to taxes?	higher taxes
What millet was subject to Justinian's Code?	The Orthodox millet
The Ottoman dynasty was preceded by what sultanate?	Sultanate of Rum
What is one way that the Empire was described as it related to culture?	Persianate empire
When the Ottoman empire conquered a region what also became a part of the empire?	some of the traditions, art and institutions of cultures
The Seljuk Empire was influenced by the cultures of others resulting in it being referred to as what?	Persianised
What type of Ottoman poetry is ritualized?	Divan poetry
What kind of poetry inspired Ottoman Divan Poetry?	Persian poetry
What type of framework was Divan poetry based on?	a strict metrical framework
What was the romance genre of Divan poetry known as?	mesnevî
What make up the largest portion of Divan poetry?	gazels (which make up the greatest part of the repertoire of the tradition), or kasîdes.
Prose in the Ottoman empire did not develop to a higher level until which century?	the 19th century
What rules did Ottoman prose have to follow?	the rules of sec (سجع, also transliterated as seci), or rhymed prose
What did the rules of sec require?	between each adjective and noun in a string of words, such as a sentence, there must be a rhyme
Who wrote Muhayyelât?	Giritli Ali Aziz Efendi
When was Muhayyelât written?	1796
What was the biggest influence from the west on Ottoman literature?	French literature
During what time period was Ottoman literate most influenced by the west?	the latter half of the 19th century
During the Tanzimat what western influence could be seen?	the influence of Romanticism
The poetic tradition had its biggest influence on what Ottoman literary movements?	the Symbolist and Parnassian movements
Romanticism, and Realism were two movements from the west that influenced the Ottoman literary scene, what was the third?	Naturalist
What 1876 Novel did Namik Kemal write?	İntibâh ("Awakening")
What did İbrahim Şinasi write in 1860?	the one-act comedy "Şair Evlenmesi" ("The Poet's Marriage").
Who wrote Hasan Mellâh yâhud Sırr İçinde Esrâr?	Ahmed Midhat Efendi
What Realist novel did Ahmed Midhat Efendi write in 1881?	Henüz On Yedi Yaşında
What did writers of the Tanzimat period hope to accomplish with their publications?	contribute to a revitalization of Ottoman social structures
Ottoman artists mixed Chinese art with the art of what else?	traditional Byzantine art
The ottoman empire built structures in Romania that included Mosques, and Bridges, what else was built?	fountains and schools
Why did the art of the Ottoman empire develop the way it did?	the wide ethnic range of the Ottoman Empire
Beside Edirne, Istanbul, and Egypt what other locations can one find the influence of the Ottoman classical period?	Eritrea, Tunisia, Algiers, the Balkans and Romania
Were would one find the sheets where Ottoman's created illuminated decorations?	muraqqa
What is another name for an Ottoman miniature?	taswir
Ottoman calligraphy can also be referred to as what?	hat
Who commissioned illustrated manuscripts in the Ottoman empire?	the Sultan or the administrators of the court
What palace was the place of creation for illustrated manuscripts?	Topkapi Palace
Which art was important in religious symbolism and as a decoration in the Ottoman empire?	carpet weaving
What was the custom for those wearing shoes indoors in the Ottoman empire?	it was customary to remove one's shoes
Where did carpet weaving in the Empire originate?	the nomadic cultures of central Asia
Where did carpet weaving initially spread to inside of the Empire?	Anatolia
Kilims were used by Turks to provide insulation where?	walls and doorways
The elites of the Ottoman empire found what type of music important?	Ottoman classical music
Many of the Sultans of the Ottoman empire were accomplished at being what?	musicians and composers
The sultan known by what name has compositions which are still performed today?	Selim III
What rhythmic units does Ottoman classical music use?	units called usul
What are the melodic units used by Ottoman classical music?	makam
What are the three most used Anatolian and central asian instruments in Ottoman Classical music?	the saz, the bağlama, the kemence
Which Middle Eastern instruments can be heard in Ottoman classical music?	the ud, the tanbur, the kanun, the ney
In late Ottoman classical music one can find Western instruments, what were they?	the violin and the piano
There were two main style of music in the Ottoman empire, what were they?	classical music, and folk music
What were the most distinctive style of music in the Ottoman provinces?	Janissary Music, Roma music, Belly dance, Turkish folk music
The cuisine known as Ottoman cuisine is in reference to the food eaten where?	the capital, Istanbul, and the regional capital cities
In what kitchen's was Ottoman cuisine perfected?	the Imperial Palace's kitchens
What is one type of religious event that the general public may come to experience the creations of the Imperial Palace?	Ramadan
Preparing food at the Yalıs of the Pashas was one way Ottoman Cuisine might spread to whom?	the population
What did the chefs ingredients in the Imperial Palace's kitchens?	create and experiment
Turkish cuisine originates from what source?	a shared Ottoman cuisine
The cuisine of what territories are descended from Ottoman cuisine?	former Ottoman territories
Turkish and Greek cuisine are descended from Ottoman Cuisine, along with the food of what other regions?	Balkan cuisine, Armenian cuisine, and Middle Eastern cuisine
Turkish coffee is descended from what?	Ottoman cuisine
Pita bread descends from what type of cuisine?	Ottoman cuisine
In what century did the Ottoman's start to desire foreign manuscripts?	15th Century
Which sultan ordered a Greek scholar to do translations of work by Ptolemy?	Sultan Mehmet II
Who did an Ottoman sultan order to translate work by Ptolemy?	Georgios Amiroutzes
How many years did Ali Qushji spend in Istanbul?	two or three years
Where was Ali Qushji from?	originally from Samarkand
When did European sport clubs begin to form in the Ottoman empire?	19th century
Where did football matches become to be popular in the Ottoman empire?	Constantinople
What was the leading sport club in 1905?	Galatasaray Sports Club
In what year did the Altay Sports Club form?	1914
What was the football club known as Ülküspor formerly known as?	Turkish Fatherland Football Club
Which philosophy branch is concerned with issues surrounding ontology?	Philosophy of space and time
The philosophy of space and time was inspired by what kind of philosophy?	early analytic philosophy
The  philosophy of space and time focuses on whether or not time and space exist independently of what?	the mind
The  philosophy of space and time focuses what kind of flow within time?	unidirectional
Who expounded the earliest recorded Western philosophy of time?	Ptahhotep
When do the Vedas date back to?	late 2nd millennium BC
Which philosophies are the Vedas oriented with?	Indian philosophy and Hindu philosophy
What do the Vedas describe?	ancient Hindu cosmology
How long is the cycle of rebirth discussed in the Vedas?	4,320,000 years
Which christian philosopher ruminated on time?	St. Augustine
What did St. Augustine comment on in Book 11, regarding thinking about time?	the difficulty
Who presented the first philosophical argument for the reality of Creation?	Augustine
What did Augustine say that the knowledge of time depended on?	the knowledge of the movement of things
Where did Augustine say time could not appear?	where there are no creatures to measure its passing
Which 11th century Muslim physicist discussed space perception and its epistemological implications?	al-Haytham
Which 11th century book discussed space perception and its epistemological implications?	Book of Optics
Whose definition of topos did Alhazen reject?	Aristotle's
Alhazen's  experimental proof of the intromission model of vision led to the change of understanding of what?	Without tangible notions of distance and size for correlation, sight can tell us next to nothing about such things
Alhazen stated that without tangible notions of distance and size for correlation, sight can tell us what about spatial perception?	next to nothing
When did Kant publish one of the most influential works in the history of the philosophy of space and time.	1781
What was Kant's influential work on the history of the philosophy of space and time titled?	Critique of Pure Reason
What did Kant describe time as?	a priori notion
What did Kant say was similar notion to time?	space
What did Kant say time and space allow one to do?	sense experience
What did Leibniz argue against?	the absolutist position
Which principles did Leibniz's arguments trade heavily upon?	the principle of sufficient reason and the identity of indiscernibles
Leibnitz held that there is a reason that is sufficient to explain what and why it is the way it is and not otherwise for every what?	fact
What states that if there is no way of telling two entities apart, then they are one and the same thing?	identity of indiscernibles
Leibniz's example involves how many universes?	two
Where are Leibniz's universes situated?	absolute space
How far are Leibniz's universes situated apart?	five feet
What is the only way Leibniz's example would be possible?	absolute space exists
What stood out in Clark's response to Leibniz?	the bucket argument
According to Clark's argument, water in a bucket, hung from a rope and spun, will begin with kind of surface?	flat
As the buck spins, what happens to the water?	the water will become concave
If the buck stops, the water will do what?	continue to spin
What is the surface of the water apparently not caused by?	the interaction of the bucket and the water
Leibniz describes space as existing only as a relation between what?	objects
According to Leibniz, what has no existence apart from the existence of objections?	space
What provides the absolute frame of reference within which objects can have motion?	Newtonian space
In Newton's system, how does the frame of reference exist between objects within it?	independently
For how long did the evidence of a concave water surface hold authority in reference to space?	many centuries
How did Mach describe thought experiments like the bucket argument?	problematic
What is difficult to confirm about the bucket in the absence of anything else in the universe?	that the bucket was indeed spinning
What was equally possible about the surface of the water in the bucket?	would remain flat.
What did Mach argue about the water experiment in an otherwise empty universe?	would remain flat
What did Mach argue would happen if another object were introduce in the bucket's universe?	the bucket could be seen as rotating
What does the increase in the number of objects in the universe do to the curvature of the water?	increases the curvature
The Mach argument is called what?	Mach's Principle
Mach argued that the momentum of an object exists as a result of the sum of the effects of what?	effects of other objects in the universe
lbert Einstein proposed that the laws of physics should be based on what principle?	relativity
The principle of relativity holds that the rules of physics must be the same for who?	all observers
In all reference frames, how is the the speed of light?	the same
Einstein's theory was motivated by who?	Maxwell
Before Einstein, speed was though to be relative to what?	the luminiferous ether
In classical physics, an inertial reference frame is one in which an object without force does what?	does not accelerate
What follows a geodesic of space-time?	an inertial frame of reference
An object in free fall does not experience what?	force
What holds an object standing on earth against the geodesic?	the surface of the planet
Why will water become concave, according to the relativity theory?	it is rotating with respect to the geodesic.
How does Einstein advocate Mach's principle?	partially
How Einstein's theory compared to Leibniz's?	contrary
What is considered contrary to idealist beliefs in regards to space?	objects exist independently of the mind
Coordinative definition has how many major features?	two
The first feature of Coordinative definition involves what?	coordinating units of length with certain physical objects
What is the first feature motivated by?	we can never directly apprehend length
The second feature of Coordinative definition involves what?	separated objects
Sameness of length must be set how?	by definition
The symmetry group of the general theory of relativity includes what?	all differentiable transformations
What else besides  invariance, or symmetry and group part ways in relativistic physics?	the covariance group
Which theory does the relativity depart from?	classical mechanics
What are not pair with transformations in the theory of relativity?	single formulation
 The covariance group of the general theory of relativity is the covariance group of how many theories?	every
How many contradictory facts does the problem of the direction of time arise from?	two
What kind of physical laws are time-reversal invariant?	fundamental
If if a cinematographic film were taken by means of physical  laws and then played backwards, it would still portray what?	physically possible process
How is our experience of time at the macro level?	not time-reversal invariant
What do we not have memories of?	the future
How are things in statistical mechanics?	complicated
What are superior to classical thermodynamics?	statistical mechanics
In order to explain glass breaking, Fundamental laws of physics can be paired with what?	a statistical postulate
Is statistical mechanics asymmetric or symmetric in regards to time-reversal?	symmetric
What kind of law is the second law of thermodynamics, as it arises in statistical mechanics?	not an absolute law
What does the third type of solution to the problem of the direction of time argue?	the laws are not time-reversal symmetric
What is are kind of nuclear force is not time-reversibile?	weak nuclear force
Time asymmetric phenomena in quantum mechanics are to few to account what kind of time-asymmetry?	macroscopic
Who argues that the fundamental laws of physics are laws of temporal evolution?	Tim Maudlin
Maudlin argues that the passage of time is what kind of asymmetry?	intrinsic
What grounds the distinction between sequences?	asymmetry
Whose suggestion is difficult to assess in regards to the direction of time?	Maudlin
Who started the discussion within analytic philosophy on the problem of the flow of time?	J. M. E. McTaggart
How many "temporal series" did McTaggart propose?	two
What was McTaggart's first series called?	the A-series
The A-Series orders events according to their being in the past, present or future and in comparison to what else?	each other
What is McTaggart's second series called?	The B-series
According to what theory is time an ordering of various realities?	Presentism
Presentism states that at a certain time some things do what?	exist
Who believes that time is a dimension of reality on a par with the three spatial dimensions	Eternalist
According to an Eternalist, what can be said to be just as real as things in the present?	all things—past, present, and future
According to the Eternalist theory, what must we use to describe Homer?	special language
How similar are the positions on the persistence of objects?	somewhat similar
Who holds  that for an object to persist through time is for it to exist completely at different times?	endurantist
Who holds for a thing to exist through time is for it to exist as a continuous reality?	perdurantist
Which view is seen as conventional?	Endurantism
Who is an example of a perdurantist?	David Lewis
How can asymmetry of causation be observed?	in a non-arbitrary way
How many features of asymmetry in the cup example can be viewed?	two
Asymmetry is attributable to a relation of what kind of direction?	temporal
What else, besides direction, is asymmetry attributable to?	implications of form and functional capacity
What era is commonly known as the final phase of the Stone Age?	the Neolithic
What era preceded the Neolithic?	Holocene Epipaleolithic period
What event is associated with the start of farming?	Neolithic Revolution
What era saw an increase in metal tool use?	Copper Age
What time period marks the start of Neolithic culture?	10,200 – 8,800 BC
Where did the Neolithic culture begin?	Levant (Jericho, modern-day West Bank)
What food item was the key to the evolution of farming?	wild cereals
What era lasted between 12,000 and 10,200 BC?	The Natufian period
What objects were not used by early farm societies in the Near East ?	pottery
What did the use of pottery help early Japanese societies develop?	agriculture
What trend led to parts of the world developing their own local Neolithic cultures?	independent domestication events
When did the The Neolithic 1 (PPNA) period start?	roughly 10,000 years ago
Where is the Göbekli Tepe temple located?	Turkey
Who built the Göbekli Tepe temple?	nomadic hunter-gatherer tribes
What is the name of earliest man made place of worship?	Göbekli Tepe
When did the The Neolithic 2 (PPNB) era start?	around 8,800 BCE
What era followed the  The Neolithic 2 (PPNB) era?	the Mesolithic era
How many settlers were found in Jordan?	3,000 inhabitants
What is the name of one of the biggest prehistoric settlements in the Near East?	Ain Ghazal
When did the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)  phase start?	Around 10,200 BC
When was a settlement developed in Tell Qaramel?	Around 10,700 to 9,400 BC
How many temples were built in Tell Qaramel?	2
What was the name of the town that first appeared during the PPNA?	Jericho
What materials were used to build the wall around Jericho?	stone and marble
What are the names of two researchers who divided neolithic chronology into ten periods?	Jacques Cauvin and Oliver Aurenche
What traits did researchers use to divide the ten periods?	social, economic and cultural characteristics
When was the original division of 10 advanced to a division of 5?	2002
What are the names of two researchers who divided neolithic chronology into five periods?	Danielle Stordeur and Frédéric Abbès
When did the domestication of sheep first appear in Egypt?	6,000 BC
How did Egyptians gather food before raising livestock?	fishing, hunting, and the gathering of wild plants
What region do some scholars see as the source for Egypt's start in agriculture?	the Middle East
When did agrarian societies start to arise in Southeast Europe?	7th millennium BC
Where was one of earliest farming sites in Europe found?	Vashtëmi, southeastern Albania
What type of sculptures were found in the Balkans from 6000 BC?	Anthropomorphic figurines
What trend led to Neolithic traditions spreading to northwestern Europe by around 4500 BC?	cultural diffusion and migration of peoples
Who possibly created the earliest system of writing?	The Vinča culture
When was the earliest known Asian farm site found in South Korea?	2012
What time period was the Korean farm site dated?	between 3600 and 3000 B.C.
What items were found on the Korean farm site?	Pottery, stone projectile points, and possible houses
What technology will researchers use to measure a more accurate time period for the farm site?	accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
What major trends appeared in Mesoamerica during 4500 BC?	crop domestication and sedentary lifestyles
What term is used to describe the mid-late Neolithic era in American education?	Formative stage
What term is used to describe the Early Neolithic era in American education?	Archaic Era
What hunting weapon was found in the Southwestern US during  500 to 1200 C.E.?	bow and arrow
What social groups were formed during the Neolithic age of Eurasia?	small tribes
What cultural trend did not first appear in large amounts until the Bronze Age?	social stratification
What type of cultures preceded Neolithic societies?	Paleolithic cultures
What caused a major increase in social inequality?	domestication of large animals
What started competition between families for wealth?	Possession of livestock
Who was in possession of large herds that would produce more livestock?	Neolithic pastoralists
What settlement featured equal sized homes with little evidence of capital?	Catal Huyuk
What was the cultural aspect was the major center of life?	the household
What time period were the huge circular ditches found in?	4800 BC and 4600 BC
What did the ditches later evolve into?	causewayed enclosures, burial mounds, and henge
What features about the ditches suggests that it was built by people under a leader's command?	required considerable time and labour to construct
Where was evidence of fortified settlements found?	Linearbandkeramik
What did some villages fortify their settlements with?	a palisade and an outer ditch
What tools were seen as evidence of violence among settlements?	weapon-traumatized bones
What site in Talheim suggests violent warfare in the Neolithic era?	the Talheim Death Pit
What production trait existed in tribal groups that were controlled by charismatic leaders?	Control of labour
What theory describes the implied egalitarianism of Neolithic societies?	Marxist concept of primitive communism
What type of disagreement existed in tribal groups that were controlled by charismatic leaders?	inter-group conflict
What lifestyle element changed significantly from the paleolithic to the neolithic era?	shelter
What era consisted of people living temporary homes?	paleolithic
What type of homes were built in the Neolithic era?	mud brick houses
What societal trend was the cause of permanent homes?	The growth of agriculture
Where were entrances located in early homes?	Doorways were made on the roof
What trend led to a major shift in the livelihoods of early cultures?	crop farming and cultivation
What behavior did humans rely on to survive before agriculture?	nomadic hunter-gatherer subsistence technique
What era saw an increase in permanently settled farming towns?	the Bronze Age
What were the causes of famine in early farm towns?	drought or pests
What type of societies were not affected by famine?	hunter-gatherer communities
What type of societies were usually still successful after dealing with famine?	agrarian communities
What food related trend was significant in the new agrarian societies?	diet
What forms of availability dictated Pre-agrarian diets?	local plant and animal resources
What was included in the Post-agrarian diet?	cereal grains, plants and to a variable extent domesticated animals and animal products.
What forced the need to supplement food supply with hunting and gathering?	the increase in population
What type of occupation were Neolithic people considered to be proficient at?	farmers
What purposes were the production of farm tools used for?	tending, harvesting and processing of crops
What types of tools did early farmers use for crops?	sickle blades and grinding stones
What types of tools did early farmers use for food production?	pottery, bone implements)
What tool allowed early farmers to convert forest into arable land?	stone axe
What did Neolithic people use mud-brick to build?	houses and villages
What scenes did the paintings on homes depict?	humans and animals
What were European homes constructed from?	wattle and daub
What types of sites were built for the deceased?	Elaborate tombs
Where do thousands of early tombs still exist?	Ireland
What did early humans use to make clothing?	animal skins
What evidence suggested that humans used animal products for clothing?	finds of large numbers of bone and antler pins
What were perforated stones used for?	spindle whorls or loom weights
What famous figure of the Copper Age wore clothes similar to the Neolithic Era?	Ötzi the Iceman
In which nation was Friedrich Hayek born?	Austria-Hungary
Friedrich Hayek name was commonly shortened to what?	F. A. Hayek
What award did Hayek receive in 1974?	Nobel Memorial Prize
With whom did Hayek share his 1974 award?	Gunnar Myrdal
Along with being an economist, what else was Hayek known as?	philosopher
Hayek became a member of which group in 1984?	Order of the Companions of Honour
For what reason was Hayek inducted into the order?	services to the study of economics
What award was Hayek the first to receive?	Hanns Martin Schleyer Prize
Who awarded Hayek the Medal of Freedom?	President George H. W. Bush
Which of Hayek's articles received recognition in 2011?	The Use of Knowledge in Society
Who was Hayek's father?	August von Hayek
What was August von Hayek's occupation?	medical doctor
What was August von Hayek particularly passionate about?	botany
From whom did Felicitas inherit her wealth?	her mother
How many children did August von Hayek and his wife have?	three
Who's occupation inspired Hayek when he was older?	His father's
Eugen Bohm was friends with which of Hayek's grandfathers?	Franz von Juraschek
What occupation did Hayek's grandfather's have?	scholars
What did August von Hayek's father write?	systematic works in biology
Who was August von Hayek's father?	Gustav Edler von Hayek
Who was among the first readers of Ludwig  Wittgenstein's book?	Hayek
How often times did Hayek and Wittgenstein meet?	on only a few occasions
Whose philosophy heavily influenced Hayek?	Ludwig Wittgenstein
What did Wittgenstein and Hayek do during the first world war?	both were officers
What was the name of the book Wittgenstein published in 1921?	Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
What did Hayek conclude regarding his brothers?	they were somehow of a different generation
With whom did Hayek more frequently converse?	adults
Prior to his schooling, what was the state of Hayek's reading skills?	read fluently and frequently
Who told Hayek he should begin reading Hugo de Vries works?	his father
Which philosopher did Hayek learn about in a school lecture?	Aristotle
Where did Hayek acquire his doctorates?	University of Vienna
Where did Hayek learn about the brain?	Constantin von Monakow's Institute of Brain Anatomy
What was the name of Hayek's first work?	The Sensory Order
With whom did Hayek establish the Geistkreis?	Herbert Furth
Where did first show his work?	the Geistkreis
What work did Hayek begin in 1923?	research assistant
Where did Carl Menger and Friedrich von Wieser influence Hayek?	University of Vienna
For whom did Hayek work upon being hired by Ludwig von Mises?	the Austrian government
What was Hayek gathering during his time as a research assistant?	macroeconomic data
What was the name of the professor Hayek worked for as a research assistant?	Jeremiah Jenks
What ideology was Hayek originally in support of?	democratic socialism
What caused Hayek to turn away from Wiser's ideology?	reading von Mises' book Socialism
During his attendance to von Mises' seminars, who did Hayek become friends with?	Eric Voegelin
What viewpoint did the book Socialism shift Hayek toward?	classical liberalism
Who is the father of the ideology Hayek came to support?	Carl Menger
What position did Hayek gain at the Austrian Institute?	director
Who requested that Hayek be employed by LSE?	Lionel Robbins
What sort of recognition had Hayek received when he came to London?	one of the leading economic theorists in the world
What subject did Hayek's works influence and inspire?	modern microeconomics
In what year did Hayek come to London?	1931
What did Hayek write regarding fascism and socialism?	The Road to Serfdom
Whose works served as inspiration for the title of Road to Serfdom?	Alexis de Tocqueville
When was the Road to Serfdom published?	March 1944
Where was Road to Serfdom more popular than it was in Britain?	United States
Who is responsible for Road to Serfdom being shortened for Reader's Digest in 1945?	Max Eastman
Upon leaving London, for what college did he choose to work?	University of Chicago
Who supplied Hayek's salary?	an outside foundation
What was the cause for the feud between Robert Hutchins and faculty?	departmental autonomy and control
Why did the economics department turn down Hayek's employment?	sick of Hutchins' meddling
What did Hayek serve on after his initial rejection?	Committee on Social Thought
Which of Hayek's works had a profound influence on those at the University of Chicago?	The Road to Serfdom
Who played a critical role in the formation of the Law and Society program?	Aaron Director
What group did Hayek form with three other people?	Mont Pèlerin Society
What was the group that Friedman and Hayek supported later renamed to?	Intercollegiate Studies Institute
What topic were Hayek's next two books going to cover?	the liberal order
Which of Hayek's books was not as well received as The Road to Serfdom?	The Constitution of Liberty
As of the release of his 1960 book, how long had it been since The Road to Serfdom was released?	sixteen years
What was the title of the his 1960 book's second chapter?	The Creative Powers of a Free Civilization
How did Hayek feel about the success of the book he released in 1960?	disappointed
What country did Hayek move to in 1962?	West Germany
What is the name of the book Hayek started upon his arrival in West Germany?	Law, Legislation and Liberty
Where did Hayek spend an entire year after his retirement?	University of California, Los Angeles
When was the final volume of Law, Legislation and Liberty released?	1979
During his time in Los Angeles, what was the topic of the seminars Hayek taught not related to his new book?	philosophy of social science
What political party was Margaret Thatcher the head of in 1975?	British Conservative Party
Who did Thatcher meet with shortly after she was elected as the head of her party?	Hayek
What path was suggested as the right one for Margaret Thatcher's party by a speaker?	the "middle way"
Which of Hayek's works did Thatcher produce at the Conservative Research Department?	The Constitution of Liberty
What was the name of the agreement Hayek criticized in 1977?	Lib-Lab pact
What did some Liberal politicians claim the pact was meant to do?	discourage socialist legislation
The agreement Hayek criticized was between the British Labour government and which political party?	British Liberal Party
What did Hayek believe was lost in the continued empowerment of a socialist government?	all title to the name 'Liberal'
Which party was criticized for being less concerned about liberty and democracy?	the Conservative Party
With which political group was David Steel affiliated?	Liberal Party
Who disagreed with David Steel's statements in 1978	Hayek
Which type of government was more favorable than others according to Hayek?	limited democracy
Hayek believed that which type of democracy was the worst of its alternatives?	unlimited
What group was Hayek inducted into by the Queen of England?	Order of the Companions of Honour
Who suggest Hayek for the honor of joining the Order?	Margaret Thatcher
In 1984, what was Margaret Thatcher's position within the British government?	Prime Minister
How did Hayek wish to be referred to after his 1984 award?	Frederick
At the end of the same day Hayek met with the Queen of England, what did he say?	"I've just had the happiest day of my life."
What was the reason given for Hayek's 1991 award from the President?	a "lifetime of looking beyond the horizon"
Which President presented the award to Hayek?	George H. W. Bush
Where was Hayek when he died?	Freiburg, Germany
Where was Hayek buried in relation to his home town of Vienna?	northern outskirts
Where was The Use of Knowledge in Society published?	American Economic Review
What is the name of Mises' 1912 book?	Theory of Money and Credit
Hayek focused most of his economic works on the business cycle, money and what else?	capital
What work did Hayek produce as a result of studying Mises' book?	Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle
What is the English name for the book Hayek published in 1929?	Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle
According to Hayek, what was the cause of the banks' wrongful allocation of funds?	artificially low interest rates
Lionel Robbins came to head which school in 1929?	London School of Economics
In regards to economics, Lionel Robbins believe English-speaking academics had what?	narrow approach
Which man's works were mostly the cause of the ''narrow approach''?	Alfred Marshall
Who was responsible for bringing on Hayek at the LSE?	Lionel Robbins
What did Nicholas Kaldor say Hayek brought to macroeconomics?	less "facile and superficial" understanding
Hayek's critical analysis of Keyne's work was published under what title?	Prices and Production
Apart from easy money, what did Hayek believe unemployment was caused by?	artificially low interest rates
Who did Keynes turn to for assistance in arguing his point to Hayek?	Piero Sraffa
According to Nicholas Kaldor, what had Hayek's book created?	"a remarkable crop of critics"
What was the result of Hayek's Prices and Production?	works were largely ignored
Who was particularly critical of Hayek's work following Prices and Production?	Nicholas Kaldor
What is the name of the first book Hayek released to revise his stances from Prices and Production?	Profits, Interest and Investment
Lionel Robbins' The Great Depression was a result of his support for what?	the Austrian theory of the business cycle
Who did Keynes' arguments against the Austrian theory of the business cycle eventually influence?	Lionel Robbins
What topic did Hayek never write a book about as he said he would?	the dynamics of capital
What topic did Hayek shy away from following Pure Theory of Capital?	macroeconomics
What did Gunnar Myrdal call Hayek?	an "ideologue"
Which of Hayeks books did Milton Friedman praise most?	The Road to Serfdom
Which whom did Hayek share a Nobel prize?	Gunnar Myrdal
What did Hayek claim those who must distribute resources would lack most?	enough information
Whose work most notably influenced Hayek's argument regarding resource distribution?	Max Weber
What is the one way Hayek argued that resource distribution could succeed?	through the price mechanism in free markets
Other than Max Weber, who was a notable influence to Hayek's statements regarding resource distribution?	Ludwig von Mises
What did some socialists bring up as a rebuttal to Hayek's resource distribution argument?	general equilibrium theory
What did socialists believe equilibrium theory invalidated?	Mises's thesis
According to those who argued against Hayek, what sets planned and free markets apart is what?	who was responsible for solving the equations
What type of economic system did the socialists want to avoid?	free market
Which of Hayek's books argued against the socialist price mechanism?	The Use of Knowledge in Society
Which type of economy did Hayek believe the price mechanism to be less effective with?	central planning
The arguments presented in The Use of Knowledge in Society created an starting point for who?	Oliver Williamson
The arguments presented in Hayek's 1945 book were a large reason for being granted what award?	the Nobel prize
What was the name of the ideology Hayek criticized?	collectivism
How did Hayek believe collectivism could be maintained?	a central authority
According to Hayek, what is necessary for the implementation of a socialist economy?	central economic planning
Hayek believed the requirements for a socialist economy would lead to what?	totalitarianism
What did Hayek believe was the core responsibility of the state?	maintain the rule of law
Hayek believed the state could aid the economy by doing what?	creating a "safety net"
Who did Hayek say economic security should be guaranteed to?	all
According to Hayek, clothing, food and shelter should be provided to what extent?	sufficient to preserve health
What sort of system did Hayek propose the government create?	social insurance
In what economic field of study does Hayek's views differ from those in macroeconomics?	microeconomics
What is the term used to describe economists following Keynes school of thought?	"Marshallian"
Whose works inspire the term "Walrasian" in economics?	Abba Lerner
When did Hayek start working on Abuse of Reason?	During World War II
What did Hayek specifically aim to expose in Abuse of Reason?	fundamental misconceptions about the social science
Whose beliefs in scientific philosophy were similar to Hayek's?	Karl Popper
What did Hayek use to refer to the spread of ignorance and misunderstanding within the social sciences?	scientism
In scientism, it is typically believed that explanations in science are what?	simple two-variable linear relationships
In what year was the book published in which Hayek developed Hebbian learning?	1952
Before he began studying economics, what concept did Hayek come up with that was later featured in his 1952 book?	Hebbian learning
What did Hayek present in his 1952 book that affected multiple areas of science?	"Hebbian synapse"
What is the name of the book in which Hayek presented the Hebbian Synapse?	The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology
When did Hayek begin presenting his ideas on the limits of human knowledge?	the latter half of his career
What did Hayek want society to function around?	a market order
What is the responsibility of government in Hayek's market order?	to enforce the legal order
What would be the cause of the success for the Hayek's ideal free-market?	would be self-regulating
What would Hayek's free-market not require in order to function properly?	good men
What concept did Hayek dislike?	social justice
How did Hayek feel regarding income distribution?	there is no point in calling the outcome just or unjust
What reason does Hayek provide for differences in income distribution not being a matter of just or unjust?	the results of the individual's efforts are necessarily unpredictable
According to Hayek, a society in which income is redistributed is what?	the opposite of a free society
What has Hayek's views on the market been used to defend?	non-interventionist policy
What is the term used to describe the obligation for humans to avoid disrupting the ecosystem?	prima facie
What are ecosystems views to be?	spontaneous orders
One might still support spontaneous orders without agreeing with which of Hayek's assessments?	analysis of markets
What is limited by the ignorance of humanity?	our ability to manipulate nature
According to Wapshott, who was promoting the implementation of universal health care?	Hayek
Who did Hayek say should provide a safety net for society?	the state
In which of Hayek's works did he make his statements regarding social insurance?	The economic calculation problem
Who made the claim that Hayek was particularly determined regarding his beliefs on social insurance and a safety net?	Bernard Harcourt
Who criticizes Hayek's ability to provide specific facts?	Arthur M. Diamond
Diamond believes Hayek's weaknesses come out when he steps beyond the bounds of what topic?	economic science
What term does Diamond use to refer to Hayek?	intellectual skeptic
Diamond states that the final result of Hayek's statements are what?	confused and contradictory
At what point did Hayek claim dictatorships may be necessary?	a transitional period
What did Hayek claim to prefer over a democratic government in the absence of liberal ideals?	a liberal dictatorship
What did Hayek believe the Chilean government would become in the future?	a liberal government
As claimed by Hayek, Chilean citizens had more freedom under which ruler?	Pinochet
Hayek believed that authoritarianism was very different from what?	totalitarianism
What country did Hayek arrive in where he provided his disctinction between totalitarianism and authoritarianism?	Venezuela
What did Hayek believe to be absent from Latin America?	totalitarian governments
What is Hayek's definition of totalitarian?	the want to “organize the whole of society” to attain a “definite social goal”
What did Hayek claim to be better than investing in government spending programs?	private investment in the public markets
What other notable figure signed the letter in which Hayek made his statement regarding private investment?	Lionel Robbins
Who was responsible for England's return to the use of gold as standard currency?	Churchill
With whom did Hayek disagree with publicly?	John Maynard Keynes
Which economist is cited the most by winners of the Nobel prize in that field?	Kenneth Arrow
What Nobel prize winner has spent most of his life studying Hayek's capital theory despite being critical of the man?	Paul Samuelson
On the topic of the practicality of a socialist economy, who does Samuelson believe was wrong?	Joseph Schumpeter
On the topic of mainstream economics, whose Nobel lecture was particularly critical?	Hayek's
Which of Hayek's works does Samuelson cite as being incorrect regarding macroeconomics?	Prices and Production
Whose 1980 book mentions "informal" economics?	Milton Friedman's
What is the name of the book Friedman released in 1980?	Free to Choose
How is Friedman's book described in regards to the price system?	Hayekian
Which of Hayek's works did Friedman once teach?	The Use of Knowledge in Society
Which fellow Vienna native was Hayek friends with?	Karl Popper
Who is the only exception from whom Hayek claims to have learned more than he did from Popper?	Alfred Tarski
Hayek dedicated many of his papers to Popper based on a dedication Popper made to him in which of his work?	Conjectures and Refutations
Which of Popper's works was the first to grasp Hayek's attention?	Logik der Forschung
Popper was present for which notable Mont Pelerin Society event?	the inaugural meeting
Which of Hayek's books had an impact on those against postmodernism?	The Road to Serfdom
To whom did Hayek owe his intellectual success?	Carl Menger
Carl Menger's work in social explanation was not too different from those in which Scottish period??	Scottish Enlightenment
In what year was Margaret Thatcher elected Prime Minister?	1979
Whom did the Prime Minister of England choose as secretary of state?	Keith Joseph
During the 80s and 90s, three major English speaking nations experienced a political shift to to what?	conservative governments
What position did the British Prime Minister's secretary of state previously hold?	director of the Hayekian Centre for Policy Studies
One of Hayek's supporters served which US president?	Ronald Reagan's
What ideology did Hayek not agree with in an essay appended to The Constitution of Liberty?	conservatism
What word is used in the United States to identify Hayek's ideology?	libertarian
Which ideology did Hayek believe conservatism discouraged?	internationalism
What does conservatism have in common with classical liberalism?	belief in the free market
What was Hayek's statement regarding conservatism?	"Conservatism is only as good as what it conserves."
What did Hayek suggest as an alternative to being called a libertarian?	Old Whig
In opposition to conservatives, what group has Hayek's work influenced?	liberal-minded economists
Who wrote an essay as a result of Hayek's "Why I Am Not a Conservative"?	James M. Buchanan
From whom did Hayek acquire the term he proposed as an alternative to libertarian?	Edmund Burke
In his later years, what term did Hayek use to describe himself?	a Burkean Whig
What term do those who disagree with Hayek use to describe his ideals?	neoliberalism
Who was it that claimed Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty to be an thorough example of neoliberal philosophy?	Samuel Brittan
Whose ideals does Brittan believe to win out over Hayek's?	Raymond Plant
Who makes the claim that Hayek was actually a conservative?	Madsen Pirie
According to Pirie, conservatives dislike change only when its forced upon them by whom?	people in authority who think they know how to run things better
Pirie believes Hayek to be a conservative for what reason?	mistakes the nature of the conservative outlook
What does Pirie claim conservatives want for the free market?	to function smoothly
What is diarrhea?	the condition of having at least three loose or liquid bowel movements each day
What is one of the effects of diarrhea?	can result in dehydration due to fluid loss
What are the warning signs of dehydration?	loss of the normal stretchiness of the skin and irritable behaviour
What are other signs of dehydration?	decreased urination, loss of skin color, a fast heart rate, and a decrease in responsiveness
What is the most common cause of diarrhea?	an infection of the intestines
What can cause an infection in the intestines?	a virus, bacteria, or parasite
What are the three types of diarrhea?	short duration watery diarrhea, short duration bloody diarrhea, and if it lasts for more than two weeks, persistent diarrhea
What is it known as if blood is present?	dysentery
What are some ways to prevent diarrhea?	improved sanitation, clean drinking water, and hand washing with soap
What else can a mom do to prevent diarrhea for her baby?	Breastfeeding for at least six months
What is the treatment of choice for diarrhea?	Oral rehydration solution (ORS), which is clean water with modest amounts of salts and sugar
What conditions would a doctor prescribe antibiotics?	cases such as those who have bloody diarrhea and a high fever, those with severe diarrhea following travelling, and those who grow specific bacteria or parasites
HOw many cases of diarrhea are there a year?	1.7 to 5 billion cases
How often do kids get diarrhea in developing countries?	average three times a year
Frequent episodes of diarrhea are common in what type of cases?	malnutrition
What long term issues can arise from frequent diarrhea?	stunted growth and poor intellectual development
What is secretory diarrhea?	an increase in the active secretion, or there is an inhibition of absorption
What are the causes of secretory diarrhea?	cause of this type of diarrhea is a cholera toxin that stimulates the secretion of anions, especially chloride ions
Is there any structural damage associated with secretory diarrhea?	. There is little to no structural damage.
What occures with osmotic diarrhea?	s when too much water is drawn into the bowels
What causes osmotic diarrhea?	If a person drinks solutions with excessive sugar or excessive salt, these can draw water from the body into the bowel
How do osmotic lazatives work?	alleviate constipation by drawing water into the bowels
What can cause osmotic diarrhea in healthy people?	too much magnesium or vitamin C or undigested lactose
When does inflammatory diarrhea occur?	when there is damage to the mucosal lining or brush border
What happens with inflammatory diarrhea?	a passive loss of protein-rich fluids and a decreased ability to absorb these lost fluids
What can cause inflammatory diarrhea?	bacterial infections, viral infections, parasitic infections, or autoimmune problems
What other causes are there for inflammatory diarrhea?	tuberculosis, colon cancer, and enteritis.
Diarrheal disease has what effects on a person?	a negative impact on both physical fitness and mental development
What can early childhood malnutrition cause?	reduces physical fitness and work productivity in adults
What is the cause of childhood malnutrition?	diarrhea
Children who have experienced sever diarrhea are more likely to have what effect?	significantly lower scores on a series of tests of intelligence
What is IBS?	irritable bowel syndrome
What symptoms do you have with IBS?	abdominal discomfort relieved by defecation and unusual stool (diarrhea or constipation) for at least 3 days a week over the previous 3 months
How can symptoms be managed with IBS?	a combination of dietary changes, soluble fiber supplements, and/or medications
What is a good indicator of the rate of infectious diarrhea?	Poverty
Why does living in poverty raise your risk of diarrhea?	from the conditions under which impoverished people live
What causes this to be exacerbated?	the lack of adequate, available, and affordable medical care.
Why is proper nutrition important?	for health and functioning, including the prevention of infectious diarrhea
What effects does lower levels of zinc have in children?	greater number of instances of diarrhea, severe diarrhea, and diarrhea associated with fever
What can having a vitamin A deficiency cause?	cause an increase in the severity of diarrheal episodes
What is the rate of  vitamin A deficiency in children worldwide?	127 million
What did Nesse and Williams learn?	diarrhea may function as an evolved expulsion defense mechanism
If diarrhea is stopped, would could happen?	there might be a delay in recovery.
What happened with people with Shigella were treated with anti-diarrheal medication?	caused people to stay feverish twice as long as those not so treated.
What has had major effects on the transmission of diarrheal diseases?	Basic sanitation techniques
How much does hand washing reduce the chances of disease?	approximately 42–48%
Why do developing countries not wash their hands as much as other countries?	access to soap and water is limited
What is a solution to help this problem?	implementation of educational programs that encourage sanitary behaviours
What is a major means of the spread of diarrhea disease?	water contamination
What has cut the rate of diarrhea disease incidents?	clean water supply and improved sanitation
What would be the reduction in deisease incedence if there was better water and sanitation?	22–27% reduction in disease incidence
What is the downfall of using immunization against the pathogens that cause disease?	it does require targeting certain pathogens for vaccination
What is responsible for 6% of dearrheal disease?	Rotavirus
What percent is the rotavirus responsible for in diarrheal disease deaths?	20%
What was the effect of the Rotavirus vaccine?	(2-3%) decrease in total diarrheal disease incidence
What year was the Rotovirus vaccine used?	1985
What can be done to combate dietary deficiences?	promoting better eating practices
What has been used and shown successful in a decrease in incidence of diarrheal disease?	Zinc
WHat strategy was found out to be more cost effective?	zinc supplementation
What is the basic treatment many cases of diarrhea need?	replacing lost fluid and salts is the only treatment needed
How is this treatment given?	This is usually by mouth – oral rehydration therapy – or, in severe cases, intravenously
What type of diet is no longer recommended?	BRAT diet
What does WHO recommend to do?	children with diarrhea continue to eat as sufficient nutrients are usually still absorbed to support continued growth and weight gain
What can be used to prevent dehydration?	Oral rehydration solution (ORS)
What are some good standard home solutions?	salted rice water, salted yogurt drinks, vegetable and chicken soups with salt
What is a commercial solution that can also be used?	Pedialyte
What is the WHO's recipe for ORS?	one liter water with one teaspoon salt (3 grams) and two tablespoons sugar (18 grams) added
What are not recommended for younger kids because it can casue more dehydration?	Drinks especially high in simple sugars, such as soft drinks and fruit juices
Why are sodas and high sugar fruit juices not recommended?	A too rich solution in the gut draws water from the rest of the body, just as if the person were to drink sea water
What can be used to give fluids when they can not drink?	A nasogastric tube
What does WHO recommend?	a child with diarrhea continue to be fed
What does continuing to eat do for your illness?	Continued feeding speeds the recovery of normal intestinal function
What happens when a childs food is restricted?	children whose food is restricted have diarrhea of longer duration and recover intestinal function more slowly
Are antibiotics used in diarrhea instances?	they are usually not used except in specific situations
What are the concerns with anitbiotics?	may increase the risk of hemolytic uremic syndrome in people infected with Escherichia coli O157:H7
What are bacteria doing that makes them not work as well?	some bacteria are developing antibiotic resistance
What are the origins of the word madrasa?	Arabic
What type of educational institution does the term madrasa refer?	any type
In Western culture, the term madrasa widely refers to the practices of what religion?	Islamic
How many students enrolled in madaris are Muslim?	Not all
What are the root origins of the word madrasah?	triconsonantal Semitic
What is the literal translation of madrasah?	a place where learning and studying take place
In Arabic, what does madarasah mean?	same as school does in the English language
During the Ottoman Empire, what types of schools were typical?	lower schools and specialised
What were the students in madaris called?	danişmends
What is the English connotative understanding of the word madrash?	Islamic institutions
What is taught through a hifz class or set of classes?	memorization of the Qur'an
What is shariah?	Islamic law
What is the discipline taught in mantiq courses?	logic
What set of courses does someone need to take for preparation to be considered as a scholar?	ʻālim
What age groups are usually enrolled in madaris?	all ages
How long does someone have to be enrolled in alim courses to earn a certificate or graduate?	approximately twelve years
In what ways are madaris similar to western colleges?	people take evening classes and reside in dormitories
Why do madaris extend enrollment to children of less fortunate circumstances?	provide them with education and training
What is the format for co-education for women in madaris?	they study separately from the men
What is the meaning of Islamic education?	education in the light of Islam itself
What book is the basis for education in Islamic traditions?	Quran
What types of education greatly differs from Islamic education?	Muslim education
What is Islamic religion traditionally considered as far as theology is concerned?	monotheism
Where was the first madrasa located?	the estate of Hazrat Zaid bin Arkam
Who was the teacher at the first madrasa?	Hazrat Muhammad
Who was named as a teacher at the second madrasa, housed in a mosque?	Hazrat 'Ubada bin Samit
What handwriting art form was taught in the early madaris?	calligraphy
What type of physical fitness activities were taught in the early madaris?	athletics and martial arts
Which class of people founded the madaris during the medieval period?	ruling elite
How were the madaris funded during the medieval period?	through a religious endowment
What class of people inherited status during the Mamluk Period?	former slaves
What allowed the ruling elite to maintain power during the Mamluk period?	Guaranteed positions within the new madaris
In what city was the Mosque-Madrasah of Sultan Hasan?	Cairo
Who traditionally paid for scholars to study natural sciences?	royal courts
What group of people had the highest literacy rates during the Middle Ages?	Caliphate
What schools had the biggest impact on the rising literacy rates in the Caliphate?	maktab and madrasa institutions
How long did it take for madaris to spread to smaller cities and towns?	several centuries
When were the first recorded Islamic elementary schools?	10th century
What term refers to Islamic elementary schools?	maktab
Who wrote a training guide for Islamic maktab teachers?	Ibn Sīnā
What did Ibn Sina prefer over private tutors?	classes
How many component of education did Ibn Sina describe in their teachings?	two
What type of skills did Ibn Sina state children should learn in secondary education?	manual skills
According to Ibn Sina, at what age should children choose a direction for their education?	14
According to Ibn Sina, what is needed to support transition at the secondary stage of education?	flexibility
What should secondary training provide a student in the secondary stage of school?	future career
What discipline was studied in traditional madrasah?	religious sciences
What was traditionally left out of the madrasah curriculum?	philosophy and the secular sciences
Who decided the content that would be delivered in a particular madrasah?	its founder
What is the most widely known madrasah?	al-Azhar University
How many madaris have been founded in Cairo?	75
What term refers to Islamic law?	fiqh
When did Islamic law school begin?	9th century
How long did a student have to study law, in early Islamic law graduate schools, in order to graduate?	ten or more years
What traditional schooling has been considered modeled after the traditional Islamic graduate schools?	European doctorate
What did earning the ijazat al-tadris award students?	licence to teach
Who awarded a teaching license in Islamic schools?	individual scholar-teacher
Who awarded a teaching license in European schools?	chief official of the university
What type of license is closely related to the ijazat al-tadris?	licentia docendi
What determination of the study of law was held to much debate?	whether certain opinions of law were orthodox
What type of matters are covered through Islamic law?	civil as well as religious
What is the Islamic term for issuing a legal opinion?	fatwa
What is ijtihad?	process of scholarly research
When did some madaris become considered like traditional colleges?	10th century
What class of people founded both European universities and Islamic madaris	princely patrons
What was considered to be the underlying purpose of madaris?	further the rulers' agenda
Who argued that European universities and Islamic madaris have very little in common?	George Makdisi
When was al-Qarawiyin University founded?	859
Who founded al-Qarawiyin University?	Fatima al-Fihri
What types of degrees were earned at al-Qarawiyin University?	all levels
What religious buildings were housed inside al-Qarawiyin University?	mosques
What types of teachers were at al-Qarawiyin University?	individual faculties for different subjects
When was Al-Azhar University founded?	975
Where is Al-Azhar University located?	Cairo, Egypt
What was required to earn a law degree at Al-Azhar University?	an oral examination
Who was an astronomy professor at Al-Azhar University?	Maimonides
What is Nizamiyah of Baghdad most known for?	largest university of the Medieval world
What field does the ijazah signify expertise in?	Islamic religious law of sharīʻah
What was the purpose of studying natural sciences in madaris?	supply religious needs
Who decided if a student earned a law degree in undergraduate madaris?	the teacher
What scientific discipline is still taught in modern madaris?	Ptolemaic astronomy
What is considered the most famous madrasa?	al-Azhar
Who argues that madaris are not the same as traditional European universities?	Medievalist specialists
What are two examples of waqfs?	madrasa and jāmiʻah
What do scholars that specialize in the medieval period describe madaris as?	Islamic college
What do scholars believe is missing from madaris that prevent them from being considered universities?	corporate element
When did more madaris begin to form more rapidly?	11th and 12th centuries
Where are madaris considered less desirable?	Western Islamic lands
When did the al-Qarawiyin officially become a university?	1947
When the madaris are considered as a charity, who controls the school?	the donor
What disciplines were introduced at al-Azhar in 1961?	economics, engineering, medicine, and agriculture
What institutions have been considered to take some its ideas from madaris?	European university
How many corollaries dd Makdisi make between Islamic language and European educational practices?	eighteen
What Eurpoean university practices are considered to be adapted from madaris?	degree and doctorate
What freedom specifically did Makdisi believe European schools learned from Islamic traditions?	academic
What clothing practice did Makdisi believe European schools learned from madaris?	wearing academic robes
What other religion was considered to share parallels in teaching styles with the Muslim faith?	Christian
What was Makdisi accused of doing when evaluating the parallels between European and Islamic schools?	overstating his case
What is the European version of fiqh?	civil law
What do scholars believe is the reason for similarities between Islamic and European schools?	parallel occurrence
What percentage of Islamic women were educated before the 1200s?	less than one percent
How many female Islamic scholars were on record after the 1400s?	over 8,000
In what book was a section reserved for the study of Islamic female students?	al-Ḍawʾ al-lāmiʻ
How many female students were discussed in the al-Daw' al-Iami?	1,075
What disciplines were women trained in during the first century?	music, dancing and poetry
Who was the most well known female scholar in Islamic schools?	Shuhda
Where did Shuhda attend school?	Baghdad
When was formal education for Islamic women halted?	1258
During which Caliphate did Islamic women begin attending formal school?	Abbasid
What titles could women earn by going to Islamic schools?	scholars and teachers
Who wanted to ensured that their daughters were educated in Islamic schools?	learned and scholarly families
Why did the prophet Muhammad esteem women in Medina?	their desire for religious knowledge
Who created a pathway for education for women in the Islamic world?	Muhammad's wives
Which one of Muhammad's wives had a particular impact on his view of women and education?	Khadijah
Who traveled abroad to get an education at madaris?	Ottomans
How many madaris were started by Mehmed the Conqueror?	eight
How would a student matriculate to the next level of schooling in the Ottoman Empire?	complete the classes in the lower one
Where were Ottoman madaris built?	near mosques
When was the first Ottoman madrasa built?	1331
What was the essential mission of Islamic schools in the Ottoman Empire?	spiritual learning
Why was philosophy taught in Ottoman madaris?	confirm the doctrines of Islam
What type of social structure did the Ottoman Empire have?	pluralistic
What religion was at the center of education in the Ottoman Empire?	Islam
What did Ottoman madaris have that was similar to modern American schools?	wide range of studies
What kind of social service was provided through the madaris?	aid to the poor through soup kitchens
What had a hold over social life in the Ottoman Empire as well as other cultures?	religion
Where did students learn about religious and social norms?	medreses
What practice was desired through connecting religion and schools?	Islamic orthodoxy
What group makes up a larger percentage of people in India?	Deobandis
What problems are arising due to the political conflicts over schools?	Hindu-Muslim friction
What is the largest school for Barelvis people in India?	Jamia Nayeemia Muradabad
What disciplines does India want to introduce to madaris?	Mathematics, Computers and science
In what year did the Indian government begin to stop recognizing madaris as schools?	2015
How many Muslim students are there in Kerala?	over 500,000
How many Muslim teachers are there in Kerala?	6,000
Who determines the content taught in Arabic public schools?	State-appointed committees
What types of programs provide traditional Islamic teaching?	after-school
What is the format of school for girls and boys?	co-educational
Who decides if Muslims attend secular schools or traditional madaris?	students
What are madaris referred to as in Indonesia and Malaysia?	Sekolah Agama
What region of the Philippines has a large Muslim population?	Mindanao
What region of Thailand has madaris?	southern
How many madrasahs are in Sinagapore?	six
What program is being installed in madrasahs in Singapore?	International Baccalaureate
What year is it planned for IB programs to be in place at Madrasah Al-Arabiah Al-Islamiah?	2019
What will the uniform be at Madrasah Al-Arabiah Al-Islamiah?	the songkok for boys and tudong for girls
How many regions in Singapore have widely accepted madaris?	16
What law protects the teaching of Arabic and Islamic traditions in Mindanao?	Department Order No. 51
What religion do most people practice in Mindanao?	Muslim
When did madaris become more accepted in Mindanao?	2004
What curriculum is used in non public madaris in Mindanao?	Standard Madrasa Curriculum (SMC)
When was the first madrasa started in North America?	1983
What country has many students that attend Al-Rashid Islamic Institute?	US
Where is Al-Rashid Islamic Institute?	Cornwall, Ontario
What organization did Shaykh Muhammad Alsahareef start?	AlMaghrib Institute
What is the common western perception of the teaching received at madaris?	anti-Americanism and radical extremism
What type of content is delivered at madaris?	varied curricula
What type of teaching is provided at Indian madaris?	secularised
What are the origins of western schools?	institutions of the Catholic church
How many science disciplines were taught at madaris in the Ottoman Empire?	seven
Who founded Philadelphia?	William Penn
What role did Philadelphia play in the American Revolution?	a meeting place for the Founding Fathers
What purpose did Philadelphia serve while D.C. was under construction?	temporary U.S. capital
When did it reach 2 million occupants>	1950
What was the historical economic base of Philadelphia?	manufacturing
When did the city near bankruptcy?	late 1980s
Where did wealthy residents move?	suburbs
Who replaced the wealthy?	immigrants
What is the GDP of the city?	$388 billion
Where does it rank in comparison to other US cities in GDP?	fourth
How many Fortune 500 companies call Philadelpia home?	seven
How many domestic tourists visit annually?	39 million
What branch of the US military was born in Philadelphia?	United States Marine Corps
What native American tribe lived in the area before settlement?	Lenape
What other tribe occasionally fought against the Lenape?	Iroquois
What disease killed the most Lenape?	smallpox
Where did the Lenape go after being pushed out of the Philidelphia area?	upper Ohio River basin
Where do the Lenape reside today?	Oklahoma
Who were the first settlers to the Delaware Valley?	the Dutch
What was the name of the first settlement in the area?	Fort Nassau
Who claimed the entire Delaware River?	The Dutch
When did the English conquer the New Netherland colony?	1664
Who founded the Pennsylvania colony?	William Penn
Who did Penn buy the land from?	Lenape
What religion did William Penn practice?	Quaker
When was Philadelphia established as a city?	1701
What type of street layout did Penn use for Philadelphia?	grid plan
What important revolutionary document was signed in Philadelphia?	Declaration of Independence,
When did Philadelphia host the Constitutional Convention?	1787
How many Revolutionary War battles were fought around Philadelphia?	Several
When did the US government leave Philadelphia for D.C.?	1799
What religion did the black community found?	African Methodist Episcopal Church
Which city surpassed the population of Philadelphia?	New York City
What type of economy did Philadelphia have?	industrial
What was Philadelphia's biggest industry during the 19th century?	textiles
When was the first World's Fair?	1876
Which were the two biggest immigrant groups in Philadelphia?	Irish and German
What is the size in square miles today?	130 square miles
Who carried out the first strike in North America?	immigrants
When did the strike take place?	1835
What did the strikers achieve?	ten-hour workday
Why did so many Irish immigrants come to Philadelphia?	the Great Famine
When did the black population explode?	Between 1880 and 1930
Which political party controlled Philadelphia in the early 20th century?	Republican
What phrase could describe Philadelphia of the early 20th century?	corrupt and contented
When did the first major political reform occur?	1917
When was the peak of Philadelphia's population?	1950
Why did the population decline after this time?	the loss of many middle-class union jobs
What is the main driver of the economy now?	service businesses
How much of the population left after 1950?	one-quarter
What is another large industry?	a tourist destination
Who planned the central city?	Thomas Holme
Which rivers run through the city?	The Delaware River and Schuylkill Rivers
How many public parks did Penn plan?	five
How many live in the central area today?	183,240
How many planning districts make up Philadelphia?	18
When was the 1980 zoning code revamped?	2007–2012
Which two mayors accomplished the zoning code revamp?	John F. Street and Michael Nutter
Name 6 important Philadelphia architects?	Benjamin Latrobe, William Strickland, John Haviland, John Notman, Thomas U. Walter, and Samuel Sloan
Who is Philadelphia's greatest architect of the later 19th century?	Frank Furness
When did building begin on the Philadelphia CIty Hall?	1871
What commission was created in 1955?	Philadelphia Historical Commission
What does this commission control?	Philadelphia Register of Historic Places
How tall is the City Hall?	548 ft
What is the tallest building?	Comcast Center
Which building under construction will surpass Comcast Center?	Comcast Innovation and Technology Center
What is the dominant type of house in Philadelphia?	row house
What are row houses called outside of Philadelphia?	Philadelphia rows
How old is most of the housing in Philadelphia?	early 20th century or older
Name a type of row house in the city?	Victorian-style homes in North Philadelphia to twin row houses in West Philadelphia
Which neighborhood has the oldest housing in America?	Society Hill
What climate zone does Philadelphia fall under?	humid subtropical climate zone
What is the summer weather like?	hot and muggy
What is the normal snowfall?	22.4 in
How much rain does Philly get on average?	41.5 inches
What is the most rain in one day?	8.02 in
What is the average January temp?	33.0 °F
What is the July average temp?	78.1 °F
What is the average time for freezing temps?	November 6 thru April 2
How long does the grow season last on average?	217
Which month is the driest?	February
What is the 2014 population?	1,560,297
When was the low point in Philadelphia's population?	2006
How much is the population predicted to grow by 2035?	100,000
What is the percent of blacks?	43.4%
What is the percent of whites?	41.0%
What is the hispanic make-up of the population?	12.3%
What is the largest European ancestry?	Irish (12.5%)
What is the density?	11,457 people per square mile
How many houses or apartments were there in 2010?	670,171
What percent are vacant as of 2013?	13 percent
What percent don't own cars?	32
What percent own 2 or more cars?	23
At the last census how many households had children under 18 in them?	24.9 percent
What percent were non-family households?	43.2
What is the size of the average household?	2.45
Percentage of unwed births?	56
What was the median household income in 2013?	$36,836
What is the name of a wealthy neighborhood?	Society Hill
What is the lowest median income in Philadelphia?	$14,185
What is the city's largest age group?	25- to 29-year-old
How many people at the last census were under 18?	343,837
How many baby's were there in 2013?	22,018
How many deaths were there in 2013?	13,691
Name the six largest European ethnic groups in the city?	Irish, Italians, Polish, Germans, English, and Greeks
Which city has the largest Irish and Italian populations?	New York City
What area of the city has a large Italian neighborhood?	South Philadelphia
Which three areas are high in Irish and Polish?	Kensington section, Port Richmond, and Fishtown
Which part of the city has a large Jewish area?	Mount Airy
Name three sub-cultures in the Center City?	yuppie, bohemian, and hipster
What is the name of the gay district?	Gayborhood
Name a University located in the city?	Drexel and University of Pennsylvania
What percent of 5 year olds or older speak English?	79.12%
What percent of 5 year olds or older speak Spanish?	9.72%
What is the total over 5's that speak another language than English?	20.88%
Unemployment rate in 2014?	7.8%
What was the average unemployment rate in the U.S. in 2014?	6.2%
How many jobs were gained in 2014?	8,800
What industries accounted for most of the city's job gains?	education and health services, leisure and hospitality, and professional and business services
What industries suffered declines?	manufacturing and government
Which is the biggest historical sites?	Independence National Historical Park
How many UNESCO sites does the U.S. have?	22 UNESCO World Heritage Sites
Where was the Declaration of Independence signed?	Independence National Historical Park
What famous bell is in Philadelphia?	the Liberty Bell
What famous writer has a house in Philadelphia?	Edgar Allan Poe
Name the archaeology museum?	University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology
Name a museum named after a founding father?	Franklin Institute
Which city had the nations first zoo?	Philadelphia
Name Philidelphia's largest park?	Fairmount Park
Name the accent spoken in the area?	The Philadelphia dialect
Which dialect is it similar to?	Baltimore dialect
What other city is similar to Philadelphia's accent?	New York
Who studies the accent at the University of Pennsylvania?	William Labov
Name two districts with good night life?	South Street and Old City
What is the home of the orchestra?	Kimmel Center for the Performing Arts
What is the countries oldest opera house?	Academy of Music
Who uses the opera house?	Opera Company of Philadelphia and the Pennsylvania Ballet
What is the oldest theater in the U.S.?	Walnut Street Theatre
Which American city has the most public art?	Philadelphia
What was the Assoc. for Public Art called in the past?	Fairmount Park Art Association
How many pieces of art were funded by the Percent for Art ordinance?	more than 200
Name a type of music from the 70's that influenced the nation?	Philadelphia soul
What concert did Philly host on July13th, 1985?	Live Aid
What is the name of the stadium that held Live Aid?	John F. Kennedy Stadium
Name a hip/hop artist from the city?	The Roots, DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince, The Goats, Freeway, Schoolly D, Eve, and Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes
What water sport is popular in the city?	Rowing
What is the symbol of rowing in the city?	Boathouse Row
What is the name of the big rowing races?	Dad Vail Regatta, the largest intercollegiate rowing event in the U.S, the Stotesbury Cup Regatta, and the Head of the Schuylkill Regatta
Where are these races held?	Schuylkill River
What type of government does Philadelphia have?	strong-mayor version of the mayor-council
How many terms can a mayor serve?	two consecutive four-year terms
Who is the current mayor?	Jim Kenney
What party does the mayor represent?	Democratic Party
What is the legislative branch called?	Philadelphia City Council
What is the main trial court called?	The Philadelphia County Court of Common Pleas (First Judicial District)
What type of cases are heard here?	felony-level criminal cases and civil suits above the minimum jurisdictional limit of $7000
How are judges appointed?	elected by the voters
Who was the last Republican DA?	Ron Castille
What party dominated until the mid-20th century	Republican Party
What happened in Philadelphia in 1856?	Philadelphia was chosen as the host city for the first Republican National Convention in 1856
When did the Democrats take the city?	1936
Who won the most votes in the city in '08?	Barack Obama
How many congressional districts are there in the city?	four
How many congressional districts were there at the peak population?	six
Who represents the 8th district?	Mike Fitzpatrick
When was the last major Republican representation of a large part of the city?	1983
Who was the last Republican to be fairly competitive in the mayoral race?	Sam Katz
Did the crime rate go up or down after the War years?	pronounced rise in crime in the years following World War II
How many murders occurred in 1990?	525
What was the average murder rate during the 90's?	600
How many murders occurred in 2013?	246
When did shootings peak in the city?	2006
How many shootings were there in that year?	1,857
Has violent crime rate fallen or risen in the last 10 years?	fell
What rank in danger does Philadelphia have in the U.S.?	54th
Has public school enrollment dropped or increased in the last 5 years?	dropped
How many public schools have been closed in 2013?	24
How much does the city spend per year per child?	$12,570
Have grad rates fallen or increased in the last years?	increased
What was the grad rate in 2005?	52%
What was it in 2014?	65%
Is that the above or below the national average?	below the national and state averages
What is the largest private institution in the city?	Temple University
What are the 3 research universities in the city?	University of Pennsylvania, Temple University and Drexel University
How many med schools are there?	five
How many major papers are published?	two
What is the 3rd oldest paper in the nation?	Philadelphia Inquirer
Who owns the major papers in the city?	Interstate General Media
Name a smaller newspaper?	Philadelphia Tribune
What community does the Tribune serve?	African-American community
What paper serves the LGBT community?	Philadelphia Gay News
Name a Jewish newspaper?	The Jewish Exponent
Where was the first radio license granted?	St. Joseph's College
When did the first radio stations appear?	1922
Name the 3 public radio stations?	WHYY-FM (NPR), WRTI (jazz, classical), and WXPN-FM
Who owned W3XE?	Philco
When did it become NBC's first affiliate?	1939
What show started out in the city?	Bandstand
When did SEPTA service get cut?	1981
Why did SEPTA rail service get cut?	lack of funding
Has service ever been restored?	but lack of funding has again been the chief obstacle to implementation
Name a proposed project to repalce it?	Schuylkill Valley Metro to Wyomissing, PA, and extension of the Media/Elwyn line back to Wawa, PA. SEPTA's Airport Regional Rail Line Regional Rail
Name the main airport?	Philadelphia International Airport (PHL)
Where does PHL rank in the list of busiest airports?	15th
What airline uses this airport as its primary international hub?	American Airlines
What is the main north-south freeway called?	Delaware Expressway
What is part of I-76 called?	Schuylkill Expressway
When was the Vine Street Expressway finished?	1991
Name a bridge in the city?	Ben Franklin Bridge
What is another name for the Roosevelt Expressway?	U.S. 1
When was Woodhaven road built?	1966
What neighborhoods does Cottman Avenue serve?	Northeast Philadelphia,
What is another name for The Fort Washington Expressway?	Route 309
What is US-30 also known as?	Lancaster Avenue
What bus line uses the city as a hub?	Greyhound Lines
Where is Greyhound terminal located?	1001 Filbert Street
How many other bus companies operate from Philadelphia?	six
What is the name of the six bus companies?	Bieber Tourways, Capitol Trailways, Martz Trailways, Peter Pan Bus Lines, Susquehanna Trailways, and the bus division for New Jersey Transit
Name 2 rail companies that use the city as a hub?	Pennsylvania Railroad and the Reading Railroad
Where did the Pennsylvania Railroad have their first station?	Broad Street Station
Where did the Reading operate out of?	Reading Terminal
What is Reading Terminal called now?	Pennsylvania Convention Center
What was the first water supply system called?	Fairmount Water Works,
Who provides the city water now?	Philadelphia Water Department
Where dos PWD get it's water from?	Delaware River and the balance from the Schuylkill River
How many pumping stations are there in the sewer system?	21
How many miles of sewers are in the city?	3,657 miles
What is the largest city owned gas utility?	Philadelphia Gas Works
How many homes does PGW serve?	500,000
When was PGW founded?	1836
When did the city take PGW over?	1987
What area code is used in Philadelphia in 1947?	215
When was the 610 area code added?	1994
When was the 267 added?	1997
What city in Poland is a sister city to Philadelphia?	Toruń
What city in Israel is a sister city to Philadelphia?	Tel Aviv
When was Torun triangle built?	1976
What else does the Triangle contain?	Copernicus monument
How many sister cities does Philadelphia have?	ten
What was Kerry's major?	political science
Where did Kerry go to college?	Yale University
What branch of the military did Kerry join?	Naval Reserve
What medals did Kerry win?	the Silver Star Medal, Bronze Star Medal, and three Purple Heart Medals
What group was Kerry a spokesman for?	Vietnam Veterans Against the War
Where did Kerry get a law degree?	Boston College Law School
Who was Kerry an Lt. Gov. for?	Michael Dukakis
When did Kerry become a Senator?	1984
Where was Kerry an Lt. Gov.?	Massachusetts
When was Kerry an Lt. Gov.?	from 1983 to 1985
When did Kerry run for president?	2004
Who was Kerry's running mate?	John Edwards
How much did Kerry lose by?	35 electoral votes
Who was Bush's running mate?	Dick Cheney
Where was John Edwards a senator?	North Carolina
What is Kerry's middle name?	Forbes
At what facility was Kerry born?	Fitzsimons Army Hospital
What was Kerry's father's religion?	Catholic
What was Kerry's mother's religion?	Episcopalian
What is Kerry's older sibling's name?	Margaret
What was Kerry's role in the Yale Political Union as a junior?	President of the Union
What secret society did Kerry join?	Skull and Bones Society
What country did Kerry visit as a student?	Switzerland
Who was Kerry's most influential professor?	H. Bradford Westerfield
What was Kerry's role in the Yale Political Union as a sophomore?	Chairman of the Liberal Party
When did Kerry join the Naval Reserve?	February 18, 1966
When did Kerry become a navy officer?	December 16, 1966
How long was Officer Candidate School?	16 weeks
Where is the Navy training center?	Newport, Rhode Island
When did Kerry publish his memories of Vietnam?	1986
What kind of ship was the USS Gridley?	guided missile frigate
What was the formal name of 'swift boats'?	Fast Patrol Craft
How long were swift boats?	50-foot
What had Kerry expected the 'swift boats' to do?	coastal patrolling
Where was Kerry's boat on Dec 2-3, 1968?	near a peninsula north of Cam Ranh Bay
How many crew were with Kerry?	two
Who were in Kerry's crew?	Patrick Runyon and William Zaladonis
What did Kerry's crew destroy?	sampans
Where was Kerry injured?	in the left arm above the elbow
When did Kerry earn his 2nd Purple Heart?	February 20, 1969
What munition hit Kerry's boat?	a B-40 rocket
Where did Kerry earn his 2nd Purple Heart?	on the Bồ Đề River
Where did Kerry's boat escape to safety?	Gulf of Thailand
When did Kerry earn a Silver Star?	February 28, 1969
Where did Kerry earn a Silver Star?	the Duong Keo River
How many swift boats did Kerry command?	his Swift boat and two other Swift boats
Who awarded the Silver Star to Kerry?	Admiral Zumwalt
What story described the events of Feb 28, 1969?	The Death Of PCF 43
Where did Kerry receive his Silver Star?	An Thoi
Who was Kerry's commander?	Lieutenant Commander George Elliott
What complaint did Elliot have about Kerry's actions?	beaching the boat without orders
When was a press release put out about Kerry earning the Silver Star?	March 1, 1969
What was released on March 17, 1969?	a historical summary
Where was Kerry on Mar 13, 1969?	on the Bái Háp River
On what body part was Kerry wounded on Mar 13, 1969?	in the buttocks
What was Kerry doing when he was wounded on Mar 13, 1969?	blowing up a rice bunker
What boat was Kerry on, on Mar 13?	PCF-94
What was the lead boat on Mar 13?	PCF-3
What boat was Rassmann on?	PCF-94
Who fell overboard from Kerry's boat?	James Rassmann
What was Rassmann's job?	a Green Beret advisor
What medal did Kerry earn for rescuing Rassmann?	the Bronze Star Medal with Combat "V"
What does the Combat V mean?	heroic achievement
Which wound allowed Kerry to leave combat duty?	third
Where was Kerry reassigned in April 1969?	the Brooklyn-based Atlantic Military Sea Transportation Service
When did Kerry become a lieutenant?	January 1, 1970
Who was Kerry a personal aide for?	Rear Admiral Walter Schlech
When did Kerry leave the Naval Reserve?	February 1978
Who kept George W. Bush out of Vietnam?	his father
What military branch was George W. Bush in?	the Texas Air National Guard
How did Republicans attack Kerry?	by calling Kerry's war record into question
What did SBVT change its name to?	Swift Vets and POWs for Truth
What term was inspired by the attacks on Kerry?	swiftboating
How many members did VVAW have when Kerry joined it?	about 20,000
What VVAW investigation was Kerry involved in?	the "Winter Soldier Investigation"
Who was Melvin Laird?	Nixon Secretary of Defense
What did Laird refuse to court-martial Kerry for?	his antiwar activity
What did Kerry do on Apr 22, 1971?	appeared before a U.S. Senate committee hearing
What was the topic of the hearing Kerry testified on?	ending the war
What did Kerry throw over a fence?	some of his own decorations and awards as well as some given to him by other veterans to throw
Why did Kerry participate in the protest?	for peace and justice, and to try and make this country wake up once and for all
How many vets participated in the protest?	almost 1000
When was Kerry arrested for protesting?	May 30, 1971
Who was being honored on May 30, 1971?	American POWs held captive by North Vietnam
How many people were arrested with Kerry?	441
At what time was Kerry arrested?	2:30 a.m.
Why were the protesters arrested?	tried to camp on the village green
Who had Kerry considered running against in 1970?	Democrat Philip J. Philbin
In which district had Kerry considered running in 1970?	Massachusetts's 3rd congressional district
Who ran against Philbin instead of Kerry?	Robert Drinan
Why did Morse retire?	to become Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs at the United Nations
What political party was Morse in?	Republican
What was Paul Sheehy's job?	attorney
What was DiFruscia's position?	State Representative
Who did Kerry share a campaign headquarters with?	Anthony R. DiFruscia
Why was Kerry's brother messing with phone lines?	they had received an anonymous call warning that the Kerry lines would be cut
What is Kerry's younger brother's name?	Cameron
What party did Durkin run as?	Independent
How far ahead of Cronin did Kerry poll?	26-points
What slant did The Sun have?	conservative
Who did Kerry say tried to stop his campaign?	President Nixon
How did Kerry want to create jobs?	a jobs programme to clean up the Merrimack River
How many votes did Cronin get against Kerry?	110,970
What percent of votes did Cronin get against Kerry?	53.45%
How many votes did Kerry get against Cronin?	92,847
What percent of votes did Kerry get against Cronin?	44.72%
What did Kerry think cost him the race against Cronin?	his failure to respond directly to The Sun's attacks
Where did Kerry move after the 1972 election?	Belvidere, Lowell
What did Kerry's brother call the decade after 1972?	"the years in exile"
What did Kerry fundraise for?	the Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere
When did Kerry enter law school?	September 1973
Where was Kerry a talk radio host?	WBZ
When did Kerry become an ADA?	January 1977
What condition did Droney have?	amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
What is ALS's nickname?	Lou Gehrig's Disease
What senator did Kerry investigate in 1978?	Edward Brooke
Why was Brooke being investigated?	"misstatements" in his first divorce trial
When did Kerry consider running for president if Droney didn't?	1978
When did Kerry leave the DA's office?	1979
Who left the DA's office with Kerry?	Roanne Sragow
What bakery did Kerry co-found?	Kilvert & Forbes Ltd.
Who did Kerry start a bakery with?	K. Dun Gifford
What was Paul Tsongas's job in 1984?	junior U.S. Senator from Massachusetts
When did Kerry run for Senate?	1984
When did Kerry run for Lt Governor?	1982
What was James Shannon's job?	Congressman
What was Tip O'Neill's job?	House Speaker
When did Kerry visit Nicaragua?	April 18, 1985
Who did Kerry visit Nicaragua with?	Senator Tom Harkin
Where was Tom Harkin from?	Iowa
Who did Kerry visit in Nicaragua?	Daniel Ortega
What was criticized about Ortega's administration?	strong ties to Cuba and the USSR and were accused of human rights abuses
Who did Kerry's staff expose in an Oct 14 report?	Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North
Who had Oliver North been supporting?	right-wing Nicaraguan rebels (Contras)
What crime had Kerry said North committed?	illegally funding and supplying armed militants without the authorization of Congress
Who were the Contras?	right-wing Nicaraguan rebels
What government agencies worked with North?	the National Security Council and the CIA
Who was the State Department giving money to?	drug traffickers
How much money did the State Department give the traffickers?	over $806,000
Where had the money given to drug traffickers come from?	funds authorized by the Congress for humanitarian assistance to the Contras
What was the response to Kerry's accusation of funding traffickers?	little reaction in the media and official Washington
Where is the BCCI based?	Pakistan
What bank helped Noriega?	Bank of Credit and Commerce International
When was BCCI shut down?	1991
Who collaborated in the report about BCCI?	Kerry and Senator Hank Brown
What was the BCCI report called?	The BCCI Affair
Who ran against Kerry in 1996?	William Weld
When Weld was re-elected governor, how much of the vote did he get?	71%
When was Weld re-elected governor?	1994
What did Kerry and Weld agree to limit their campaign spending to?	$6.9 million
Who broke the agreed-upon spending cap?	Both candidates
What was Kerry supposed to say when he 'botched a joke'?	"... you end up getting us stuck in a war in Iraq. Just ask President Bush."
Who was Kerry saying was stuck in Iraq?	President Bush and not American troops in general
What mistake did Kerry make in the joke?	inadvertently left out the key word "us"
Who did the Washington Post say Kerry was an envoy for?	Afghanistan and Pakistan
When did the Washington Post say Kerry was important envoy?	May 2011
How, in May 2011, did the WaPo describe Bin Laden's killing?	perhaps the most important crossroads yet
What did Kerry get from the Pakistanis?	the tail-section of the U.S. helicopter which had had to be abandoned at Abbottabad during the bin Laden strike
Who was Pakistan's army chief in 2013?	Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani
Who said Kerry was the 'top Senate liberal'?	the National Journal
When was Kerry called the 'top Senate liberal'?	2003
What was Kerry's actual career voting rank for 'liberalness'?	11th most liberal
What trade agreement did Kerry support?	North American Free Trade Agreement
What trade agreement did Kerry oppose?	Central American Free Trade Agreement
When did Kerry say he intended to support the Iraq War?	October 9, 2002
When did Bush declare the Iraq war?	2003
Who did Kerry say we should disarm?	Saddam Hussein
When did Kerry speak at Georgetown University?	January 23, 2003
What committee did Kerry chair in 1991-1993?	the Senate Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs
What did the POW/MIA committee conclude about Vietnam POWs?	there was "no compelling evidence that proves that any American remains alive in captivity in Southeast Asia."
When did Kerry sponsor a resolution to reopen trade with Vietnam?	1994
Who sponsored the resolution to reopen trade with Vietnam, along with Kerry?	John McCain
When did Bill Clinton normalize relations with Vietnam?	1995
Where was John Edwards a senator?	North Carolina
Where was Howard Dean a governor?	Vermont
What was Wesley Clark's former job?	Army General
Who won the 2004 Iowa Democratic Caucus?	John Kerry
When did Kerry choose John Edwards to be his VP?	July 6, 2004
Who did Kerry criticize during the 2004 campaign?	President George W. Bush
Why did Kerry criticize Bush during the 2004 campaign?	for the Iraq War
What had Kerry voted against after supporting the initial Iraq authorization?	an $87 billion supplemental appropriations bill to pay for the subsequent war
What did Bush's campaign call Kerry for changing his mind about Iraq?	a flip-flopper
What was Kerry's PAC?	Keeping America's Promise
What was the mission of Keeping America's Promise?	"A Democratic Congress will restore accountability to Washington and help change a disastrous course in Iraq"
How many down-ballot candidates did Kerry help support?	179
How many states' down-ballot candidates did Kerry help support?	42
Which election did Kerry's PAC focus on?	the midterm elections during the 2006 election cycle
When was it reported that Kerry would become SoS?	December 15, 2012
Who was Secretary of State before Kerry?	Hillary Clinton
Who backed out of becoming SoS after Hillary?	Susan Rice
Why did Rice withdraw?	a politicized confirmation process following criticism of her response to the 2012 Benghazi attack
When was Kerry's appointment confirmed?	January 29, 2013
Who complained about how Kerry ran the State Dept?	Career State Department officials
What was the complaint about how Kerry ran the State Dept?	power has become too centralized under Kerry's leadership, which slows department operations when Kerry is on one of his frequent overseas trips
How had some State employees described Kerry?	having "a kind of diplomatic attention deficit disorder"
Who published the Ivory Tower Survey?	Foreign Policy Magazine
What was Kerry's ranking in the Ivory Tower Survey for effectiveness as SoS?	tied for 11th place out of the 15
Who met Kerry in Jan 2014?	Archbishop Pietro Parolin
What country did Kerry discuss with Parolin?	Syria
What did the Pope express support for in Jan 2014?	the Geneva II process
How many people did Kerry say had died in Syria as of Jan 2014?	over 130,000
Who was Syria's president in 2014?	Bashar al-Assad
What did Kerry say Syria could do to avoid a military strike?	turn over every single bit of his chemical weapons to the international community in the next week
Which country convinced Syria to actually give up its chemical weapons?	Russia
What was Sergey Lavrov's position?	Russian Foreign Minister
When did the UN Security Council order Syria's chemical weapons be destroyed?	September 28
Where did Kerry speak in Nov 2013?	the Organization of American States
What did Kerry say had ended, in the Nov 2013 speech?	the era of the Monroe Doctrine
When did Kerry speak to the OAS?	in November 2013
Who was Kerry's paternal grandmother?	Ida Lowe
Who was Kerry's paternal grandfather?	Frederick A. "Fred" Kerry
What was Kerry's paternal grandmother's career?	musician
What was Kerry's paternal grandfather's career?	shoe businessman
Where did Kerry's paternal grandparents immigrate from?	the Austro-Hungarian Empire
When did Kerry and his wife separate?	1982
When did Kerry and his wife divorce?	July 25, 1988
When did Kerry and his wife get an annullment?	1997
What book did Kerry's ex-wife write?	A Change of Heart
Who did Kerry's ex-wife remarry?	Richard Charlesworth
Who is Kerry's 2nd wife?	Maria Teresa Thierstein Simões Ferreira
What is Kerry's 2nd wife's nationality?	Mozambican
Who was Kerry's 2nd wife's previous husband?	Henry John Heinz III
When did Kerry and Teresa meet?	1990
Where did Kerry and Teresa meet?	at an Earth Day rally
What was Teresa Heinz Kerry's net worth in 2004 according to Forbes?	$750 million
What range of estimates have been given for Teresa Heinz Kerry's net worth?	from around $165 million to as high as $3.2 billion
What was Kerry's mother's name?	Rosemary Forbes Kerry
When did Kerry's mother pass away?	2002
Where would Kerry have ranked among richest US presidents, adjusted for inflation?	third-richest
What religion is Kerry?	Roman Catholic
What religious items did Kerry bring with him while campaigning?	a religious rosary, a prayer book, and a St. Christopher medal
What is St. Christopher the patron saint of?	travelers
What did Kerry do in the church while living in Switzerland?	was an altar boy and prayed all the time
Which part of the Bible did Kerry find the most moving?	the Letters of Paul
Who interviewed Kerry in Oct 2004 about his religion?	Christianity Today
What did Kerry tell Christianity Today that he is open-minded to?	many other expressions of spirituality that come through different religions
What did Kerry say about major religious texts?	he believed that the Torah, the Qur'an, and the Bible all share a fundamental story
Who said Kerry is an 'avid cyclist'?	Sports Illustrated
What type of bicycle does Kerry prefer?	a road bike
What are 'centuries' in bicycling?	long-distance rides
What bicycles did Kerry use while campaigning?	recumbent stationary bikes for his hotel rooms
What other sports does Kerry participate in?	snowboarder, windsurfer, and sailor
What type of yacht did Kerry buy?	a Friendship 75
How expensive was Kerry's yacht?	$7 million
Where was Kerry's yacht built?	New Zealand
How much sales tax did Kerry owe on the yacht?	$437,500
Which state received Kerry's yacht's sales tax?	Massachusetts
How many square kilometers is Rajasthan?	342,239
What percentage of India's total area is Rajasthan?	10.4%
What are alternative names the Thar Desert is known by?	the "Rajasthan Desert" and "Great Indian Desert"
What province in Pakistan does Rajasthan border on its north?	Punjab
The Dilwara Temples are a pilgrimage site for whom?	Jain
When was the first usage of the word Rajasthan?	1829
In what publication did the name Rajasthan first appear?	Annals and Antiquities of Rajast'han or the Central and Western Rajpoot States of India
What is another name for the Rajasthan region?	Rajputana
In what year did George Thomas write the memoir known as Military Memories?	1800
Who wrote the book entitled India: A History?	John Keay
Some portions of Rajasthan were involved with what ancient civilization?	the Indus Valley Civilization
In what Indus Valley Civilization district was Kalibangan within?	Hanumangarh district
What were the Saka Rulers of Western India believed to be called?	Western Kshatrapas
Over what time period were the Western Kshatrapas in power?	405–35 BC
The Kushans ruled what part of the Indian subcontinent?	the northern part
Members of what tribe were exterminated in Ajmer?	Gurjars
What tribe formerly ruled Kota?	Bhils
What was the name of the group that formerly ruled Bundi?	Meenas
What is another way to refer to the PhulMali?	Saini
The Jats assisted in building what state?	Rajasthan
What empire stopped Arab invasions?	Gurjar Pratihar Empire
Arab attempted to invade the Gurjar Pratihar Empire beginning in what century?	8th
Arab conquest was limited to what region?	Sindh
What was the most notable accomplishment of the Gurjara Pratihara Empire?	its successful resistance to foreign invasions
Which historian claims that even the Arabs acknowledged the importance of the Gurjara Pratihara Empire in stopping invasions?	Historian R. C. Majumdar
How many princely states of Rajputana contain?	nineteen
What is the name of the British district within Rajputana?	Ajmer-Merwara
Bharatpur is an example of what kind of state?	princely
Under a Muslim Nawab there was a princely state, what was its name?	Tonk
What families rose to power in the 6th century?	Rajput families
What group in the Rajasthan region started to have internal disputes?	Mughals
In what century did the Mughal Empire come into decline?	18th century
The Maratharas gained what over Rajputana?	suzerainty
Where were the Marathas from?	the state of what is now Maharashtra
In what year did the British Empire replace the Maratha Empire?	1818
Which mountain range goes through Rajasthan?	the Aravalli Range
What is the length in miles of the Aravalli Range?	530 mi
What peak is at the southwestern part of the Aravalli Range?	Mount Abu
What portion of Rajasthan is east and south of the Aravalli Range?	two-fifths
Which river separates the main Aravelli ranges?	West Banas River
Dry and sandy conditions are indicative of which region of Rajasthan?	The northwestern portion
Which desert is in the northwestern part of Rajasthan?	the Thar Desert
What is the most populous city in the Thar Desert?	Jodhpur
What are the names of the major districts of the Thar?	Jodhpur, Jaisalmer, Barmer, Bikaner and Nagour
Rainfall in the Thar Desert region is less than what amount each year on avarage?	400 mm
What is a characteristic of the region to the east of the Aravalli range?	more fertile and better watered
What is the name of the ecoregion to the east and southeast of the Aravalli Range?	the Kathiarbar-Gir dry deciduous forests ecoregion
What are two examples of trees in the broadleaf forests east of the Aravalli's?	teak, Acacia
What is the name of the region which is home to Dungarpur?	Vagad region
What is the most heavily forested region in Rajasthan?	Vagad
How many meters high is Guru Shikhar?	1,722
What percentage of Rajasthan is to the northwest of the Aravalli range?	60%
What is the average elevation of the south-eastern region of Rajasthan?	100 to 350 m above sea level
A tableland is contained within what to southeastern districts?	Kota and Bundi
What river runs along the badlands in the northeast of Rajasthan	the Chambal River
Which region contains Desert National Park?	Jaisalmer
How many square miles is Desert National Park?	1,221 sq mi
What types of large fossils are found in Desert National Park?	massive fossilised tree trunks
What are the most common types of eagles one might see in the Jaisalmer region?	Short-toed eagles (Circaetus gallicus), tawny eagles (Aquila rapax), spotted eagles (Aquila clanga)
What is another name for a laggar falcon?	Falco jugger
What Rajasthani national park is known for its tigers?	Ranthambore National Park
How many tigers were relocated to Sariska?	five tigers
Ranthamb National Park is known by photographers as what?	one of the best place in India to spot tigers
Why did tigers became extinct in Sariska?	poaching and negligence
The Rajasthan economy is largely composed of what type of industries?	agricultural and pastoral
What are Rajasthans two main cash crops?	Cotton and tobacco
What type of oil does Rajasthan produce some of the largest amounts of in India?	edible oils
Rajasthan consumes the most of what product?	opium
How many crop seasons are there in Rajasthan?	two crop seasons
What type of fibre is Rajasthan ranked 2nd in production of?	polyester fibre
What is the largest city for polyster blouse pieces in Rajasthan?	Pali is largest city in cotton and polyster in blouse pieces
From what town did the marble in the Taj Mahal come?	Makrana
What type of deposits are found at Sambhar?	rich salt deposits
What kind of mines are found in Khetri and Jhunjhunu ?	copper mines
What are earnings from crude oil in Rajasthan expected to be in 2013?	₹250 million per day
How many barrels of crude oil from Barmer is Rajasthan allowed to extract each day?	300,000 barrels
The leader in Indian crude oil production at 250,000 barrels per day is what region?	Bombay High
What group is conducting exploration for Rajasthan's crude oil??	Cairn India
How many barrels per day is currently being extracted from the Barmer region?	175,000 barrels
What type of food was preferred in Rajasthani cooking?	Food that could last for several days and could be eaten without heating
Along with scarce green vegetables, what had an impact on Rajasthani cooking?	scarcity of water
What type of snack is Rajasthan known for?	Bikaneri Bhujia
What famous dish is also known as hot garlic paste?	lashun ki chutney
Vegetarian restaurants come from which Rajasthani region?	the Marwar region
What type of dance comes from Jodhpur Marwar?	The Ghoomar dance
Kalbeliya dance is from which region?	Jaisalmer
What type of music plays a big part in the culture of Rajasthan?	Folk music
Heroic deeds are often a theme of what type of Rajasthani song?	Folk songs
What kind of song is referred to as a bhajan?	religious or devotional
Bagaru and Sanganer represent what type of art?	prints
Zari is a type of what art that is a major Rajasthani export?	embroidery
Females in Rajasthan wear what type of traditional clothing?	ankle-length skirt and a short top
What are the names for a traditional female short-top piece of clothing?	lehenga or a chaniya choli
What colors are dresses in Rajasthan typically made using?	bright colors like blue, yellow and orange
What type of possession has been documented in Rajasthan?	Spirit possession
What underworld god possess Rajasthanis?	Bhaironji
What are possessed individuals known as?	ghorala
Ghorala is another word for what?	mount
What results from possession by even benign spirits?	loss of self-control and violent emotional outbursts
What was the literacy rate of Rajasthan in 1991?	38.55%
How many females had the ability to read in Rajasthan in 1991?	20.44%
What was the rise in female literacy between 1991 and 2001 in Rajasthan?	23%
What is the national average for literacy in India?	74.04%
What was the literacy rate of Rajasthan in 2001?	60.41%
What are the to main educational hubs of Rajasthan?	Jodhpur and Kota
In what educational hub would one find AIIMS?	Jodhpur
What is is Kota known as within India?	coaching capital of India
How many universities does Rajasthan have?	nine
How many engineering colleges are in Rajasthan?	41 engineering colleges
What percentage of India's foreign visitors came to Rajasthan from 2009 to 2010?	14 percent
At what level is Rajasthan ranked in India for visits by foreigners?	fourth highest
How high is Rajasthan ranked among domestic Indian tourists?	fourth
What two palaces are frequent tourist destinations within Rajasthan?	The palaces of Jaipur and Ajmer-Pushkar
What percentage of the Rajasthani GDP comes from tourism?	eight percent
Who built the famous decorated havelis in Rajasthan?	Rajput kings
Jaipur is also known as what city?	the Pink City
What are the notable houses in Jaipur made from?	a type of sandstone dominated by a pink hue
What type of temples stretch from the north to the south of Rajasthan?	Jain Temples
Which Pali District temple is dedicated to Lord Adinath?	Ranakpur Temple
What country is Guam a territory of?	United States
Where is the island of Guan located?	northwestern Pacific Ocean
How many people currently call Guam home as of 2015?	161,785
What is the most populous city in Guam?	Dededo
What is the name of the largest mountain in Guam?	Mount Lamlam
What is the official name given for Guam's indigenous people?	Chamorros
When did Guam's indigenous people first arrive?	4,000 years ago
Who was the first European to visit the island?	Ferdinand Magellan
What year was Guam colonized?	1668
What year did the United States capture Guam?	1898
Along with Guam, which other territories were in the United States jurisdiction before WWII?	American Samoa, Hawaii, and the Philippines
What was the date on the attack of Pearl Harbor?	December 7, 1941
What happened just after the attack on Peal Harbor?	Guam was captured by the Japanese
How long did the Japanese occupation last?	thirty months
Which four classes made up the ancient -Chamorro society?	chamorri (chiefs), matua (upper class), achaot (middle class), and mana'chang (lower class)
Where were the matua located on the island?	coastal villages
Where were the mana'chag located?	interior of the island
What was the nationality of Magellan?	Portuguese
What year did Magellan locate the island of Guam?	1521
What were the name of outrigger canoes?	Proas
In what year was Guam claimed by Spain?	1565
What was the name of the general who claimed Guam?	General Miguel López de Legazpi
What did Spain build to protect their fleet at Guam?	built several defensive structures
When did Spanish colonization commence?	June 15, 1668
Which two Spaniards aided this colonization and started the first catholic church?	Diego Luis de San Vitores and Pedro Calungsod
When did Guam's Cathedral first open?	February 2, 1669
What was the name of the first Cathedral?	Dulce Nombre de Maria
When did the Smallpox epidemic take place?	1688
In what years was there intermittent war fare?	July 23, 1670 until July 1695
What did the smallpox epidemic reduce the population down to in Chamorro?	50,000 to 10,000
What was the name of the person who started the campaign to pacify the area?	Juan de Santiago
When did Captain Damian de Esplana arrive?	1674
What did Captain Damian do after his arrival?	ordered the arrest of rebels
Who was the first Spanish Governor of Guam?	Francisco de Irrisarri y Vinar
In what year did Jose de Quiroga arrive?	1680
in What year did Quiroga complete his pacification?	1695
When did the United States take control of the island?	1898
What happened that allowed the United States to have Guam?	Spanish–American War
What is the name of the executive order that transferred Guam over to the U.S?	108-A
Which two people were exiled to Guam after the Philippine-American war?	Emilio Aguinaldo and Apolinario Mabini
Why were the Chamorros brought to Guam?	to serve as interpreters
How were Guamanian Chamorro viewed by the Japanese?	as an occupied enemy
Who were loyal to Japan?	Northern Mariana Chamorros
What established Guam as an unincorporated territory?	Guam Organic Act of 1950
What conflict did the Organic Act come after?	After World War II
What did the Guam Act allow the population now that they were a U.S territory?	granted the people U.S. citizenship
How many square miles is Guam?	212
How was this island chain created?	the colliding Pacific and Philippine Sea tectonic plates
How deep is the Mariana Trench located near Guam?	35,797
How many miles is Guam across?	30 miles
What natural disaster that is not predictable does Guam have to worry about?	earthquakes
Due to Guam being so close to Anatahan, what dod they have to worry about?	volcanic smog
What is Guam's climate characterized as?	tropical marine
What is the mean high temperature in Guam?	86 °F (30 °C)
What is the average annual rainfall of Guam?	96 inches (2,180 mm)
When does the dry season in Guam typical run?	December to June
Which months are considered the coldest in Guam?	January and February
hat years did the Spanish rule Guam?	1668–1898
What religion was the general population converted to?	Roman Catholicism
Which two major holidays become popular in Guam?	Easter and Christmas
What is the name of the modern Chamorro language?	Malayo-Polynesian
What two indiginous pre-hispanic culture has survived to this point?	chenchule' and inafa'maolek
What is the name of the intricate system in Guam?	. Chenchule
What do the Chamorro believe in according to Historian Lawrence Cinningham	the land and its produce belong to everyone
What is the culture of Pengngan Chamorro based on?	social protocol
What does mangnging refer to that directly involves one major human scense?	sniffing over the hands of the elders
What is a belembaotuyan in Guam?	string musical instrument made from a gourd
What posses some challenges for the Chamorros who find it hard to keep their culture?	cosmopolitan and multicultural nature of modern Guam
What else has led to the Chamorro find it hard to keep their culture that involves it's children?	relocating to the U.S. Mainland
What has recently led to a resurgence in the Chamorros culture and preservation of their old ways?	young Chamorros who seek to continue the ancient ways of the Chamorro people.
How many people make up the Guam legislation?	15
Who is the current non-voting delegate for Guam?	Democrat Madeleine Z. Bordallo
How many electoral votes does Guam currently have?	Guam has no votes
What major movement occurred in Guam in the 80's and 90's?	becoming a commonwealth
Why would Guam becoming a commonwealth be so important?	would give it a level of self-government similar to Puerto Rico
What is the name of this U.S state that could possibly form a union with Guam?	Hawaii
What has the U.S military proposed?	building a new aircraft carrier berth on Guam
How many Marines would the United States move to Guam?	8,600 Marines
Because of the EPA, how many Marines would the United States be able to send to Guam to live?	4,800 Marines
What tourist commonly visits Guam?	Japanese
Around how many Hotels does Guam currently have?	20 large hotels
How many public golf courses does Guam currently have?	seven
About how many tourist visit Guam yearly?	a million
Which major U.S store does Guam currently have that happens to be the largest in the world?	Kmart
What is the name of the pact held between the United States, Micronesia, Marshal Islands, and Palau?	The Compacts of Free Association
What is the benefit of the  Compacts of Free Association?	no restrictions to reside in the United States (also its territories)
What has Guam claimed about Compacts of Free Association?	the territory has had to bear the brunt of this agreement
In what year was the local postage stamp overprinted and has since been replaced?	1899
What type of postal service does Guam currently have today?	U.S. postage
What is the current Zip Code range in Guam?	96910–96932
Which three major companies do not consider Guam as domestic when shipping is involved?	FedEx, UPS, and DHL
What determines the speed in which mail reaches Guam from the United States?	on size and time of year
Which type of service usually takes less than a week to get postage to the island?	first-class
What do most Guam residents use when receiving mail?	post office boxes or private mail boxes
What is considered to be the lifeline of Guam?	The Commercial Port
What is the name of the shipping company in Hawaii that connects Guam?	Matson, Inc
Why is the port so important?	most products must be shipped into Guam for consumers
What is the name of the international airport in Guam?	Antonio B. Won Pat
What major airline resides at the airport?	United Airlines
What is Guam responsible for when goods both come in and leave?	operating its own customs and quarantine agency
Which animal was accidentally introduced into Guam?	brown tree snake
What was accidentally introduced into Guam?	brown tree snake
With the introduction of a non native snake in the area of Guam what impact did it have the island?	nearly eliminated the native bird population
What has the U.S Department of Agriculture done to help watch for the snakes?	has trained detector dogs to keep the snakes out of the island's cargo flow
What are the names of the two native birds in Guam before the brown snake intrusion?	Guam rail (or ko'ko' bird in Chamorro) and the Guam flycatcher
How many bird species have been driven to extinction in Guam?	twelve bird species
What other bird was very common before WWII according to the elders?	ko'ko' birds
What insect was detected in 2007?	coconut rhinoceros beetle
What other American territory has these beetles that have infested Guam?	American Samoa
Where is the Coconut Beetle native to?	Southern Asia
What plagues the Guam dry season?	Wildfires
What are the cause of the majority of the fires in the area?	man
What causes water quality problems in Guam?	sediment is carried by the heavy rains into the Fena Lake Reservoir and Ugum River
What has Guam recently being trying to protect?	coral reef habitats
What has led to the decrease of fish near Guam?	pollution, eroded silt and overfishing
What is the name of the flying mammal in Guam that some are concerned for?	Mariana fruit bats
What are the names of the two colleges in Guam?	The University of Guam (UOG) and Guam Community College
Who are these two schools accredited by?	Western Association of Schools and Colleges
What is the name of the small Christian college in Guam?	Pacific Islands University
How many students as of 2000 were attending public schools in Guam?	32,000
What has plagued Guam public schools?	high dropout rates and poor test scores
What is the name of the governing body of the school in all of Guam?	The Guam Department of Education
Who runs Guam's main health care facility?	The Government of Guam
What is the name of the main health care facility in Guam?	Guam Memorial Hospital
Which privately owned medical facility opened in 2016?	Guam Regional Medical City
What is commonly contrasted with empiricism?	rationalism
Where does rationalism say knowledge comes from?	reason independently of the senses
What is an example knowledge being derived from intuition?	knowledge of God's existence
What did Locke think some knowledge could come from?	intuition and reasoning alone
Where were the main European rationalists?	Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz
What theory was Aristotle's explanation based on?	his theory of potentiality and actuality
How did Plato's Phaedo and Apology think of the mind?	an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth
Who thought the senses were more important, Aristotle or Plato?	Aristotle
Who thought the senses were less important, Aristotle or Plato?	Plato
What does "nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu" mean?	Latin for "nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses"
What is the Stoic view?	the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it
What was Aetius's career?	doxographer
Where was Sextus from?	Chaeronea
Who wrote 'Against the Professors'?	Sextus
Whose ideas did Sextus build on?	Aetius
Whose idea was 'tabula rasa'?	Aristotle
What religion was Al Farabi?	Islamic
What does al-'aql al-hayulani mean?	material intellect
What does al-'aql al-fa'il mean?	active intellect
What is crucial for understanding?	the immaterial "active intellect"
What was 'Abubacer' normally called?	Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail
What was 'Ebn Topnail' normally called?	Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail
What was Ibn Tufail's religion?	Muslim
What was Ibn Tufail's ethnicity?	Andalusian
When did Ibn Tufail live?	12th century CE
When was da Vinci born?	1452
When did da Vinci die?	1519
What did renaissance writers question?	the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition
Who did Machiavelli disdain?	writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals
What did da Vinci advise when your experience contradicted authority?	abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings
When was Vincenzo Galilei born?	ca. 1520
When did Vincenzo Galilei die?	1591
Who was Vincenzo Galilei's oldest son?	Galileo
What does 'esperienza' mean?	experiment
When was the British empiricism period?	17th century
What type of philosopher was Francis Bacon?	empiricist
What type of philosopher was Descartes?	rationalist
What type of philosopher was Hobbes?	empiricist
What type of philosopher was Spinoza?	rationalist
When was 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding' published?	1689
Who wrote 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding'?	John Locke
What does 'tabula rasa' mean?	blank tablet
What did Locke say 'tabula rasa' meant?	white paper
What did Locke's 'tabula rasa' concept say happens to the mind?	on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written
Who wrote 'Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge'?	George Berkeley
Who wrote 'Alciphron'?	George Berkeley
When was 'Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge' published?	1710
What religion was George Berkeley?	Anglican
What nationality was George Berkeley?	Irish
What did Hume bring to empiricism?	a new level of skepticism
What was Hume's nationality?	Scottish
What two types of arguments did Locke say there are?	demonstrative and probable
When did Hume die?	1776
When was Hume born?	1711
What types of human knowledge did Hume say there are?	relations of ideas and matters of fact
What type of human knowledge is math?	relations of ideas
What type of human knowledge is observing the world?	matters of fact
What type of human knowledge is "the sun rises in the East"?	matters of fact
Where did Hume say people's ideas come from?	their "impressions"
What did Hume think our beliefs are?	a result of accumulated habits, developed in response to accumulated sense experiences
What did Hume think our beliefs can't be established solely by?	reason
What did Hume think is a circular argument?	the justification for inductive reasoning
What did Hume say we can't know by inductive reasoning?	that the sun will continue to rise in the East
Why did Hume say we expect the sun to rise?	because it has repeatedly done so in the past
What conclusion do most of Hume's followers disagree with?	that belief in an external world is rationally unjustifiable
What did Hume say can't be rationally justified?	belief in an external world
What is phenomenalism?	physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events
What is subjective idealism closely related to?	Phenomenalism
What did John Stuart Mill say matter is?	the "permanent possibility of sensation"
What did Mill say knowledge comes from?	an inductive inference from direct experience
What sensations did Mill differentiate?	actual and possible sensations
When Mill left a question of sensations unanswered, how did Berkeley answer it?	God
What did Mill say might not actually exist?	gap-filling entities
What did Mill misrepresent about math?	the structure and method of mathematical science, the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures
What phase of empiricism ended in the 1940s?	phenomenalist
How can't a finite set of statements be described?	in purely sensory terms
What is necessary to explain a doctor's normality in sensory terms?	a second doctor
What are other terms for logical empiricism?	logical positivism or neopositivism
When was logical empricism formulated?	early 20th-century
What did logical empiricism try to combine with mathematical logic?	British empiricism
What was Otto Neurath an important member of?	Logical empiricism
What was AJ Ayer an important member of?	Logical empiricism
When was Bertrand Russell born?	1872
When did Bertrand Russell die?	1970
What did Frege say about math?	all mathematical truths are logical
What did Wittgenstein say about logic?	all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies
What are pseudoproblems?	most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems
Who were extreme empiricists?	neopositivists
Who attacked logical positivism?	Nelson Goodman, W.V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, Karl Popper, and Richard Rorty
What position does Dummett take?	anti-realists
Who abandoned phenomenalism?	Carnap and Neurath
When did pragmatism arise?	In the late 19th and early 20th century
Who developed pragmatism?	Charles Sanders Peirce and William James
Where did Peirce and James meet?	Harvard
When did Peirce and James meet?	in the 1870s
What did Peirce later call his ideas instead of pragmatism?	pragmaticism
When was Peirce born?	1839
When did Peirce die?	1914
What view did Peirce think had been driven to excess?	the "data-driven" strict-empiricist view
Who formed the basis for modern scientific method?	Charles Peirce
Whose rationalism did Peirce criticize?	Descartes
How long before Peirce did Hume write?	a century
How did Peirce view inductive vs deductive reasoning?	complementary
How did Hume view inductive vs deductive reasoning?	competitive
What did fallibilism say?	the conclusions of science are always tentative
What does the scientific method's rationality depend on?	its self-corrective character
Who wrote 'Lectures on Pragmatism'?	Peirce
When was 'Lectures on Pragmatism' published?	1903
What is 'haecceity'?	unique individuality or "thisness"
What did Irvin Rock write about?	indirect perception
Where has 'perception as abduction' come up repeatedly?	in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research
Who came up with 'radical empiricism'?	William James
Where were James's pragmatism and radical empiricism intertwined?	in James's published lectures
When was William James born?	1842
When did William James die?	1910
When did James come up with 'radical empiricism'?	Around the beginning of the 20th century
Who came up with 'instrumentalism'?	John Dewey
What did Dewey think about reality?	reality is determined by past experience
When was Dewey born?	1859
When did Dewey die?	1952
What was instrumentalism a modification of?	James' pragmatism
What do idealist philosophies say is constructed in our minds?	reality
What types of things are idealist philosophies skeptical about?	mind-independent
Along with physicalist theories, what theories is idealism in conflict with?	dualist
In sociology, what sorts of ideas does idealism focus on?	beliefs and values
What Indian thinkers were early idealists?	Hindu
What Greek philosophers had idealistic views?	Neoplatonists
With what sect of Buddhism was the Yogācāra school affiliated?	Mahayana
In what century did the Yogācāra school arise?	4th
What century did George Berkeley live in?	18th
What was the ethnicity of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling?	German
In what century did Hegel write?	19th
Along with British idealism and existentialism, what philosophy was influenced by the German idealistic tradition?	phenomenalism
Along with positivism and pragmatism, what philosophy rejected idealism's metaphysical views but what nevertheless influenced by it?	Marxism
What does ἰδεῖν mean in English?	to see
By what year was "idealism" a word in English?	1743
Whose worldview contrasts with that of idealists in the ordinary sense of the word?	pragmatists
What language is ἰδεῖν?	Greek
What is the term used for philosophies that consider the spiritual to be of paramount importance?	idealist
What branch of idealism believes that reality is fundamentally nonphysical?	Metaphysical
What branch of idealism sees abstracts as more real than perceived objects?	Platonic
Along with phenomenalists, what idealists believe the senses are more important than reason?	subjective
What branch of idealism believes that we can only know the real world via ideas?	Epistemological
Who is a notable subjective idealist?	George Berkeley
What famous philosopher was a transcendental idealist?	Immanuel Kant
Who are subjective idealists opposed to?	realists
Along with Plato, what notable philosopher rejected epistemological idealism?	Gottfried Leibniz
Who believed the essence of reality to be composed of monads?	Leibniz
In what philosophy was Christian idealism often rooted?	Neoplatonism
What philosophy influential in the medieval church was opposed to Christian idealism?	Aristotelian scholasticism
In what century did Christian thought begin to be influenced by the scholasticism of Aristotle?	12th
Along with the Unity Church, what contemporary religious movement may be regarded as idealist?	New Thought
What notable idealist was responsible for a "world ground" theory?	Hermann Lotze
Who regarded Plato as the oldest exponent of metaphysical objective idealism?	Simone Klein
What sort of dualist is Plato regarded as?	metaphysical and epistemological
What was another term for forms in Plato's theory of forms?	ideas
What branch of physics might support a worldview similar to Platonic dualism?	quantum
What sort of philosopher was Plotinus?	neoplatonist
According to Noiré, who was the first true Western idealist?	Plotinus
What issue did Schopenhauer discuss that Plotinus did not?	whether we know external objects
What did the Enneads believe might not have existence outside of the soul?	Time
Along with phenomenalism, what is another term for subjective idealism?	immaterialism
Of what see was Berkeley bishop?	Cloyne
What was Berkeley's ethnicity?	Anglo-Irish
What does esse est percipi mean?	to be is to be perceived
What did Berkeley consider things like matter to be?	abstractions
Who was known as the "Cambridge Platonist"?	John Norris
Who was notably influenced by John Norris?	Arthur Collier
When was An Essay Towards the Theory of the Ideal or Intelligible World written?	1701
What sort of reality did Collier believe was knowable?	represented image of an external object
Who coined the term "thing-in-itself"?	Immanuel Kant
Who invented the idea of a "table-of-commonsense"?	Sir Arthur Eddington
Who came up with the idea of "things-as-interacted-by-us"?	Arthur Fine
Who spoke of the "warning signs" of idealism?	Musgrave
What sort of philosopher was Richard Rorty?	Postmodernist
What sort of thinkers were Foster and Luce?	subjectivists
What book was written by A.A. Luce?	Sense without Matter
What year saw the publication of Sense without Matter?	1954
Who wrote A World for Us: The Case for Phenomenalistic Idealism?	Foster
Whose work is Sense without Matter regarded as updating?	Berkeley
What school of thought did Berkeley belong to?	Subjective Idealism
What sort of idealist was Descartes?	Sceptical
In what section was Descartes criticized?	Paralogisms of Pure Reason
In what edition was there a Refutation of Idealism?	2nd
When was the second edition published?	1787
Who wrote Parerga and Paralipomena?	Schopenhauer
What type of knowledge did Schopenhauer believe the ideal to be?	subjective
According to Schopenhauer, to what can the ideal be attributed?	our own minds
What did Schopenhauer believe we were restricted to?	our own consciousness
What did Schopenhauer believe were the only things we could know?	representations
Who censured Kant for his agnostic tautology?	Friedrich Nietzsche
Along with Schopenhauer, whose idealism did Nietzsche attack?	Descartes
Nietzsche's attack on Schopenhauer used an argument similar to Kant's attack on who?	Descartes
According to Hegel, what sort of idealist was Fichte?	transcendental
Who did Hegel see as a subjective idealist?	Berkeley
What sort of idealist did Hegel define himself as?	Absolute
How did Hegel believe historical reality to be knowable to a philosopher?	exercise of reason and intellect
When was Science of Logic written?	1812–1814
Who was the author of Science of Logic?	Hegel
Why did Hegel believe natural things are less real than spiritual things?	less self-determining
Along with God and morally responsible people, what is an example of a spiritual thing to Hegel?	ethical communities
What is an example of a school of thought Hegel believed to be wrong?	materialism
In Hegel's thought, what inner reality is possessed by both subject and object?	Spirit
What is another term for Hegel's "subject"?	any human observer
What does Spirit turn into when a person arrives at self-realization?	Absolute Spirit
What does Hegel mean by "object"?	any external entity
Who did Tucker argue that Hegel's philosophy involved the worship of?	self
Who was a notable critic of Hegel?	Kierkegaard
For whom did Kierkegaard argue reality cannot be a system?	human
According to Kierkegaard, why can't reality be a system for human beings?	humans are incomplete
Even though Kierkegaard does not believe in the possibility of an existential system of reality, what sort of system can exist?	logical
Who wrote Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences?	Hegel
When was Phenomenology of Spirit published?	1807
What trait did Climacus believe that Hegel suppressed?	individuality
Whose will did Hegel believe should prevail over that of the individual?	State
What conception of right and wrong did Climacus believe Hegel endorsed?	bourgeois
What sort of reality did Hegel perceive God's mind to be?	ultimate
Along with Hegel, who also argued for human incompleteness?	Kierkegaard
According to Hegel, what form does thought necessarily take?	abstraction
Why does Hegel believe we cannot know God?	we are finite beings
If something transcends time, what does it, according to Hegel, also transcend?	human understanding
Who wrote The Refutation of Idealism?	Moore
In his rejection of idealism, whose thought did Moore attack?	Bradley
Who originated the saying 'esse est percipi'?	Berkeley
Who is a notable exponent of pluralistic idealism?	Gottfried Leibniz
What is the term for the type of idealism preached by Leibniz?	Panpsychism
What did Leibniz believe the universe is fundamentally composed of?	monads
Who was a notable disciple of Leibniz?	James Ward
What does Ward see as the purpose of interaction between monads?	self- betterment
Who was an exponent of so-called "Boston Personalism"?	Bowne
What was the term given to the personal idealism of Howison?	California Personalism
Who is a notable realistic personal theist?	Saint Thomas Aquinas
What issue do both Aquinas and Brightman discuss?	dependence upon an infinite personal God
What sort of freedom did Howison believe was incompatible with materialism?	moral
With what university is J.M.E. McTaggart affiliated?	Cambridge
In what year was The Nature of Existence published?	1927
According to McTaggart, what are the only things that have real existence?	minds
What does McTaggart believe space and time to be?	unreal
How does McTaggart believe minds relate to one another?	love
What was the name of the philosophy preached by Thomas Davidson?	apeirotheism
What type of idealism was Thomas Davidson's philosophy?	pluralistic
According to Davidson, how many gods are there?	infinite
By whose philosophy was Davidson influenced?	Aristotle
What did Davidson believe the God of Aristotle is synonymous with?	rational thought
Among what twentieth century scientists was idealism popular?	physicists
Along with quantum physics generally, what scientific doctrine caused some physicists to embrace idealism?	relativity
In what year was the second edition of The Grammar of Science published?	1900
What did Pearson claim that science classifies?	contents of the mind
Who is claimed to have been influenced by The Grammar of Science?	Einstein
How do receive information from the physical world?	messages transmitted along the nerves to the seat of consciousness
What type of consciousness is similar but not identical to consciousness itself?	subconsciousness
What is the nature of the fundamental character of reality?	mental
According to the author, who would have particular trouble in accepting that reality is fundamentally mental?	physicist
What is the main thing that we experience?	mind
What makes up Education?	knowledge, skills, values, beliefs, and habits
What methods make up Education?	storytelling, discussion, teaching, training, and directed research
Where does education usually take place under?	the guidance of educators
What occurred after the Fall of Rome with literature?	Catholic Church became the sole preserver
What happened with education  during the Early Middle Ages?	church established cathedral schools
What did these early schools during the Middle Ages evolve into?	medieval universities
What was the name of the famous school during the high middle ages?	Chartres Cathedral School
Where does formal education take place?	school environment
What are some of the sets or ideals most school systems follow?	student-teacher interactions, methods of assessment, class size,
Who guides the students in a formal environment?	certified teacher
Whats the typical age range for pre-school?	three to seven
What are pre-schools also known as?	nursery schools and as kindergarten,
In what country is Kindergarten a term used for primary education?	US
What is another term used for Primary education?	elementary
What does primary school consist of?	first five to seven years of formal, structured education
What is the name of the orgination who is striving to get all the countries on the same path with primary education?	UNESCO
What does secondary education comprise of?	formal education that occurs during adolescence
What two examples were given of what "postsecondary" or "higher" education?	university, vocational school
When does secondary schooling typically take place?	teenage years
What is the purpose of secondary education?	to prepare for higher education, or to train directly in a profession.
When did secondary education emerge in the United States?	1910
Why was secondary school introduced in the U.S?	rise of large corporations and advancing technology
Who benefited from secondary schools?	employers and employees
What was another name used for Higher Education?	tertiary, third stage, or postsecondary education
What is High Education?	follows the completion of a school such as a high school
What does Tertiary education include?	undergraduate and postgraduate education
What does University education include?	teaching, research, and social services activities,
What are usually Universities made up of?	several colleges
What type of University would Yale fall under?	independent
What was a rule for disabled people in the past for education?	not eligible for public education
Who denied children with disabilities to be unable to attend a public school?	physicians or special tutors
Who were some of these early physicians?	Itard, Seguin, Howe, Gallaudet
What would Special Education usually only apply to in the early years of schooling in the U.S?	people with severe disabilities
What is another term used for Special Education Services?	alternative
When were public schools become more and more developed?	19th century
What are some examples of alternative schools?	Montessori schools, Waldorf schools (or Steiner schools), Friends schools
Whos educatgion approach was introduced in Germany in the 19th century and is used in most Kindergartens?	Friedrich Fröbel's
Who from Switzerland was an influential in education?	Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi
Who were the founders of progressive education?	John Dewey and Francis Parker
What makes up Indigenous education?	indigenous knowledge, models, methods, and content
In which two systems can Indigenous education be used?	formal and non-formal educational systems
What is one of the main purposes for Indigenous education?	improve the educational success of indigenous students
Who defines informal learning?	Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Where does informal learning occur?	home, work, and through daily interactions
What does informal leaning usually consist of amongst people who take this route of learning?	language acquisition, cultural norms and manners
Where does informal learning usually take place?	outside educational establishments
What is not necessary for informal learning?	to be pedagogically conscious, systematic and according to subjects
What falls under the informal learning umbrella?	unconsciously incidental, holistically problem-related, and related to situation management
When was the 'education through recreation" applied to childhood?	19th century
When was the concept of 'education through recreation' changed and expanded?	20th century
What changed when the concept was broadened?	to include young adults
What does Auto didacticism generally mean?	learning on your own
When can you become an Autodidact?	any point in one's life
Which famous U.S president was a Autodidact?	Abraham Lincoln
Which famous inventor was a Autodidact?	Thomas Alva Edison
In what year did e-learning jump 14 times over traditional leaning?	2012
Which form of education looks to be the dominant form i the coming years?	Open education
What has been a constant issue with education for as long as education has been around itself?	Cost of education
Which type of schooling can be most expensive?	Online courses
What is not as common in open education?	merit-system degree
Which University offers conventional degrees?	Open University in the United Kingdom
What do most open education sources offer?	own form of certificate
What does Universal Primary Education belong to?	international Millennium Development Goals
What is one issue that hurts Universal Primary Education?	charitable funding
Which organization has discovered corruption in the educator sector?	Transparency International
What has come from similarities in systems?	increase in international student exchanges
Which programfacilitates the exchange students across Europe?	The European Socrates-Erasmus Program
Which group provides opportunities for Eastern Europe and Asia exchange students?	The Soros Foundation
What does LCPS stand for?	low cost private schools
What was the reason for the polarisation for affordable schooling?	disputes around whether the schools are affordable for the poor
Where are these types of school spreading across?	Africa and Asia
What are some of the claims being pointed towards education inequality?	children did not exceed the education of their parents
Who do students often blame for their education short comings?	teachers and their textbooks
What happens when someone tries to improve education?	the educational establishment itself occasionally showers the person with criticism rather than gratitude
What is the discrepancy between Developed and less developed countries?	Developed countries have people with more resources
What resources do developed countries have better access to?	housing, food, transportation
What is common in developed countries?	criticism and blame
What is one good trait about students from developed countries?	have the will and the way to do many things
What use of technology can greatly supplement how teachers teach in the classroom?	internet
What do students also need occasionally before putting blame on teachers?	gratitude for the resources they have
What is the meaning of Education psychology?	the study of how humans learn in educational settings
What is also used interchangeably  with Education psychology?	school psychology
Who are likely to be identified as educational psychologist?	researchers and theorists
What is educational psychology concerned with?	the processes of educational attainment
How can Educational psychology in part be understood?	through its relationship with other disciplines
How is the method of educational psychology have some relation to medicine and biology?	discipline analogous
Where does education psychology draw from?	contributes to cognitive science and the learning sciences
In universities where are the departments of educational psychology normally held?	faculties of education
What is important for a student in education?	Intelligence
What does education increase in a student?	measurable intelligence
What is intelligence at 53 more closely related to?	intelligence at 8
Who focused on identifying stimuli that can influence learning?	Dunn
Who also along with Dunn recommended other teaching studies?	Joseph Renzulli
Who created the Type Delineator?	David Kolb and Anthony Gregorc's
What do some theories believe?	that all individuals benefit from a variety of learning modalities
What should be included in effective teaching?	teaching methods which cover all three learning modalities
What can Philosophy education be when we talk about the process?	philosophy of the process of education or the philosophy of the discipline of education
What defines Philosophy education?	the philosophical study of education and its problems
What fields make up field education and a field applied philosophy?	metaphysics, epistemology, axiology and the philosophical approaches
What is another term used for instructors?	teachers
What are the main subjects that are covered by the instructor?	reading, writing, mathematics, science and history
In the United States what is considered the single most important factor in a child's education?	quality of teachers
What is the theory behind Empirical analyses?	poor countries should grow faster than rich countries
What has been argued about high rates in education?	essential for countries to be able to achieve high levels of economic growth
What is greatly needed with technology transfer when it relates to education?	requires knowledgeable managers and engineers
Literature on how earnings and how it relates to schooling was greatly influenced by who?	Jacob Mincer
This view of how schooling and earnings has sparked a lot of studies, but what else has it brought up?	is also controversial
What was one of the main concerns of this literature on how schooling and earnings?	not achieve their full academic potential, due to financial difficulties
Which state borders Tennessee to the east?	North Carolina
Which mountains occupy much of eastern Tennessee?	Appalachian Mountains
Which river marks Tennessee's border to the west?	Mississippi River
What is the capital of Tennessee?	Nashville
What is Tennessee's most populous city?	Memphis
What government formed in 1772 is considered the forerunner of Tennessee?	Watauga Association
What state held territory that would later become part of Tennessee?	North Carolina
What date did Tennessee become one of the United States of America?	June 1, 1796
Which was the final state to join the Confederacy before Civil War fighting started?	Tennessee
Which of the Confederate states rejoined the Union first when the Civil War concluded?	Tennessee
Which part dominated Tennessee's politics in the late 1880s?	Democratic
Which Tennessee city was received significant federal investment in the 1940s?	Oak Ridge
What part of the Manhattan Project did Tennessee host?	uranium enrichment facilities
What made Tennessee politics more competitive again in the middle of the 20th century?	civil rights legislation
What locale in Memphis is know as the place where blues was born?	Beale Street
What Tennessee recording company first promoted Elvis Presley?	Sun Records
Which Tennessee city is home to the Country Music Hall of Fame?	Nashville
Which museum celebrating popular music is located in Jackson, Tennessee?	International Rock-A-Billy Museum
In which year is W.C. Handy first known to have been playing in Tennessee clubs?	1909
What is Tennessee's primary non-meat agricultural product?	soybeans
What trail forms part of the border Tennessee shares with North Carolina?	Appalachian Trail
Which national park in Tennessee sees more visitors that any other in the United States?	Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Which Tennessee city hosts the state's most famous aquarium?	Chattanooga
What tourist attraction is located in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee?	Dollywood
Who first recorded a territorial name in the region that resembles its current name Tennessee?	Captain Juan Pardo
Which Native Americans had a town called Tanasi in present day Monroe County, Tennessee?	Cherokee
Tanasi is know to have been located and mapped by British traders by which year?	1725
What nationality was Juan Pardo?	Spanish
Which governor is given credit for the name Tennessee as it is now spelled?	James Glen
Which work by Henry Timberlake made the current spelling of Tennessee widely popular?	Draught of the Cherokee Country
Which state created a county called Tennessee in 1788?	North Carolina
Which two Tennessee counties cover the area that comprised North Carolina's Tennessee County?	Montgomery County and Robertson County
In which year did a constitutional convention meet to form a new state out of the unincorporated territory that would become Tennessee?	1796
By what nickname is Tennessee officially known?	Volunteer State
Which major conflict that included the Battle of New Orleans is said to have given Tennessee its nickname?	War of 1812
How many volunteers did Tennessee send to the Mexican-American War?	30,000
What conflict overseen by President Polk might be the source of Tennessee's nickname?	Mexican–American War
Which local icon's death inspired many of the Tennessee volunteers during the Mexican-American War?	Davy Crockett
What is the elevation of Tennessee's highest point?	6,643 feet
What mountain in Tennessee is the Appalachian Trail's highest point?	Clingmans Dome
What river is situated on Tennessee point of lowest elevation?	Mississippi River
Which city marks the geographical center of Tennessee?	Murfreesboro
Approximately how many miles long is Tennessee's Ridge and Valley region?	55
What is the western part of the Tennessee Valley called?	the Great Valley
Which city is Tennessee's fourth largest?	Chattanooga
Together, Bristol, Johnson City, and Kingsport are known by what name?	the Tri-Cities
What river forms in the Tennessee Valley?	Tennessee River
Which Tennessee airport has the code TYS?	McGhee Tyson Airport
What is the name of the airport serving Chattanooga, TN?	Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport
What interstate highways cross the Grand Division in Tennessee?	I-24, I-81, I-40, I-75, and I-26
An airport with which code serves the Tri-Cities area in Tennessee?	TRI
What is the lowland area of Tennessee between the Tennessee River and Mississippi River called?	Tennessee Bottoms
What geographical region lies west of the Tennessee bottom land?	Mississippi Alluvial Plain
What maximum elevation is the land in the Mississippi Alluvial Plain?	300 feet (90 m) above sea level
What city is central to the economy of West Tennessee?	Memphis
What is the most common climate across Tennessee?	humid subtropical
Most of Tennessee has which type of climate?	humid subtropical
Which mountains contain those parts of Tennessee with a temperate climate?	Appalachians
Which body of ocean water affects Tennessee's climate the most?	Gulf of Mexico
What is Tennessee's average annual precipitation in inches?	50
Which range of months is Tennessee's wettest?	between December and April
What is Tennessee's average high temperature in degree Celsius during the summer?	32
What is the highest temperature ever recorded in Tennessee?	113 °F (45 °C)
Where was the highest known temperature in Tennessee recorded?	Perryville
What Fahrenheit temperature is the lowest ever recorded in Tennessee?	−32 °F
Where in Tennessee did the temperature reach -36 degrees Celsius in December of 1917?	Mountain City
Which hurricane brought damaging rains to Tennessee in 1995?	Hurricane Opal
On average, how many days each year are there thunderstorms in Tennessee?	50
Which parts of Tennessee are most threatened by tornadoes?	West and Middle Tennessee
How many tornadoes strike in Tennessee in an average year?	15
What year in the 1990s did an unusual blizzard visit Tennessee?	1993
Which cities other than Knoxville have been the capital of Tennessee?	Knoxville, Kingston, and Murfreesboro
How many counties are part of Nashville's metropolitan area?	13
What distance in miles is Clarksville, TN from Nashville?	45
Which city is Tennessee's sixth largest by population?	Murfreesboro
Which two of the six most populous Tennessee cities are nearest the Great Smoky Mountains?	Chattanooga and Knoxville
How many years ago was Tennessee first inhabited by humans?	12,000
What time period corresponds with the Mississippian cultural phase in early Tennessee history?	1000–1600 AD
Which Native American people are the first group to inhabit Tennessee that we know by name?	Muscogee
What do archaeologists call the cultural phase of the inhabitants of Tennessee between 1000 BC and 1000 AD?	Woodland
Which European nationality first explored the Tennessee region?	Spanish
Which year did Hernando de Soto explore Tennessee?	1540
Which Native American peoples were living in Tennessee when Juan Pardo explored the area?	Muscogee and Yuchi
Which Native American people left Tennessee for the Virginia area because of encroaching Europeans?	Cherokee
By which year had most of the Native Americans been forced out of the Tennessee region?	1838
In which year did the British first settle in what would become Tennessee?	1756
What was the name of the first British settlement in what is now Tennessee?	Fort Loudoun
Which British officer oversaw the construction of Fort Loudoun?	Captain Raymond Demeré
Which Cherokee faction forced the surrender of Fort Loudoun in 1760?	Overhill Cherokees
Which British commanding officer was killed the day after Cherokee took Fort Loudon in 1760?	Captain Paul Demeré
What did American settlers call the Cherokee who attacked Fort Watuaga in 1776?	the Chickamauga
Who lead the Cherokee attack on Fort Watuaga in 1776?	Dragging Canoe
What was the name of the Chickamauga leader's cousin who helped settlers escape his raids?	Nancy Ward
Who left Fort Watuaga, crossed the Appalachians, and attacked the British army in South Carolina in 1780?	Overmountain Men
Who lost the Battle of Kings Mountain in South Carolina?	the British Army
What was the name of the state that three North Carolina counties hoped to form in 1784?	Franklin
What was the name given to the land that North Carolina transferred to the federal government in 1790?	Southwest Territory
What town marked the western extent of the Cumberland Settlements?	French Lick
What other name does the North Carolina Road share with Daniel Boone's passage through the Cumberland Gap?	Wilderness Road
Which state was the first formed out of federally controlled territory?	Tennessee
In addition to the original thirteen, which two states were admitted to the union before Tennessee?	Vermont and Kentucky
Which mountain marked the starting point of the Tennessee border described by the state constitution?	Stone Mountain
When Tennessee's border was first defined, territory west of which river was considered for future annexation?	Mississippi River
Which US President oversaw the forced westward relocation of Cherokees beginning in 1838?	Martin Van Buren
How many Cherokee-owned black slaves were also relocated between 1838 and 1839?	2,000
What Cherokee phrase means "the trail where we cried?"	Nunna daul Isunyi
Which Native American nation's emigration was first associated with the term "Trail of Tears?"	Choctaw
Approximately how many Cherokees died along their "Trail of Tears?"	4,000
Which Tennessee governor championed secession in February of 1861?	Isham Harris
Which area of Tennessee was most resistant to secession?	East Tennessee
What percentage of voters voted against secession in Tennessee's February 1861 referendum?	54
On which date did Tennessee enter a military alliance with the Confederacy?	May 7, 1861
Which region of Tennessee swung in favor of secession in the June 1861 referendum?	Middle Tennessee
Which side won more Civil War battles in Tennessee?	Union
Which Union commander seized control of the Tennessee River in February 1862?	Ulysses S. Grant
During which month in 1862 did Union forces capture Memphis?	June
Union control of Middle Tennessee was reaffirmed by what battle in January 1863?	Battle of Murfreesboro
Which county in East Tennessee was more supportive of the Confederacy than its neighbors?	Sullivan County
Which Confederate general failed to capture the Union fort at Knoxville?	James Longstreet
Which Union general broke the Confederate siege of Chattanooga in November 1863?	Grant
Which Confederate general launched an attack on Chattanooga from Perryville, KY?	Braxton Bragg
Which battle did Confederate General Longstreet win in East Tennessee?	Battle of Bean's Station
Which forces controlled most of Tennessee when slaves were emancipated?	Union
Up to how many former slaves began fighting with for the Union after the Emancipation Proclamation?	200,000
Which edict freed slaves across most of the Confederacy, but technically not Tennessee?	Emancipation Proclamation
Who was elected Vice President of the United States in 1864?	Andrew Johnson
Which Confederate state's representation was readmitted to Congress first?	Tennessee
On which date were Tennessee's elected representatives restored to their offices in Washington D.C.?	July 24, 1866
Their ratification of which Amendment spared Tennessee a military governor during Reconstruction?	Fourteenth
In which year did Andrew Johnson become President?	1865
Who were targeted by restrictive laws passed in Southern states at the end of the 19th century?	African Americans
In which year did the Tennessee General Assembly pass electoral reform laws that disenfranchised most African Americans in the state?	1889
Who besides African Americans were victims of Tennessee's late-19th century electoral reform?	poor Whites
What is the name for laws dating from the late-19th century which promoted segregation?	Jim Crow laws
Approximately how many African Americans lived in Tennessee in 1900?	480,430
Which Tennessee Senator was the only Republican first-time Senator elected in 2006?	Bob Corker
Who was elected governor of Tennessee in 2002?	Phil Bredesen
Who was the first Republican Speaker of the Tennessee state senate since Democrats took control in the Reconstruction era?	Ron Ramsey
Which political party did the majority of conservative Tennessee voters support in the early 20th century?	Democratic
What was Tennessee's estimated population in 2015?	6,600,299
What percentage population increase did Tennessee experience between 2010 and 2015?	4.01%
How much of Tennessee's population increase between 2010 and 2015 was due to migration?	219,551
In 2008, what percentage of Tennessee residents were born outside the South?	Twenty percent
What net population increase during Tennessee's last two US Census reports was due to immigration from outside the country?	59,385
What was Tennessee's most common self-reported ethnic group in 2000?	American
What percent of Tennessee residents self-reported their ethnic group as Irish in 2000?	9.3%
Which European ancestries are most common among self-identified ethnic "Americans" in Tennessee?	English and Scotch-Irish
What European national ancestry was claimed by 45% of Tennessee residents in 1980?	English
What was Tennessee's population in 1980?	3,221,354
Which Protestant denomination has its headquarters in Nashville, TN?	National Baptist Convention
Which Tennessee city contains the headquarters of the Church of God and The Church of God of Prophecy?	Cleveland
The principle Bible college of the Free Will Baptists is located in which Tennessee city?	Nashville
Which two major Protestant denominations are based in Memphis?	Church of God in Christ and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church
Roughly how many farms are located in Tennesee?	82,000
Which livestock is the major focus of Tennessee agriculture?	beef cattle
When did cotton first become a large-scale agricultural product in Tennessee?	1820s
Which river landform partly in Tennessee provided the most fertile land for cotton production?	Mississippi Delta
Where in Tennessee is the headquarters of International Paper?	Memphis
Where is Nissan Motor Company's headquarters in the United States?	Franklin
Which company has a $2 billion production plant in Bradley County?	Wacker Chemie
Hemlock Semiconductor produces electronic components in which Tennessee city?	Clarksville
Which major global shipping company is based in Memphis?	FedEx
What types of income are exempt from Tennessee state income tax?	salaries and wages
At what rate is Tennessee state sales and use tax usually applied?	7%
Above which amount is inheritance tax applied in Tennessee?	$1,000,000
What is the sales tax on foodstuffs in Tennessee?	5.25%
Which edible items are taxed at the higher non-food sales and use tax rate in Tennessee?	candy, dietary supplements and prepared food
In which year did Tennessee tourism first exceed 100 million visitors?	2014
How many billions of dollars were spend by tourists in Tennessee in 2014?	17.7
How much tax revenue did tourism generate for Tennessee in 2014?	$1.5 billion
In 2014, which three Tennessee counties took in the most money from tourism?	Davidson, Shelby, and Sevier
What was the percentage increase in Tennessee's tourism-based jobs in 2014?	2.8%
Which other state sent Tennessee the most tourists in 2013?	Georgia
What percentage of out-of-state tourists stayed in Tennessee for four or more nights?	11%
What average daily amount did a tourist spend in Tennessee in 2013?	$118
What percentage of Tennessee tourists daily spending in 2013 went toward accommodation?	17%
In which state do the greatest percentage of Tennessee tourists reside?	Tennessee
Which city is the endpoint of I-26?	Kingsport
I-24 connects which two Tennessee cities?	Chattanooga to Clarksville
Which interstate highway running north-south passes through Memphis?	Interstate 55
Which interstate ends at a junction close to Dandridge, Tennessee?	Interstate 81
What Tennessee cities are connected by I-269?	Millington to Collierville
Which are the two main parties in Tennessee politics?	Republican and the Democratic
Which part of Tennessee voted more Republican in the years following the Civil War?	eastern
What type of farmers inhabited eastern Tennessee in the late 19th century?	yeoman
Which crops grown in West Tennessee had required a great deal of slave labor?	tobacco and cotton
Which party did most former slaves join when they were given the right to vote after the Civil War?	Republican
In which decade did the Tennessee legislature institute a poll tax?	1880s
Which party declined in Tennessee politics following voting reform legislation during Reconstruction?	Republican
What percentage of the Tennessee population was African-American in 1900?	23.8
In 1913, the Tennessee state legislature made which organizational structure the default form of city government in the state?	Board of Commission
Which Republican presidential candidate did Tennessee support in 1920?	Warren G. Harding
What religion was the Democratic presidential candidate that Tennessee voted against in 1928?	Catholic
How many times has Tennessee supported Democratic presidential candidates in the general elections since the 1950s?	four
Which Republican won the Presidency while carrying Tennessee in 1928?	Herbert Hoover
In 1960, what group made up 16.45% of Tennessee's population?	African Americans
What Congressional Act fully re-enfranchised African-American in Tennessee?	Voting Rights Act of 1965
Which Republican Senator's 1970 victory showed the Republican Party's renewed competitiveness in Tennessee?	Bill Brock
Which constituency has become the Republican Party's staunchest supporters in Tennessee?	white conservatives
Which Republican was elected Tennessee Governor in 1970?	Winfield Dunn
Which two Tennessee cities are most supportive of the Democratic Party?	Nashville and Memphis
Which Tennessee city has the largest African-American population?	Memphis
Which two eastern Tennessee congressional districts have the longest track record of favoring Republican candidates?	1st and 2nd
Since which year has Tennessee's 1st congressional district voted overwhelmingly Republican?	1881
Which two Tennessee metropolitan areas have been most supportive of the Republican Party?	Tri-Cities and Knoxville
Which Democratic candidate lost his own state in the 2000 general election?	Al Gore
By what percentage of the popular vote did George W. Bush carry Tennessee in 2004?	14%
Democratic presidential candidates from which region's states have fared best in recent Tennessee history?	Southern
Which 2000 presidential candidate was a former US Senator from Tennessee?	Al Gore
Which 1962 US Supreme Court ruling forced states to realign their voting districts to reflect census findings?	Baker v. Carr
What phrase expresses the Supreme Court's 1962 decision that population overrules geographic consideration in election districting?	one man, one vote
A bias in Tennessee politics favoring which type of geographical district gave rise to the Baker v. Carr Supreme Court case?	rural
Which type of geographical district became more powerful in Tennessee politics following the 1962 Supreme Court decision?	urban
Which Tennessee law enforcement agency looks for road safety violations?	Highway Patrol
Which Tennessee agency enforces state wildlife regulations outside of parks?	TWRA
What is the acronym for Tennessee's statewide criminal investigation agency?	TBI
Who provides law enforcement within Tennessee's state parks?	Tennessee State Park Rangers
Which law enforcement entity serves warrants in Tennessee?	Sheriff's Office
Each Tennessee county must elect which law enforcement official?	Sheriff
Who is in charge of policing Tennessee counties' unincorporated areas?	County Sheriff
Who polices incorporated areas of Tennessee's counties?	Municipal Police Departments
What proportion of Tennessee counties recognize their Sheriff as their head law enforcement official?	94 of the 95
What method did Tennessee use for capital punishment before 1913?	hanging
In which year was electrocution introduced as Tennessee's method of execution?	1916
How many inmates has Tennessee executed since 2000?	six
How many death row inmates were awaiting executing in Tennessee in April 2015?	73
How many prisoners did Tennessee execute between 1916 and 1960?	125
What is the nickname of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville athletic teams?	Volunteers
In which year did the University of Tennessee begin competing in the Southeastern Conference of the NCAA?	1932
How many college football bowl championships have the Tennessee Volunteers won?	25
How many national titles has the Tennessee Volunteers women's basketball team claimed?	8
What is the farthest the Tennessee Volunteers have progressed in the NCAA men's basketball tournament?	Elite Eight
What is post-punk?	heterogeneous type of rock music
When did post-punk arrive on the scene?	in the wake of the punk movement of the 1970s
What did post-punk artists use in their music?	critical theory, cinema, performance art and modernist literature
What began to spring up around the post-punk music?	independent record labels and fanzines
How did post-punk take on rock and roll?	conceptual assault
When was the original punk movement?	1970s
What is a name for a type of rock music that is extremely varied in sound?	Post-punk
What elements of punk rock did post-punk depart from?	musical conventions and wider cultural affiliations
What subject matter does post-punk commonly mesh its musical sensibilities with?	art and politics
What developed along with the music developments of post-punk?	subcultures
Who coined the term post-punk?	journalists in the late 1970s
What dis the new term, post-punk, cover?	groups moving beyond punk's sonic template into disparate areas
What inspired early post-punk artists?	punk's DIY ethic and energy
Why did post-punk fall out of love with punk?	commercial formula, rock convention and self-parody
What did the new post-punk artists believe?	"radical content demands radical form"
Who were the first to use the term "post-punk"?	journalists
When was "post-punk" first used to start describing artists?	late 1970s
What were many post-punk artists originally inspired by?	punk's DIY ethic and energy
How many chords did standard punk songs typically use?	three
What did post-punk artists feel there was an imperative to constantly do?	change
What were the things that post-punk really got into?	experimentation with production techniques
What are non-rock styles that post-punk used as inspiration?	dub, electronic music, disco, noise, jazz, krautrock, world music and the avant-garde
What aesthetic did Matthew Bannister associate with post-punk?	avant-garde
What music did post-punk end to reject?	high cultural references of 1960s rock artists
As a movement, post-punk has been characterized by its conceptual assault on what conventions?	rock
What does post-punk reject any of which are perceived as being traditionalist, hegemonic, or rockist?	aesthetics
What is one of the foundational aspects post-punk is deeply favorable towards?	experimentation
How did post-punk artists once again approach the studio?	as an instrument
What references did post-punk artists specifically reject of the 1960s rock artists?	high cultural
How did Nicholas Lezard describe post-punk?	fusion of art and music
Which artists were influential in post-punk?	Captain Beefheart and David Bowie
Which writers helped to influence the post-punk movement?	William S. Burroughs and J.G. Ballard
What was an intellectual focus of post-punk?	postmodernism
How did the post-punk movement feel about big business?	anti-corporatist
What was Nicholas Lezard's description of post-punk?	"a fusion of art and music"
Where did post-punk ram its appropriation of ideas into?	musical and pop cultural contexts
What tradition could be found in works by Captain Beefheart and David Bowie?	art school
What intellectual movement informed and influenced a variety of post-punk artists?	postmodernism
Why did many post-punk artists produce and release their own music?	anti-corporatist
Who described post-punk as "a more adventurous and arty form of punk"?	Stephen Thomas Erlewine
Who described post-punk as  "less a genre of music than a space of possibility"?	Simon Reynolds
Who said "so multifarious that only the broadest use of the term is possible" with regards to post-punk?	Nicholas Lezard
Who does music critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine work for?	AllMusic
What as the blanket term "post-punk" been the target of?	controversy
What organization is Stephen Thomas Erlewine associated with?	AllMusic
What have some people suggested post-punk doesn't have, instead being more about approaches and sensibilities?	unifying style
Why type of scholar is music journalist Simon Reynolds?	post-punk
Why is only the broadest use of genre possible when trying to categorize what actually defines post-punk?	multifarious
What is post-punk?	music that emerged from the cultural milieu of punk rock in the late 1970s
What else was music incorrectly catagorized into before post-punk?	new wave music
Why is the term post-punk sometimes disputed?	various groups commonly labeled post-punk in fact predate the punk rock movement
What is the acctepted era of post-punk?	between 1978 and 1984
What previous movement is post-punk often identified as coming after?	punk rock
What were many groups now labeled as post-punk initially categorized as?	punk or new wave music
Why has the prefix 'post' caused a bit of dispute as it relates to various post-punk groups?	predate the punk rock movement
Who has defined a period of when the post-punk era was?	Reynolds
Between what years did Reynolds identify the post-punk era as existing?	1978 and 1984
WHich independent music company was founded by Geoff Travis?	Rough Trade
Who founded Factory?	Tony Wilson
When did releasing music indepentently really hit popularity?	1977
Who released Spiral Scratch on their own label?	Buzzcocks
When did the indoe music scene begin to grow?	mid-1980s
What did many entrepreneurs interested in their local punk-influenced music scenes found?	independent record labels
Who founded the record label Rough Trade?	Geoff Travis
Where was Tony Wilson's Factory based?	Manchester
When did some groups start looking for methods to release their music themselves?	1977
Whose label did the Buzzcocks release their Spiral Scratch EP on?	their own
When did writers for Sounds first mention "post punk"?	late 1977
What did Wire do with sounds, lyrics and aesthetics which different a lot from their peers?	experimenting
What career path did Jon Savage take in life?	Writer
When did the Sex Pistols break up?	January 1978
Who was Siouxsie backed by?	the Banshees
What are examples of British bands termed post-punk?	Siouxsie and the Banshees and Wire
Who connsidered post-punk "harsh urban scrapings [,] controlled white noise" and "massively accented drumming"?	Jon Savage
Which band's lead singer was Johnny Rotten?	Sex Pistols
What was Johnny Rotten's real name?	John Lydon
When did the Sex Pistols break up?	1978
When the punk movement started shrinking, what began to fill the void left by their demise?	vibrant new scenes
What territory did the post-punk bands pursue in their works?	wider conceptual
What nationality's music magazines had an influential part of post-punk culture?	British
What professional is Ian Penman known from?	writers
What kind of background did many of the initial post-punk artists have?	art
Who were well known authors covering the post-punk era?	Jon Savage, Paul Morley and Ian Penman
What were popular post-punk culture media sources?	NME and Sounds
What were the bands coming in on the heels of post-punk beginning to sound like?	experimental sounds and wider conceptual territory
What was a common background of post-punk musicians?	backgrounds in art
What was a common theme to post-punk music?	political or aesthetic agendas
Who was responsible for disbanding the Sex Pistols?	Lydon
What group declared itself to be anti-music of any kind?	Public Image Ltd
Where did Joy Division hail from?	Manchester
What type of literature contributed to Joy Division's unique style?	modernist
What end of the political spectrum was the political philosophy of Gang of Four?	Leftist
What band did Johnny Rotten form after the Sex Pistols?	Public Image Ltd
What kind of group was Public Image Ltd?	"anti music of any kind"
Which bands combined way left politics with art school studies?	Scritti Politti, Gang of Four and This Heat
What are some British post-punk bands from Manchester?	Joy Division, The Fall and A Certain Ratio
Which post-punk bands began to branch off into things like dub and dance music?	Pop Group and the Slits
What type of producer was Martin Hannett?	post-punk
What type of production techniques did Dennis Bovell develop?	innovative
What took a central roll for the emerging post-punk music?	studio experimentation
What eventually resulted in the pioneering of industrial music?	crude production techniques
Whose independent label became a hub for the industrial scene?	Throbbing Gristle's
Who were producers that led the way with emerging the post-punk culture?	Martin Hannett and Dennis Bovell
What was the name of Throbbing Gristle's record label?	Industrial Records
Which bands were on the forefront of industrial music?	Cabaret Voltaire and Throbbing Gristle
Where did industrial music get it's name?	Industrial Records
What was one of the most important ways that post-punk artists created their new sound?	studio experimentation
What nationality began birthing groups who expanded the vocabulary of punk music?	American
From what region did the group Devo originate?	Midwestern
Where was the band Talking Heads based out of?	New York
Who did the Talking Heads begin a series of collaborations with in 1978?	Brian Eno
What region's post-punk scene incorporated ideas from Theater of Cruelty?	San Francisco's
When did the American groups begin to really get in on the post-punk movement?	mid 1970s
Which American bands had ties to the Manchester punk scene?	Television and Suicide
What were some Midwestern punk bands?	Pere Ubu and Devo
What did Pere and Devo draw inspiration for their music from?	derelict industrial environments
What were groups in San Francisco's post-punk scene?	Chrome, the Residents and Tuxedomoon
What type of worldview did New York's no wave movement tend to have?	nihilistic
The Contortions, Teenage Jesus and the Jerks were all musicians part of what movement?	No wave
Who produced the compilation "No New York"?	Eno
What no wave-affiliated label was founded in 1978?	ZE Records
In addition to non-rock styles, what did some of the no-wave groups experiment with sonically?	noise, dissonance and atonality
What was no wave?	a short-lived art and music scene that began in part as a reaction against punk's recycling of traditionalist rock tropes
What type of a view did no wave have?	an abrasive, confrontational and nihilistic
What types of musicians were the Contortions, Teenage Jesus and the Jerks, Mars, DNA, Theoretical Girls and Rhys Chatham?	No wave
When was ZE Records founded?	1978
What was considered the true portrait of the no wave movement?	No New York
How did critics respond to British post-punk groups in the 1980s?	support
What nationality was the critic who positively characterized Britain's postpunk scene in an 1980 Rolling Stone article?	American
What about the sense of paradox in postpunk different in relation to the pop music of the day?	unique
What corporation was John Peel a DJ for?	BBC
What were Fast, Mute, and Glass in the context of post-punk music?	record labels
When did British post-punk emerge?	1980s
Who said that British post-punk was "sparked by a tension, humour and sense of paradox plainly unique in present day pop music"?	Greil Marcus
What British post-punk bands had success in the popular charts?	PiL and Joy Division
Which record labels really supported the British post-punk movement?	Industrial, Fast, E.G., Mute, Axis/4AD and Glass
What popular DJ supported the emergence of British post-punk?	BBC DJ John Peel
What did the magazines catering to post-punk interest do to alienate their readers?	increasingly esoteric writing
Many of the big players in the post-punk scene began leaning away from what as time progressed?	underground aesthetics
What writer advocated "overground brightness"?	Paul Morley
Which magazine tied to the post-punk movement lost half of its circulation?	NME
What did the club-oriented scene emphasize instead of the experimental seriousness of earlier post-punk groups?	glamour, fashion, and escapism
What did authors and artists begin advocating for instead of the underground scene?	overground brightness
What began to alienate the readers from publications such as NME?	increasingly esoteric writing
Who did Paul Morley collaborate with on the Art of Noise?	engineer Gary Langan and programmer J. J. Jeczalik
What did the Art of Noise hope to accomplish?	attempt to bring sampled and electronic sounds to the pop mainstream
Which new cultural movement began to emphasize glam, escapism and fashion?	New Romantic
What style of music was Gary Numan associated with?	synthpop
What did the synthpop style of music benefit from the gaining popularity of?	MTV
Synthpop heavily borrowed elements from what type of music?	electronic and synthesizer music
What type of ideas did post-punk artists attempt to sneak into mainstream pop?	subversive
What did some post-punk artists reject their previous avant-garde practices to pursue?	commercial success
What new music style focused on electronic and synthesized sounds?	synthpop
What really helped to launch synthpop?	MTV
What else began to emerge as post-punk groups moved to a more commercial focus?	pop
How did pos-punk give rise to pop?	post-punk artists attempted to bring subversive ideas into the pop mainstream
When did Manhattan's no wave scene start becoming more dance-oriented?	early 1980s
What formula did a lot of the artists emerging from the scene adhere to?	"anything at all + disco bottom"
What type of party could be found at venues like Club 57?	decadent
Who did the venues because cultural hubs for?	musicians and visual artists alike
What movement was the group the Lounge Lizards indebted to?	no wave
What did Downtown Manhattan's no wave scene transition into?	dance-oriented sound
What type of sound did no wave have before it began to transition to a more dance oriented sound?	abrasive
When was ZE's Mutant Disco released?	1981
What clubs were frequented by artists in the emerging dance scene?	Club 57 and the Mudd Club
Where did some groups develop a unique style of industrial music?	Germany
What type of music included noise, homemade instruments, and randomly found objects?	industrial
What country had a post-punk scene after a generation of rock?	Brazil
What type of album was The Sexual Life of the Savages?	compilations
What countries other than Brazil was Brazil's no wave music exported to?	UK, Germany
What type of music was associated with Einstürzende Neubauten?	industrial
Where was Einstürzende Neubauten from?	Germany
How did Einstürzende Neubauten come up with their new industrial sound?	avant-garde noise, homemade instruments and found objects
Who did members of Einstürzende Neubauten also collaborate with?	the Birthday Party
Where was Madame Satã?	Brazil
What type of music did many of the post-punk bands start indulging in?	pop
How did bands associated with the original post-punk movement cause it to end?	turned away from its aesthetics
What venue drove a lot of the awareness of the music from the now pop post-punk bands?	MTV
Where was a lot of the post-punk pop bands played in addition to MTV?	American college radio
What band combined religious imagery with political commentary into their music?	U2
What was the death knell of the post-punk movement?	commercial sounds
What else would the post-punk bands record under?	pop
Who was the most successful band to arrise from post-punk?	U2
What was one of the most popular concepts of the pop movement?	entryism
What was a driving force behind the revival of the second British Invasion of New Music to America?	MTV and modern rock radio stations
How did most critical writing treat the post-punk era, until recently?	dismissed
What do contemporary scholars feel the post-punk period contributed in hindsight?	significant innovations and music
What did Simon Reynolds describe the era of post-punk as a match for in terms of great music created?	the sixties
Who wrote that the music of the post-punk era was avant-garde?	Nicholas Lezard
What were the post-punk era artists more interested in doing to their audiences than in entertaining them with pop songs?	disturbing
What era was usually dismissed as merely an awkward phase of music?	post-punk
What do comtemporary scholars think that post-punk actually did for music?	produced significant innovations and music on its own
Which critic said that the post-punk period was open to any possibilities as far as music went?	Nicholas Lezard
Who said that the post-punk movement rivaled the Sixties in the shear amount of great music produced?	Simon Reynolds
What did Nicholas Leonard say united post-punk?	cerebral, concocted by brainy young men and women interested as much in disturbing the audience, or making them think, as in making a pop song
What musical styles did post-punk help merge?	white and black musical styles
What beginnings rose from the dead ashes of post-punk?	various subsequent genres
New wave, industrial music, synthpop and house all share roots in what genre?	post-punk
What style of music did post-punk band the Cure play in?	darker, more morose
What genre of music did Joy Division help in the development of?	gothic rock
Which type of eclectic music had a huge variety, large innovations and an "anything goes" mentality?	Post-punk
Which darker post-punk bands gave rise to gothic rock?	Joy Division, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bauhaus and the Cure
Where did systhpop, industrial and neo-psychedelia music derive from?	Post-punk
What type of music was gothic rock?	darker, more morose style
What styles of music did post-punk pave the way for?	new wave, dance-rock, New Pop, industrial music, synthpop, post-hardcore, neo-psychedelia alternative rock and house music
When did a post-punk revival start happening in England and the Colonies?	turn of the 21st century
What early sign heralded the post-punk revival?	emergence of various underground bands
When did some of the darker post-punk bands start to appear in the indie scene?	the 2010s
The post-punk revival bands bring in a fanbase from what subculture?	indie music
What band played music similar to that of the early British post-punk bands of the late '70s as recently as 2010?	Savages
When was the post-punk revival in British and American cultures?	turn of the 21st century
Who were the most commercially successful bands of the post-punk revival?	the Strokes, Franz Ferdinand, Interpol, Neils Children and Editors
When did the commercially successful post-punk bands begin to hit the scene?	late 1990s to early 2000s
What was the earliest sign of the post-punk revival?	emergence of various underground bands in the mid-'90s
Which dark post-punk bands began to emmerge in the indie scene?	Cold Cave, She Wants Revenge, Eagulls, the Soft Moon, She Past Away and Light Asylum
Which North American version of football calls for 12 player per side on the field?	Canadian
How many yards wider is a Canadian football field than an American football field?	10
Which version of North American football has smaller end zones?	American
How many downs does a team have to advance ten yards in Canadian football?	three
How far away from the line of scrimmage must Canadian football defenders be?	1 yard
On which date was the Canadian Junior Football League formed?	May 8, 1974
How old are the players in the Quebec Junior Football League?	18–22
What trophy is awarded to the winner of Canadian inter-university football competition?	Vanier Cup
What institution memorializes great Canadian football achievements?	Canadian Football Hall of Fame
On which date was the first Canadian football game for which a written record has survived?	October 15, 1862
Which team won the first recorded Canadian football game?	First Battalion Grenadier Guards
What is the oldest football club in Canada?	Hamilton Football Club
Which founder of Milton, MA also helped develop the rules of Canadian football?	Christopher Gwynn
What was the first final score recorded of a Canadian football game?	3 goals, 2 rouges to nothing
On which date was the first governing body for Canadian football formed?	March 24, 1873
Which governing organization for Canadian football was formed on June 12, 1880?	Canadian Rugby Football Union
In which year was the Western Interprovincial Football Union founded?	1936
Which Canadian football union expanded its scope in 1891?	Canadian Rugby Football Union
Which organization founded in 1956 evolved into the modern Canadian Football League?	Canadian Football Council
Which Canadian football rules did the ORFU adopt in 1903?	Burnside
Which three Canadian football unions resisted the Burnside Rules?	CIRFU, QRFU and CRU
In which year did forward passes become acceptable in Canadian football?	1929
Which style of North American football changed the rules of their game the most from their earliest versions?	American
Who donated a championship trophy for Canadian football teams in 1909?	Albert Grey
When did professional teams begin to dominate the Canadian football championship?	1940s and early 1950s
Which trophy was awarded to a Canadian football champion beginning in 1909?	Grey Cup
Which was the last amateur team to compete for the Canadian football championship?	Ontario Rugby Football Union
What government position was held by the man who donated the Grey Cup to Canadian football?	The Governor General of Canada
Which one country besides Canada has hosted a professional Canadian football game?	United States
In which year did the CFL first attempt an expansion into the United States?	1992
Which American CFL team won the Grey Cup?	Baltimore Stallions
The return of an NFL team to which city contributed to the demise of the CFL's American expansion?	Baltimore
How many years did the CFL South Division last?	three
Which organization oversees amateur Canadian football?	Football Canada
How many football teams compete in Canadian Interuniversity Sport?	26
Which trophy goes to the Canadian Interuniversity Sport football champion?	Vanier Cup
What is the name of the championship game for junior Canadian football teams?	Canadian Bowl
Which provinces field teams in the Quebec Junior Football League?	Ontario and Quebec
How many yards wide is a Canadian football field?	65
How long in meters is the crossbar of a Canadian football goal?	5.6
What part of a Canadian football field was sometimes marked with a "G"?	goal line
What distance from the sidelines are hash marks painted on a CFL field?	24 yards (21.9 m)
Which team calls heads or tails in the coin flip before a CFL game?	visiting
Who on a football team articulates the team's decision following the coin flip?	captain
What can the team that wins the coin toss choose besides whether they wish to kick off or receive the ball?	which direction of the field to play in
Who makes a choice after the team that wins the coin toss has made their decision?	the opposing captain
What is the term for play stopped because the ball carrier, although not fully tackled, can no longer advance the ball?	forward progress
Where does the next play start unless a team has just scored?	scrimmage
Which parts of the ball carrier's body do not cause play to stop when they touch the ground?	feet and hands
Which direction of pass causes play to stop when it is not caught?	forward
What minimum distance from the sideline does the official place the ball before play starts?	24 yards
What is the term for the line across the field where the ball is positioned before a play?	line of scrimmage
How many players must the team with possession place near the line of scrimmage?	seven
How close to the line of scrimmage can defensive players approach before a play is run?	one yard
How many players does each side field in an American football game?	11
What is the term for the team who begins a play with control of the ball?	offence
What is the initial backward movement of the ball in a play called?	the snap
Which two players most commonly receive the first backward pass in a football play?	quarterback or punter
What is another term for a completed play?	down
How many plays can the offence run without gaining ten yards?	three
What does a team do when they have not advance the ball enough to score or likely gain a new set of downs?	punt
How many downs does a team get after they've gained ten on their first down?	three
What is the term for the player that is currently handing the football when play is underway?	ball carrier
Within what distance from the line of scrimmage can offensive players who do not have the ball be legally contacted by defensive players?	one yard
What are two illegal ways to block an opposing player's progress near the line of scrimmage?	hold or trip
Which player may not be tackled immediately after they have thrown a pass?	quarterback
What is the usual penalty when the rules of play are violated?	loss of yardage
How many yards does a team lose when they commit a minor penalty?	five
How many yards does a team lose for face-masking?	15
What other than yardage is sometimes awarded the offence on a defensive penalty?	first down
Where is the ball placed when a defensive penalty is committed in their own end zone?	one-yard line
In which North American style of football is the line of scrimmage never inside the one-yard line?	Canadian
A play that results in what outcome will never also be a scoring play?	Penalties
How many penalty yards are awarded when the ball is nearer the goal line than the usual penalty yardage?	half the distance to the goal line
Who can decline a penalty?	the non-penalized team
A team receiving a punt cannot decline a penalty on which down?	3rd down
The outcome of which play determines the placement of the ball when a penalty is declined?	the previous play
What can a team do when they prefer the original outcome of a play to the situation they would have with a penalty assessed on the other team for that play?	decline the penalty
At which point in a game is the time the offence takes to put the ball in play measured?	last three minutes of a half
How many seconds elapse before a time count penalty is assessed?	20
What is the penalty for a time count on the first two downs?	loss of down
Who can turn the ball over to the other side if an offensive team incurs too many time count violations?	referee
How many yards does the offense lose for a time count on third down?	10
What happens to a quarter whose time expires while the ball is still live in play?	extended
Which plays do not cause time to run off the clock during the final minutes of a half?	convert attempts
What causes a quarter to be extended one additional play even if time has run out?	penalty
How long is a quarter in minutes?	15
What determines which team gets possession first when extending a game to break a tie?	coin toss
At which yard line on their opponent's side does a team take possession of the ball according to the CFL's tie-breaking rules?	35
In which year did the CFL begin requiring teams to attempt 2-point conversions after scoring in a tie-breaking situation?	2010
Which round of tie-breaking is the last possible round in a regular season CFL game?	second
Which CFL games require tie-breaking rounds continue until a winner results?	playoff or championship
What countries led the two coalitions during the Seven Years' War?	two coalitions, led by Great Britain on one side and France
What major power of the time was not involved in The Seven Years' War?	It involved every great power of the time except the Ottoman Empire
When was the Seven Year' War fought?	The Seven Years' War was fought between 1755 and 1764
What country emerged as the world's predominate power?	Britain rose as the world's predominant power
What was the Seven Years' War considered as the prelude to?	Considered a prelude to the two world wars
Who made the first strike of the Seven Years' War?	Prussia preemptively struck
What area was the site of the first action in the Seven Years' War	Saxony
What country allied with Prussia?	Prussia's alliance with Britain
What was the initial country to ally with France?	Austria formed an alliance with France
The smaller German states joined which side?	Anglo-Prussian alliance was joined by smaller German states
With whom did the Dutch Republic align?	The Dutch Republic, long-time British ally, kept its neutrality intact
Which side of the coalitions did Naples, Sicily and Savoy join?	Naples, Sicily, and Savoy, although sided with Franco-Spanish party, declined to join the coalition under the fear of British power
How did the war impact the Russian population?	The taxation needed for war caused the Russian people considerable hardship
What items had already been taxed by Russian Empress Elizabeth?	being added to the taxation of salt and alcohol begun by Empress Elizabeth in 1759
What two countries concluded a separate peace with Prussia?	Like Sweden, Russia concluded a separate peace with Prussia.
What did Britain gain in North America from the war?	Great Britain, which gained the bulk of New France in North America, Spanish Florida
What did Great Britain gain in the West Indies from the war?	some individual Caribbean islands in the West Indies,
What did Great Britain gain in Africa from the war?	the colony of Senegal on the West African coast
What happened to the scope of France's colonies as a result of the war?	France was deprived of many of its colonies
How did the war impact France financially?	had saddled itself with heavy war debts that its inefficient financial system could barely handle
What is the grandest label that historians have used to describe the  Seven Years' War?	The war has been described as the first "world war"
What does the term "Second Hundred Years' War" describe?	The term "Second Hundred Years' War" has been used in order to describe the almost continuous level of world-wide conflict during the entire 18th century,
What is the precedent for the "Second Hundred Year's War?	reminiscent of the more famous and compact struggle of the 14th century
What was a later conflict that some considered the first World War?	to later conflicts like the Napoleonic Wars
What was Sweden's motivation to join the war?	Sweden, fearing Prussia's expansionist tendencies, went to war in 1757 to protect its Baltic dominions,
What country did Spain invade?	Spain, bound by the Pacte de Famille, intervened on behalf of France and together they launched a disastrous invasion of Portugal
When did Spain invade?	Spain, bound by the Pacte de Famille, intervened on behalf of France and together they launched a disastrous invasion of Portugal in 1762
What region did Austria hope to recapture?	Austria formed an alliance with France, seeing an opportunity to recapture Silesia, which had been lost in a previous war
What was the result of the invasion by Spain?	Spain, bound by the Pacte de Famille, intervened on behalf of France and together they launched a disastrous invasion
Why did Denmark-Norway remain neutral rather than assisting its longtime ally, Britain?	The Dutch Republic, long-time British ally, kept its neutrality intact, fearing the odds against Britain and Prussia fighting the great powers of Europe
Who would Sicily and Savoy normally align with?	Sicily, and Savoy, although sided with Franco-Spanish party
What did Russian Empress Elizabeth use the proceeds of the tax on salt and alcohol for?	the taxation of salt and alcohol begun by Empress Elizabeth in 1759 to complete her addition to the Winter Palace.
Why did Naples remain neutral?	Naples, Sicily, and Savoy, although sided with Franco-Spanish party, declined to join the coalition under the fear of British power
What did Great Britain gain with respect to the French trading outposts on the subcontinent of India?	superiority over the French trading outposts
What was the result for the Native American tribes?	The Native American tribes were excluded from the settlement
What did the Native American tribes accomplish in the later Pontiac's War?	; a subsequent conflict, known as Pontiac's War, was also unsuccessful in returning them to their pre-war status.
What were two factors that redeemed the outcome for the Prussians?	good luck and successful strategy
Who was the leader of Prussia?	King Frederick the Great
Who was the traditional partner with Great Britain at the beginning of the conflict?	Great Britain and Austria, had coalesced
What was gained or lost by Austria?	British military effort had not saved Silesia for Austria
What was the major gain by Great Britain by having Austria as it ally?	British subsidies to Austria had produced nothing of much help to the British
What alliances were formed in the "diplomatic reversal"?	The collapse of that system and the aligning of France with Austria and of Great Britain with Prussia constituted what is known as the “diplomatic revolution”
Did the loss of Silesia by Austria intensify its battle with Prussia?	. Prussia, having secured Silesia, had come to terms with Austria
What Russian-Austrian agreement preceded the Seven Years War that started in 1755-56?	June 2, 1746, Austria and Russia concluded a defensive alliance that covered their own territory and Poland against attack by Prussia or the Ottoman Empire
According to the Russian-Austrian pact of 1746, what would happen to Silesia in the event of hostilities with Prussia?	They also agreed to a secret clause that promised the restoration of Silesia and the countship of Glatz (now Kłodzko, Poland) to Austria
What other area was mentioned regarding Prussian dominion in the Russian-Austrian pact?	the countship of Glatz (now Kłodzko, Poland) to Austria
What individual was the main target of the pact?	Their real desire, however, was to destroy Frederick’s power altogether
Why couldn't Petrovich persuade Austria to invade Prussia?	he could not persuade Austrian statesman Wenzel Anton von Kaunitz to commit to offensive designs against Prussia
What was the house of king George II?	Hanover
Name two diverse geographies that king George II had to protect.	his commitments in Germany were counterbalanced by the demands of the British colonies overseas
How anxious was France to assist Prussia to take over Hanover?	it had no desire to divert forces to central Europe for Prussia's interest.
Why would France want to invade Hanover?	France was very much interested in colonial expansion and was willing to exploit the vulnerability of Hanover in war against Great Britain
What was Britain's obligation to Hanover if colonial expansion via war with France was to be resumed?	Hanover had to be secured against Franco-Prussian attack
What was the objective of le Secret du roi?	goal of pursuing personal political objectives that were often at odds with France’s publicly stated policies
Who did King Louis XV want on the Polish throne?	his kinsman Louis François de Bourbon, prince de Conti,
What was King Louis XV's secret ambition for Sweden and Turkey?	Sweden, and Turkey as French client states in opposition to Russian and Austrian interests
What French official was kept in the dark about le Secret du roi?	Unbeknownst to his foreign minister,
What countries did King Louis XV want keep in his sphere of influence to thwart the interests of Russia?	Poland, Sweden, and Turkey as French client states in opposition to Russian
What two geographies did Frederick want for Prussia?	Saxony and Polish west Prussia
What country would refuse support if Frederick wen to war for Saxony and west Prussia?	could not expect French support
What was his concern about trying take Hanover from the British?	he might fall victim to an Austro-Russian attack
What kept Augustus III from consolidating Saxony and Poland?	the two territories were physically separated by Brandenburg and Silesia
Who was Poland's ancient ally?	Poland, despite its union with the ancient lands of Lithuania,
What country was pleased that Britain used its Hanover vote to elect Joseph as Te Holy Roman Emperor?	Austria
What country and person were displeased that Britain used it Hanover vote to elect Joseph as the Holy Roman Emporer?	Frederick and Prussia
What was the French view about the dismemberment of Prussia?	saw the complete dismemberment of Prussia as unacceptable to the stability of Central Europe.
What was a major objective of Britain in joining the Austro-Russian alliance?	to protect Hanover's interests against France.
What was Kaunitz's objective with the French?	Kaunitz kept approaching the French in the hope of establishing such alliance with Austria
What was Kaunitz of Austria willing to trade for French help in capturing Silesia?	willing to trade Austrian Netherlands for France's aid
What did Russia use Britain's money for?	to station 50,000 troops on the Livonian-Lithunian border, so they could defend Britain's interests in Hanover
What countries teamed together at the Convention of Westminster?	Britain and Prussia
When was the Convention of Westminster signed?	January 16, 1756
Why was Beshuzev happy to put the troops on the Livonian-Lithunian border?	Besthuzev, assuming the preparation was directed against Prussia,
What was the response of Empress Elizabeth of Russia to the English-Prussian agreement?	Empress Elizabeth of Russia was outraged
Why was France mad at the British-Prussian agreement?	France was so enraged, and terrified, by the sudden betrayal of its only ally. Austria,
France was now in a desperate position, what did they do?	France was forced to accede to the Austro-Russian alliance
Who were the parties to the treaty of Versailles?	Austria, particularly Kaunitz, used this situation to their utmost advantage. The now-isolated France
How many troops did Austria and France pledge to defend each other?	24.000 troops
Where did the French build Fort Duquesne?	the Forks" where the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers meet to form the Ohio River
What city is now located where Fort Duquesne was built?	Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Were the British successful in stopping the building of Fort Duquesne?	British attempts to halt this fort construction were unsuccessful
Who led the British militia to drive the French out of Fort Duquesne?	Led by George Washington
Where did the French for General George Washington's surrender?	Fort Necessity
Which country dispatched regular troops to North America?	Britain and France
What was the result of the British attack on Ft Duquesne?	the expedition ended in disastrous defeat
Who led the British assault on Ft. Duquesne?	British Major General Edward Braddock
What was the result of the naval encounter between Britain and France?	Admiral Edward Boscawen fired on the French ship Alcide on 8 June 1755, capturing it and two troop ships
Who won the Battle of Lake George?	inconclusive
How much effort did France put into wars to defend its colonies?	It would let colonies defend themselves or would offer only minimal help
Identify a major factor in this feckless strategy by France of not defending its colonies with enthusiasm?	geography, coupled with the superiority of the British navy, made it difficult
Why did the French rulers need a large domestic army?	several long land borders made an effective domestic army imperative
How much success did France have in adding European territory with this approach?	France had few counterbalancing European successes.
In treaty negotiations, what trades did France hope to make.	in treaty negotiations, to trade territorial acquisitions in Europe to regain lost overseas possessions.
How did the British avoid having large contingents of troops in continental Europe?	allying themselves with one or more Continental powers whose interests were antithetical to those of their enemies,
Identify an advantage that Britain had during the Seven Year's War.	Britain could turn London's enormous financial power to military advantage
Who led the armies supporting British interests in central Europe?	Frederick the Great of Prussia
What country was driven into an alliance with France by the British pairing with Prussia?	leaving Austria to side with France
How did the British behave in defending their colonies compared to the French approach?	In marked contrast to France, Britain strove to prosecute the war actively in the colonies
What was the grand strategy of prime minister William Pitt?	a grand strategy of seizing the entire French Empire
What was Pitt's primary military advantage?	Britain's main weapon was the Royal Navy
What locations did Pitt want from France?	North America and India
How did Pitt plan to augment the British regular troops?	He also planned to use colonial forces from the Thirteen American colonies
How did Pitt's strategy affect Britain's future plans?	even after that the British continued his strategy
What was the reason that the British Prime Minister thought that ware in Europe could be prevented?	the new series of alliances could prevent war from breaking out in Europe
What country initiated conflict?	the French opened the campaign against the British by an attack on Minorca
What was the result for Admiral Byng?	Admiral Byng was court-martialed and executed
When was war declared between Britain and France?	War between Britain and France had been formally declared on 18 May
How did the timing of the declaration of war compare to the conflicts in North America between Britain and France?	nearly two years after fighting had broken out in the Ohio Country.
How did Frederick II of Prussia respond to news of British and French clashes in North America?	he led Prussian troops across the border of Saxony
What country was Saxony aligned with?	Saxony, one of the small German states in league with Austria
Fpr what possession of Prussia was the Saxony invasion a distraction?	pre-emption of an anticipated Austro-French invasion of Silesia
What was one goal of the invasion of Saxony?	he would seize Saxony and eliminate it as a threat to Prussia
What was another goal of the invasion of Saxony?	to advance into Bohemia where he might set up winter quarters at Austria's expense
How did Frederick protect Silesia when he went to invade Saxony?	leaving Field Marshal Count Kurt von Schwerin in Silesia with 25,000 soldiers to guard against incursions from Moravia or Hungary
How did Frederick protect East Prussia when he went to invade Saxony?	leaving Field Marshal Hans von Lehwaldt in East Prussia to guard against Russian invasion from the east
Describe the command of Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick.	a column of about 15,000 men
Describe the command of the Duke ofBrunswich-Bevern.	a column of 18,000 men
Describe the command of Field Marshall James Keith	a corps of 30,000 troops.
How much resistance did Frederick encounter in Saxon?	Saxon and Austrian armies were unprepared, and their forces were scattered.
What reinforcements were the Saxons expecting?	Frederick prevented the isolated Saxon army from being reinforced by an Austrian army under General Browne
What happened to the Saxon army?	Saxon army surrendered in October 1756, and was forcibly incorporated into the Prussian army
What was the result of the fury of Europe?	led to the strengthening of the anti-Prussian coalition
What characteristic of Saxony caused Europe to be mad?	attack on neutral Saxony caused outrage
How did Britain Protect Hanover?	combined force of allied German states was organised by the British to protect Hanover
How did the British support Prussia?	shipping supplies and ₤670,000
Why did the Dutch reject Britain's offer to join the alliance?	the Dutch wished to remain fully neutral
Who had done better, the Prussians in Europe or the Brits in North America?	successful for the Prussian-led forces on the continent, in contrast to disappointing British campaigns in North America.
Who led the force to defend Hanover?	under the command of the Duke of Cumberland
Where did the Austrians retreat in May of 1757?	the fortifications of Prague
What were casualties like in the 1757 battle in Prague?	both forces suffered major casualties
Who led the Prussian assault on Prague in 1757	Frederick II
Why did Frederick reduce his manpower at Prague?	Frederick took 5,000 troops from the siege at Prague and sent them to reinforce the 19,000-man army under the Duke of Brunswick-Bevern at Kolin in Bohemia
How did Austrian Marshall Daun reverse the situation at Prague?	picked up 16,000 men who had escaped from the battle. With this army he slowly moved to relieve Prague.
What led to the defeat of the Prussians at Memel?	five days of artillery bombardment
How did the Russians used the captured Memel?	used Memel as a base to invade East Prussia
What caused the Russians based in Memel to be successful deeper into Prussia?	defeated a smaller Prussian force
What was Frederick's response to the Russian invasion?	he was now forced to withdraw further into Prussian-controlled territory
What additional country felt emboldened to invade Prussia?	Sweden
What were reasons that the late 1757 time frame looked bad for Prussia?	the Austrians mobilising to attack Prussian-controlled soil and a French army under Soubise approaching from the west
What was the initial result of the French invasion?	Frederick devastated Prince Soubise's French force at the Battle of Rossbach on 5 November 1757
What was the result of the Austrian invasion?	then routed a vastly superior Austrian force at the Battle of Leuthen on 5 December 1757
Name the four opponents of Prussia.	(France from the West, Austria from the South, Russia from the East and Sweden from the North)
What German areas were beginning to oppose Prussia?	a number of smaller German states such as Bavaria had been established under Austrian leadership
What Hanoverian leader lost the Battle of Hastenbeck?	Cumberland
What country won the battle at Hanover?	French
How would one describe the future participation of Hanover?	Convention removed Hanover and Brunswick from the war
How did Frederick respond to the defeat at Hanover?	Frederick sent urgent requests to Britain for more substantial assistance
Why did Ferdinand feel comfortable withdrawing troops from the eastern front?	Calculating that no further Russian advance was likely until 1758
What was the result of Prussian resistance to Sweden?	the Prussian army drove the Swedes back, occupied most of Swedish Pomerania
What area of Sweden was occupied by Prussia?	occupied most of Swedish Pomerania
What favorable developments occurred for Prussia in Hanover?	Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, regrouped his army and launched a series of offensives that drove the French back across the River Rhine.
What political development shaped the policy of the British?	successive governments led by Newcastle and Pitt had fallen. In August 1757, the two men agreed to a political partnership and formed a coalition
What Hungarian general humiliated the Prussians?	Count András Hadik
What city did Hadik occupy?	occupied part of their capital, Berlin, for one night
How was Berlin spared?	city was spared for a negotiated ransom of 200,000 thalers
How did Hadik respond to the Frederick force?	Hadik, however, left the city with his Hussars and safely reached the Austrian lines
What was Frederick's response to the occupation by Hadik?	he immediately sent a larger force to free the city
Where did Frederick invade in 1758	Frederick launched an invasion of Moravia
What city did Frederick lay siege to?	Olmütz
What turned the battle for Olmutz against Frederick?	Austrian victory at the Battle of Domstadtl that wiped out a supply convoy destined for Olmütz,
How did Frederick respond to the loss of a supply convoy?	Frederick broke off the siege and withdrew from Moravia.
What was the annual financial commitment by Britain to Frederick?	an annual subsidy of £670,000
How did Britain assist the defense of Hanover?	Britain also dispatched 9,000 troops to reinforce Ferdinand's Hanoverian army
What caused alarm in France?	re-captured the port of Emden in March 1758 before crossing the Rhine with his own forces
Who did Ferdinand repel from Ha nover?	the French
Did Ferdinand permanently occupy France?	he was compelled by the successful manoeuvering of larger French forces to withdraw across the Rhine
How did Frederick respond to the Russian occupation of east Prussia?	marched to counter it.
How large a force did Frederick send against the occupying Russians?	35,000 men
How many Russians were in defense?	Russian army of 43,000
Which army withdrew?	the Russians withdrew
What country was Prussia fighting on another front?	Swedish
What Austrian General surprised the Prussian at Hochkirch?	Marshal Daun
What was the major loss for Prussia at Hochkirch?	lost much of his artillery
Why was Frederick able to retreat successfully?	retreated in good order, helped by dense woods
What was the result of the victory for the Austrians?	The Austrians had ultimately made little progress in the campaign in Saxony despite Hochkirch and had failed to achieve a decisive breakthrough
How did the Austrian troops spend the winter?	, Daun's troops were forced to withdraw to Austrian territory for the winter
How did the Prussian army perform in 1759/	1759 saw several Prussian defeats
How would one characterize the encounter with the Russian army in 1757?	47,000 Russians defeated 26,000 Prussians
What was the result of the Battle of Maxen?	Austrian general Daun forced the surrender of an entire Prussian corps of 13,000
What happened at Minden in 1757?	the Hanoverians defeated an army of 60,000 French
What happened to Frederick's army at the Battle at Kunersdorf?	Frederick himself lost half his army
Where was the planned invasion of Britain by France?	near the mouth of the Loire
How did the French plan to transport their troops to Britain for the invasion?	their Brest and Toulon fleets
What happened to the French Mediterranean fleet?	the Mediterranean fleet under Jean-François de La Clue-Sabran was scattered by a larger British fleet
What happened to the French Brest fleet?	caught the French Brest fleet with 21 ships of the line under Marshal de Conflans and sank, captured, or forced many of them aground
With the loss of the two fleets, how did the French get their troops to Britain for the invasion?	putting an end to the French plans.
Identify a success of the Austrians?	the Austrians, under the command of General Laudon, captured Glatz
Where is Glatz	Glatz (now Kłodzko, Poland) in Silesia
What was outstanding about Frederick's victory in the Battle of Liegnitz?	outnumbered three to one
Why was Frederick's defeat of Daun so costly?	he suffered very heavy casualties, and the Austrians retreated in good order.
Who led the Russian occupation of Berlin?	General Saltykov
Identify a new country that joined the war in 1762?	Spain
Identify a second new country that joined the war in 1762?	Portugal
What city was captured in the first Spain-Portugal conflict?	. Spain, aided by the French, launched an invasion of Portugal and succeeded in capturing Almeida
Was Portugal on the side of France or Britain?	Portugal followed by joining the war on Britain's side
Britain sent troops to aid Portugal.  What was the result?	the Anglo-Portuguese army, aided by guerrillas and practicing a scorched earth strategy, chased the greatly reduced Franco-Spanish army back to Spain
How did the Prussians slow the advance of the Russians?	the Prussian army launched several successful raids against them
What was the size of one of the Prussian victories against the Russians?	. One of them, led by general Platen in September resulted in the loss of 2,000 Russians, mostly captured, and the destruction of 5,000 wagons
Identify a major Prussian loss to the Russians	Russians under Zakhar Chernyshev and Pyotr Rumyantsev stormed Kolberg in Pomerania
identify a major Prussian loss to the Austrians.	the Austrians captured Schweidnitz.
What was the concern about Prussia in Britain?	. In Britain, it was speculated that a total Prussian collapse was now imminent.
Britain tried to influence Prussia to take what action?	offering concessions to secure peace
How many troops did Frederick have left?	60,000 men
What development in Russia assisted Prussia?	Russian Empress Elizabeth died. Her Prussophile successor, Peter III, at once recalled Russian armies from Berlin
What changed the Prussian relationship with Sweden?	Peter III, at once recalled Russian armies from Berlin (see: the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1762)) and mediated Frederick's truce with Sweden
What was the unexpected action by Peter III that helped Frederick?	He also placed a corps of his own troops under Frederick's command
In 1763 what was the status of Frederick?	his kingdom was devastated and his army severely weakened
In 1763 what was the status of Austria?	facing a severe financial crisis and had to decrease the size of its army
What had happened to Frederick's financial help from Britain?	British subsidies had been stopped by the new Prime Minister Lord Bute
What had happened to Frederick's extra troops from Russia?	Catherine, who ended Russia's alliance with Prussia and withdrew from the war
What was the result of the weakening of both Prussia and Austria?	In 1763 a peace settlement was reached at the Treaty of Hubertusburg, ending the war in central Europe.
What was the style of William Pitt's warfare?	saw purpose in this type of asymmetric enterprise
What action did Pitt take against France in 1758?	The army landed on 5 June 1758 at Cancalle Bay
How did the invading British army do at St. Malo?	it would take prolonged siege to capture it, instead attacked the nearby port of St. Servan
What damage was done at the alternate site?	It burned shipping in the harbor, roughly 80 French privateers and merchantmen, as well as four warships which were under construction
How did the British invaders respond to the arrival of French relief forces?	the expedition returned having damaged French privateering
Who decided to send British troops into Germany?	Pitt now prepared to send troops into Germany;
Who led the invasion troops?	The elderly General Bligh
Was the landing successful?	the army drove off the French force detailed to oppose their landing, captured Cherbourg,
Where did the troops land?	Cherbourg
How did the British treat Cherbourg?	destroyed its fortifications, docks, and shipping.
What stopped the planned siege at St. Malo?	Worsening weather
How did the army get to the new anchorage location?	the army proceeded overland.
How did the fleet respond to the bad weather?	the ships sailed for the safer anchorage of St. Cast
How did the British army escape	A rear-guard of 1,400 under General Dury held off the French while the rest of the army embarked
What happened to the British army?	a French force of 10,000 from Brest to catch up with him and open fire on the reembarkation troops
What island did Great Britain lose in 1756?	Great Britain lost Minorca in the Mediterranean to the French in 1756
What success did the British have in Cuba?	Spanish cities of Havana in Cuba
What possession did the French lose to the Brits in 1758	captured the French colonies in Senegal in 1758
Identify the French colonies lost  to the British in 1759 and 1762.	The British Royal Navy took the French sugar colonies of Guadeloupe in 1759 and Martinique in 1762
What other colony was taken by the British from Spain?	Manila in the Philippines
Who were the Seven Nations of Canada?	These were Native Americans of the Laurentian valley
Which tribe was the enemy of the Seven Nations of Canada?	the Seven Nations were interested in fighting against the Iroquois
How much help did the Seven Nations give the French in the Ohio Valley?	the Seven Nations were not directly concerned with the fate of the Ohio River Valley
Who was the European partner of the Iroquois?	The Iroquois, dominant in what is now Upstate New York, sided with the British
How valuable was the Iroquois alliance with Britain?	The Iroquois, dominant in what is now Upstate New York, sided with the British but did not play a large role in the war
Who assisted the French in taking forts Oswego and William Henry?	France's native allies
How did the French guard respond to the attack on the prisoners?	the French refused to protect their captives
How did France's native allies treat the British prisoners?	slaughtering and scalping soldiers and taking captive many men, women and children
How did the French defend the Fortress of Louisbourg?	French naval deployments
What Canadian area had is seaward side protected by the defense of the Fortress of Louisbourg?	securing the seaward approaches to Quebec.
How did the British assure numerical superiority in taking Louisbourg?	French reinforcements were blocked by British naval victory in the Battle of Cartagena
Identify two other French possessions captured by the British.	Fort Duquesne and Fort Frontenac
Who did the British deport from Lie Saint-Jean?	the Acadian population
What is Lie Saint-Jean called today?	Île Saint-Jean (present-day Prince Edward Island)
How much were the French outnumbered at the Battle of Carillion?	4,000 French troops repulsed 16,000 British
Which country enjoyed the most success in battles in North America in 1759	All of Britain's campaigns against New France succeeded in 1759
What two forts fell on the same day in 1758?	Fort Niagara and Fort Carillon on 8 July 1758 fell to sizable British forces
When did General Wolfe take Quebec?	On 13 September 1759, following a three-month siege of Quebec, General James Wolfe defeated the French
Did the French take Quebec back?	they were unable to retake Quebec
What military advantage brought the success for the British in defending Quebec?	British naval superiority
Where did the French attack in 1762?	St. John's, Newfoundland
What advantage would taking St. John's have provided for the French?	the expedition would have strengthened France's hand at the negotiating table
Did the French hold St. John's?	French forces were eventually defeated by British troops
Did the French take St. John's?	they took St. John's
Where was the final battle between the French and British in North America?	Battle of Signal Hill
Name two major events of the Seven Years' War In North America.	the expulsion of the Acadians, the siege of Quebec
Name two more major events of the Seven Years' War in North America.	the death of Wolfe, and the Battle of Fort William Henry
How did the events of the Seven Years' War affects the production of art?	generated a vast number of ballads, broadsides, images, and novels
What are some novels about the Seven Years' War period?	Longfellow's Evangeline, Benjamin West's The Death of General Wolfe, James Fenimore Cooper's The Last of the Mohicans
What other items point to the interest in the events of the Seven Years' War?	maps and other printed materials
How were the British-French hostilities concluded?	hostilities were ended in 1763 by the Treaty of Paris
Who ended up owning Louisiana?	the most important being France's cession to Spain of Louisiana
What part of North America did Britain end up with?	they now controlled all of North America east of the Mississippi.
What country ended up with Lie d'Orleans	Spain lost control of Florida to Great Britain, but it received from the French the Île d'Orléans
What did France get that gave them a supply of sugar?	Caribbean island colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique, France chose the latter
What did France retain in India?	returned all the French trading ports
How were the French settlements changed to eliminate their military usefulness?	treaty, however, required that the fortifications of these settlements be destroyed and never rebuilt
What French ally in the area abandoned the French?	loss of France's ally in Bengal
What happened to French power in the area?	this effectively brought French power in India to an end
Who defected to the British?	the defection of Hyderabad to the British
Where was the Treaty of Hubertusburg signed?	at a hunting lodge between Dresden and Leipzig.
Who were the parties in the Treaty of Hubertusburg?	Austria, Prussia, and Saxony
What country made gains in the Treaty of Hubertusburg?	The treaty simply restored the status quo of 1748
What did Austrian want in the Treaty of Hubertusburg	The Austrians wanted at least to retain Glatz
Did the Austrians retain Glatz?	Frederick would not allow it
What happened to Austrian prestige due to the war?	Austria's prestige was restored in great part
How would Prussia's outcome affect Austria in the long run?	was potentially damaging in the long run to Austria's influence in Germany.
What area was preserved from Prussian invasion?	it did prevent Prussia from invading parts of Saxony
Did Austria get Silesia back?	Austria was not able to retake Silesia
Who did Frederick II promise to vote for in the imperial elections?	by promising to vote for Joseph II in the Imperial elections
What was the impact of the war on the wealth of Austria?	the Austrians went almost bankrupt at the end of war.
What was the change in the status of Prussia because of the war?	Beside the rise of Prussia
What was Hanover's attitude toward Austria?	-belligerent Hanover
How much military aggression did Maria Theresa exert following the war?	she dedicated the next two decades to the consolidation of her administration.
Which British king supported Hanover following the war?	George III of Great Britain
What did the war do for the reputation of Frederick the Great?	Frederick the Great’s personal reputation was enormously enhanced
What was the general opinion of Frederick the Great military acumen?	his military genius was strenuously kept alive
What good fortune from Russia assisted Frederick the Great?	Russia’s volte-face
What gain did Russia make from the results of the war?	Russia, on the other hand, made one great invisible gain from the war: the elimination of French influence in Poland
What countries were party to The First Partition of Poland?	a Russo-Prussian transaction, with Austria only reluctantly involved
Who was George III trying to please with the Proclamation of 1763?	American Indian tribes
Who was aggravated by the Proclamation of 1763?	outrage in the Thirteen Colonies, whose inhabitants were eager to acquire native lands
Who did George III try to please with the Quebec Act of 1774?	French Canadians
How did the Quebec Act of 1774 affect religion?	The act protected Catholic religion
What did the Quebec Act of 1774 do about language?	The act protected Catholic religion and French language
What British nobleman attempted to retain European alliances following the Seven Years' War?	Lord Sandwich
What countries joined Britain as allies?	lacking any substantial ally
Did the European countries see Britain or France as a greater threat?	now saw Britain as a greater threat than France
When did the American War of Independence turn into a global conflict?	1778–83
What drove Prussia away from renewing its alliance with Britain?	Prussians were angered by what they considered a British betrayal in 1762
Feynman proposed a integral model in particle physics, what was it?	parton model
Who were the two men that won the Nobel Prize in Physics with Feynman?	Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga
In what year did Feynman win his Nobel Prize?	1965
Feynman was famous for diagrams that showed how subatomic particles behaved, what are these known as?	Feynman diagrams
What honor did Feynman recieve in a 1999 poll conducted by British Journal Physics World?	ranked as one of the ten greatest physicists of all time
What was the name of Feynman's 1959 talk on nanotech?	There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom
What was the name of Feynman's lectures he made as an undergraduate?	The Feynman Lectures on Physics
What was the name of one of his semi-autobiographical books?	Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!
Feynman wrote many books and gave many ___	lectures
What book did James Gleck write about Feynman?	Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman
What was the date of Feynman's birth?	May 11, 1918
In what city was Feynman born?	New York City
Whats is Feynman's religious affiliation?	atheist
What Jewish affiliation did his parents hold?	Ashkenazi
What did Feynam think of the Talmud?	"wonderful book" and "valuable"
What personality trait did Feynman acquire from his mother?	humor
What person influenced Feynman to think deeply?	father
What electronic instrument did Feynman repair as a child?	radios
As a grade school child he created an electronic device while his parents were away, what was it?	home burglar alarm system
What talent did Feynman have, even early in his childhood?	engineering
What happened to Feyman's younger brother?	died at four weeks of age
What is Feynman's sister's name?	Joan
What science displicine did Feyman encourage his sister to study?	astronomy
Who was the one that pushed Joan to explore the universe?	Richard
What career did Joan hold?	astrophysicist
What IQ score did Feyman attain in high school?	123
What high school did Feynman go to?	Far Rockaway High School
What did Feyman derive before he went to college?	half-derivative
Feyman taught himself many math subjects, including Trigonometry at what age?	15
What burrough was Feynman's high school in?	Queens
Which two sections of the graduate exam did Feynman excel in?	mathematics and physics
Which two sections of the graduate exam did Feynman do poorly in?	history and English
What score did Feyman receive on his math and physics entrance exams?	perfect score
When did he receive his PhD?	1942
What was Feynman's PhD thesis titled?	The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics
Which weaponry research did Feynman engage in?	Manhattan Project
Whose division was Feynman assigned to at the Manhattan Project?	Hans Bethe
What did Feynman produce with the help of Bethe?	Bethe–Feynman formula
What was the purpose of the Bethe-Feynman formula?	calculating the yield of a fission bomb
Who had previously worked on fission bomb yields before Feynman?	Robert Serber
Feynman used this to protect his eyes during the test detonation	truck windshield
What atomic bomb test did Feynman see?	Trinity bomb test
What did Feynman see after the atomic test?	"purple splotch" afterimage
What did Feynman think that the truck windshield would shield him against?	ultraviolet radiation
What was the Water Boiler that Feyman worked on?	nuclear reactor
Where was Feyman sent after his work at Los Alamos?	Oak Ridge facility
What did Feynman help produce at the Oak Ridge Facility?	safety procedures
Which weapon did Feynman found to not be feasible?	uranium hydride bomb
Where did Feynman work on the "Wateer Boiler"?	Los Alamos
Feynman quickly bored of Los Alamos because the work was all kept __?	top secret
How did Feynman spook a colleague?	left a series of notes in the cabinets
What did Frederic de Hoffmann think had happened when he found these notes?	saboteur had gained access to atomic bomb secrets
Feynman visited his wife in which New Mexico city?	Albuquerque
Feynman borrowed a car from Klaus Fuchs, who was later found to be a what?	spy for the Soviets
In which book did Feynman talk about the Manhattan project?	The Pleasure of Finding Things Out
What was his reasoning in helping make the atomic bomb?	possibility of Nazi Germany developing the bomb before the Allies
After feeling guilty for helping make an atomic bomb, Feynman went through what mental disorder?	depression
What did Feynman think of his part in making the bomb after Germany had been defeated?	error on his part
Where did Feynman receive a job after getting his PhD?	University of Wisconsin–Madison
Feyman received a letter to return to teaching from whom?	Dean Mark Ingraham
Which year did Feyman complete his PhD?	1942
Where did Feynman spend his time during his contract at UW?	Manhattan project
At which college did Feyman turn down a job?	Institute for Advanced Study
Where did Feyman accept a job after the war?	Cornell University
Which colleague did Feynman follow to Cornell?	Hans Bethe
His work at Cornell helped contribute to his what?	Nobel Prize–winning work
Why did Feynman go through a depression?	destruction of Hiroshima by the bomb
The  Institute of Advanced Study and which other university colluded together to get Feynman a position?	Princeton University
Why did Feynman decide to turn down an offer from the Institute of Advanced Study?	no teaching duties
Where did Feynman receive much inspiration?	students
Ultimately Feynman decided to take a job at which college?	California Institute of Technology
In which city did Feynman find himself affixing tire chains?	Ithaca
Which nickname did Feynman receive?	Great Explainer
Feynman believed that if a topic was not easily accessible to freshmen than it was not yet what?	fully understood
In a lecture, Feynman said that what had to exist?	antiparticles
Antiparticles had to exist because if particles only were of positive energy, they would not be in what?	light cone
What did Feynman produce that help in understanding calculations between particles in space and time?	Feynman diagrams
What is the name of the antimatter counterpart of electrons?	positrons
Where did Feynman paint his diagrams?	his van
What did Feynman digrams allow him and others to do?	approach time reversibility and other fundamental processes
What model did Murray Gell-Mann develop?	quark model
What model did Feynman produce to complement the quark model?	parton model
Quarks were thought of as what in the 1960s?	not real particles
Which scientist experimented with blasting alpha particles at the nuclei of gold?	Ernest Rutherford
After the fifth quark was discovered, Feynman said what had to also exist?	sixth quark
Where did  Feynman find success before moving to quantum gravity	quantum electrodynamics
What did Feynman investigate while working on quantum gravity?	consequences of a free massless spin 2 field
What equation did Feyman derive?	Einstein field equation of general relativity
Which parts of the Yang-Mills theories did Feynman help explain?	QCD and the electro-weak theory
What did Feynman's discoveries help explain?	Yang–Mills theories
Which society was Feynman elected to?	Royal Society
After 3 years at Caltech what lectures did Feynman produce?	The Feynman Lectures on Physics
Why did publisher change the cover picture on Feynman's book?	connections to drugs and rock and roll
In his book, Feynman was shown playing what instrument?	drums
What was the name of the book Feynman wrote over light and matter?	The Character of Physical Law, QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter
In which year did Feynman orate the Caltech commencement speech?	1974
Which topic did Feynman's commencement speech at Caltech center around?	cargo cult science
What did Feyman tell the class that they must not do to themselves?	fool yourself
What is cargo cult science?	pseudoscience
What did Feynman help develop in the 1980s?	parallel computer
Who did Feynman work with on computers at Caltech?	Stephen Wolfram
Who else worked with Feynman on developing computers?	His son Carl
What specifically did his son work on?	software
What did Feyman do while his son worked on software?	influencing the interconnects
What theories do Feynman diagrams help explain?	string theory and M-theory
The diagrams have been made from lines into what 3 dimensional shape?	tubes
What angst did Feynman have against string theorists?	they don't check their ideas
Which quote by Feynman is often used by string theory opponents?	'Well, it still might be true.'"
In which way did he write about his experience on the Rogers Commission?	sober narrative
Feyman's experience on the Rogers Commission was talked about is which of his books?	What Do You Care What Other People Think?
While the higher-ups said a failure was unlikely, at 1 in 100,000 odds, the scientists felt the odd were what?	1 in 200
His writings about the Rogers Commission showed that trouble was brewing between scientists and executives at which prolific institute?	NASA
Who did NASA recruit by using flawed safety numbers?	Christa McAuliffe
Which religious sect did Feynman refuse to be part of?	Jewish
Which book did Feynman decline to be listed in?	The Laureates: Jewish Winners of the Nobel Prize
What did Feynman believe that the Jewish people were not?	the chosen people
What religious affiliation did Feynman have?	atheist
Feynman did not like to be listed in anything that labeled people by what standard?	race
Who was Feynman's wife?	Arline Greenbaum
Which disease did Arline succumb to?	tuberculosis
In which year did his wife die?	1945
Who played a cameo in a film about Feynman?	Feynman's daughter, Michelle
What was the name of the film that showed Feynman's life?	Infinity
What analogies did Feynman use to teach Carl?	ants and Martians
Which subject did Feynman and Carl both enjoy?	Mathematics
What type of computing did Feynman and his son help develop?	parallel computing
What fictional character was Feynman compared to by a colleague?	Don Quixote
What Laboratory employed Feynman for critical missions?	The Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Where did Feynman work at in Brazil?	Brazilian Center for Physics Research
Which place in Russia could Feynman not visit, but wished to do so?	Tuva
When was Feynman allowed to go to Tuva?	The day after he died
What is the name of the film that discusses Feynman's attempt to get to Tuva?	Genghis Blues
Who went to Tuva in Feynman's stead?	Feynman's daughter Michelle
What substance did Feynman give up later in life?	alcohol
Why did Feynman give up alcohol?	he did not want to do anything that could damage his brain
Which illicit drug did Feynman try at Caltech?	LSD
In what book did he talk about his LSD use?	O Americano, Outra Vez
Which book does Feynman detail was to pick up girls?	Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman
Where was his second office at Caltech?	topless bar
Who was the only person to testify that the topless bar should remain open?	Feynman
Where did Feynman write down his equations at the topless bar?	paper placemats
Who tried to shut the topless bar down?	county officials
Which paper published a story about Feynman in 1992?	New York Times
Who helped tell the 1992 New York Times story about Feynman?	James Gleick
Gleick told a story about a specific algorithim that Gell-Mann described to a student, what was this algorithim called?	The Feynman Problem-Solving Algorithm
Feynman's algorithim included writing the problem, thinking, and then what?	write down the answer
Where do the Feynman Lectures on Physics pull information from?	compiled from lectures to Caltech undergraduates in 1961–64
Once the popularity on the lectures grew, who began to attend?	professional physicists and graduate students
Which two of Feynman's colleagues helped put the lectures into book format?	Robert B. Leighton and Matthew Sands
Which addendum was added to the Lectures book in 2005?	"Feynman's Tips on Physics: A Problem-Solving Supplement to the Feynman Lectures on Physics
Who wrote the supplemental material added to the Lectures book in 2005?	Michael Gottlieb and Ralph Leighton
When was Gaddafi born, and when did he die?	1942 – 20 October 2011
What was Gaddifi's original political viewpoint?	Initially ideologically committed to Arab nationalism and Arab socialism
What political philosophy did Gaddifi create?	his own Third International Theory
What political philosophy did  Gaddafi adhere to when he was the Chairperson of the African Union?	Pan-Africanism
What was Gaddafi's position when he was considered the "Brotherly Leader"?	the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from 1977 to 2011
When did Gaddafi rule as the "Brotherly Leader"?	from 1977 to 2011
What ideology did Gaddafi adopt when he was the Chairperson of the African Union?	Pan-Africanism
List Gaddafi's lifespan.	1942 – 20 October 2011
When did he first gain power in Libya?	1969
What political ideology did Gaddafi create?	Third International Theory
By what name was Muammar Muhammad Abu Minyar al-Gaddafi typically known?	Colonel Gaddafi
What was Gaddafi's nationality?	Libyan
What was the official name of Libya between 1969 and 1977?	Libyan Arab Republic
From 1977 to 2011, what was Gaddafi's title?	Brotherly Leader
What was Colonel Gaddafi's date of death?	20 October 2011
What book did Gaddafi publish that detailed his Third Internal Theory?	The Green Book
What was Gaddafi's first position in government?	Chairman of the governing Revolutionary Command Council
As Chairman of the RCC, list the first two things that Gaddafi accomplished.	abolished the monarchy and proclaimed the Republic
How did Gaddafi change the legal system?	introduced sharia as the basis for the legal system
Describe the Popular Revolution.	the formation of General People's Committees (GPCs), purported to be a system of direct democracy, but retained personal control over major decisions.
How did Gaddafi change the legal system?	he introduced sharia as the basis for the legal system
How did Gaddafi use all the money that resulted from nationalizing the oil industry?	to bolster the military, implement social programs and fund revolutionary militants across the world.
Describe the Popular Revolution.	formation of General People's Committees (GPCs), purported to be a system of direct democracy, but retained personal control over major decisions
When Gaddafi established his power in the government, what were his first actions?	abolished the monarchy and proclaimed the Republic
What political ideology did Gaddafi want to push his country to?	Islamic socialism
What was the profession of Gaddafi's father?	goat herder
What was Gaddafi's ethnicity?	Bedouin
In what city was the Royal Military Academy located?	Benghazi
From what monarch did Gaddafi's movement take over Libya?	Idris
What was the name of the governing body headed by Gaddafi after the revolution?	Revolutionary Command Council
What does "Jamahiriya" mean?	state of the masses
What was Gaddafi's role in jamahiriya?	he retained power as military commander-in-chief and head of the Revolutionary Committees responsible for policing and suppressing opponents
List two reasons why Libya become an "international pariah."	Overseeing unsuccessful border conflicts with Egypt and Chad, Gaddafi's support for foreign militants and alleged responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing
Name two significant events in 1986 that demonstrated the world's view of Libya.	U.S. bombing of Libya and United Nations-imposed economic sanctions
How did Gaddafi lose power?	uprising led by the National Transitional Council (NTC) broke out, resulting in the Libyan Civil War. NATO intervened militarily on the side of the NTC
What was Libya's socialist government called?	Jamahiriya ("state of the masses")
Why did Libya become an "international pariah"?	Gaddafi's support for foreign militants and alleged responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing
How did the world respond to Libya in 1986?	U.S. bombing of Libya and United Nations-imposed economic sanctions.
How did Gaddafi lose power?	an anti-Gaddafist uprising led by the National Transitional Council (NTC) broke out, resulting in the Libyan Civil War
How did Gaddafi die?	Retreating to Sirte, Gaddafi was captured and killed by NTC militants.
What does the term Jamahiriya mean in English?	state of the masses
In what year did Gaddafi found the Jamahiriya?	1977
Along with Egypt, what nation did Libya have border issues with in this era?	Chad
What terrorist bombing was Gaddafi's Libya supposedly involved in?	Lockerbie
In what year did the United states bomb Libya?	1986
Describe Gaddafi's humble upbringing.	was born in a tent near Qasr Abu Hadi, a rural area outside the town of Sirte in the deserts of western Libya
How did Gaddafi's father earn a living?	as a goat and camel herder
How did his upbringing impact his later life preferences?	He repeatedly expressed a preference for the desert over the city and retreated to the desert to meditate.
What culture did Gaddafi experience as a child?	Bedouin
When was Gaddafi born?	Gaddafi's date of birth is not known with certainty, and sources have set it in 1942 or in the spring of 1943
Describe Gaddafi's early childhood.	Gaddafi was born in a tent near Qasr Abu Hadi, a rural area outside the town of Sirte in the deserts of western Libya
How did Gaddafi's father earn a living?	Abu Meniar earned a meager subsistence as a goat and camel herder
How come no one knows for sure when Gaddafi was born?	Nomadic Bedouins, they were illiterate and kept no birth records
How did his early childhood experiences impact his later life?	He repeatedly expressed a preference for the desert over the city and retreated to the desert to meditate.
When did Gaddafi's parents die?	His father, Mohammad Abdul Salam bin Hamed bin Mohammad, was known as Abu Meniar (died 1985), and his mother was named Aisha (died 1978)
Other than Mohammad Abdul Salam bin Hamed bin Mohammad, what was Gaddafi's father called?	Abu Meniar
When did Gaddafi's mother die?	1978
How many sisters did Gaddafi have?	three
Near what town was Gaddafi's birthplace of Qasr Abu Hadi?	Sirte
What was the name of Gaddafi's tribe?	Qadhadhfa
When did Libya become an independent nation?	In 1951
When Libya first became an independent country, what form of government did it adopt?	an absolute monarchy
What countries occupied Libya after World War II?	British and French forces
Who was the first leader of Libya?	a pro-western monarch, Idris
What World War I event directly impacted Gaddafi's family?	Gaddafi's paternal grandfather, Abdessalam Bouminyar, was killed by the Italian Army during the Italian invasion of 1911
How did World War I directly impact Gaddafi's family?	According to later claims, Gaddafi's paternal grandfather, Abdessalam Bouminyar, was killed by the Italian Army during the Italian invasion of 1911
What happened to Libya right after World War II?	Libya was occupied by British and French forces
When was it announced that Libya would be independent?	In 1951, the UN created the United Kingdom of Libya, a federal state under the leadership
What was the first type of government that Libya had?	a pro-western monarch, Idris, who banned political parties and established an absolute monarchy.
What country occupied Libya during World War II?	his nation was occupied by Italy
What nation controlled Libya as a colony when Gaddafi was a child?	Italy
Who battled the Italians during the North African campaign?	British
Who was Gaddafi's father's father?	Abdessalam Bouminyar
During what year did the Italians invade Libya?	1911
Along with the British, who occupied Libya at the end of the Second World War?	French
Describe Gaddafi's first experience with education.	a religious nature, imparted by a local Islamic teacher
In addition to gaining an education, describe how Gaddafi managed to attend school 20 miles from his family.	During the week Gaddafi slept in a mosque, and at weekends walked 20 miles to visit his parents
How did Gaddafi deal with peer pressure regarding his cultural background?	Bullied for being a Bedouin, he was proud of his identity and encouraged pride in other Bedouin children.
When Gaddafi's family moved to Sabha, describe his educational experiences in secondary school.	Gaddafi was popular at school; some friends made there received significant jobs in his later administration, most notably his best friend Abdul Salam Jalloud.
Describe Gaddafi's parents' educational backgrounds.	where his father worked as a caretaker for a tribal leader while Muammar attended secondary school, something neither parent had done.
Why was Gaddafi made fun of in elementary school?	Bullied for being a Bedouin, he was proud of his identity and encouraged pride in other Bedouin children.
How did Gaddafi manage to attend elementary school so far from home?	During the week Gaddafi slept in a mosque, and at weekends walked 20 miles to visit his parents.
Were Gaddafi's parents educated?	while Muammar attended secondary school, something neither parent had done.
Was Gaddafi's education free?	Education in Libya was not free, but his father thought it would greatly benefit his son despite the financial strain.
How did his early relationships play a role later when Gaddafi  became a ruler?	Gaddafi was popular at school; some friends made there received significant jobs in his later administration, most notably his best friend Abdul Salam Jalloud.
In what religion was Gaddafi educated?	Islamic
What town did Gaddafi's family move to after they left Sirte?	Sabha
What geographical portion of Libya is Fezzan located in?	south-central
Who was Gaddafi's closest friend in secondary school?	Abdul Salam Jalloud
In what town did Gaddafi first attend primary school?	Sirte
Why did Gaddafi's family have to leave Sabha?	he led a demonstration protesting Syria's secession from the United Arab Republic. During this they broke windows of a local hotel accused of serving alcohol.
Gaddafi was an avid reader. Name three biographies that he read.	Abraham Lincoln, Sun Yat-sen, and Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
What political idealogy did Gaddafi not believe in?	factionalism
While he was in secondary school, what sort of activism did Gaddafi support?	Arab nationalist activism
Why did Gaddafi's family leave Sabha?	October 1961, he led a demonstration protesting Syria's secession from the United Arab Republic
List several biographies that influenced Gaddafi.	Abraham Lincoln, Sun Yat-sen, and Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
Where sort of activism did Gaddafi promote while attending secondary school?	Arab nationalist activism
What political ideology did Gaddafi reject when he attended Misrata Secondary School?	factionalism
Where did Gaddafi travel to after he was kicked out of Sabha?	Misrata
Along with the Ba'ath Party and Muslim Brotherhood, what group was notably banned in Misrata?	Arab Nationalist Movement
In what month and year did Gaddafi protest against Syria leaving the United Arab Republic?	October 1961
Of what nationality was Michel Aflaq?	Syrian
Along with Lincoln and Ataturk, whose biography did Gaddafi read while in Misrata?	Abraham Lincoln
What subject did Gaddafi briefly study before joining the military?	History at the University of Libya in Benghazi
Why didn't Gaddafi learn to speak English?	Gaddafi, who viewed the British as imperialists
Where did Gaddafi begin his military training?	at the Royal Military Academy
How did Gaddafi view the influence of the military?	the only opportunity for upward social mobility for underprivileged Libyans, and Gaddafi recognised it as a potential instrument of political change
What crime did the British trainers believe Gaddafi was involved in?	the assassination of the military academy's commander in 1963
What subject did Gaddafi study at the University of LIbya?	History
Why did Gaddafi drop out of college?	to join the military
What rationale did Gaddafi use for joining the military?	Gaddafi recognised it as a potential instrument of political change
What country trained Libya's military?	the British military
What crime was Gaddafi suspected of being involved in during his time in the military?	the assassination of the military academy's commander in 1963
Where did Gaddafi attend college for a time?	University of Libya
During his time in college, what did Gaddafi study?	History
After Gaddafi left the University of Libya, what institution did he attend?	Royal Military Academy, Benghazi
While the Libyan monarchy existed, who trained the Libyan army?	British
What did Gaddafi regard his British instructors as?	imperialists
When Gaddafi traveled to London, did he attempt to blend into the English culture?	finding it difficult adjusting to the country's culture; asserting his Arab identity in London, he walked around Piccadilly wearing traditional Libyan robes
How did Gaddafi feel about the British officers?	claiming British Army officers racially insulted him
How did the Bovington signal course director view Gaddafi?	he thought him an "amusing officer, always cheerful, hard-working, and conscientious."
How did Gaddafi view Libya when he returned from England?	he returned home "more confident and proud of our values, ideals and social character."
How did the Bovington sign course director think of Gaddafi?	an "amusing officer, always cheerful, hard-working, and conscientious."
When Gaddafi went to England, how did he respond to their culture?	finding it difficult adjusting to the country's culture; asserting his Arab identity in London, he walked around Piccadilly wearing traditional Libyan robes
How did Gaddafi feel about the British Army officers?	Gaddafi disliked England, claiming British Army officers racially insulted him
When Gaddafi returned to Libya, how did he view his country?	while he travelled to England believing it more advanced than Libya, he returned home "more confident and proud of our values, ideals and social character."
What were Gaddafi's favorite hobbies in the military?	reading and playing football
Along with reading, how did Gaddafi enjoy spending his free time?	playing football
In what part of London did Gaddafi wear traditional Arab garb?	Piccadilly
What language did Gaddafi have difficulty learning?	English
Where did Gaddafi's signal course take place?	Bovington
What mistreatment did Gaddafi say that British soldiers subjected him to?	racially insulted him
What changes impressed Gaddafi in Egypt?	President Gamal Abdel Nasser. Nasser argued for Arab nationalism; the rejection of Western colonialism, neo-colonialism, and Zionism
What Egyptian leader impressed Gaddafi?	his hero, President Gamal Abdel Nasser
What book instructed Gaddafi in how to stage a coup?	Nasser's book, Philosophy of the Revolution
Name one event that occurred in the Arab world during Gaddafi 's childhood that influenced his life.	1948 Arab–Israeli War, the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, the Suez Crisis of 1956, and the short-lived existence of the United Arab Republic between 1958 and 1961
What political ideology did Nasser implement?	transition from capitalism to socialism
What was the nationality of a significant number of teachers in Sabha?	Egyptian
When did the United Arab Republic end?	1961
What notable event occurred in 1952?	Egyptian Revolution
From what city did Voice of the Arabs broadcast?	Cairo
What political leader did Gaddafi greatly admire?	Nasser
What was happening to Idris' government in the 1960s?	Idris' government was increasingly unpopular by the latter 1960s
What industry greatly impacted the downfall of Idris's government?	the oil industry
What sort of problems did the oil industry experience in Libya?	corruption and entrenched systems of patronage were widespread throughout the oil industry
What did the Libyan workers do to show their support of Egypt?	Libyan workers shut down oil terminals in solidarity with Egypt
Did the CIA confirm knowledge of Gaddafi's upcoming coup?:	they have since claimed ignorance, stating that they were monitoring Abdul Aziz Shalhi's Black Boots revolutionary group.
What country won the Six-Day War?	Israel
In what cities did protests against westerners flare up in 1967?	Tripoli and Benghazi
On what country's behalf were the 1967 protests taking place?	Egypt
In what year did the CIA begin to expect a military coup in Libya?	1969
What revolutionary organization was led by Abdul Aziz Shalhi?	Black Boots
When Gaddafi staged his coup, did he need to use a great show of violence?	They met no serious resistance, and wielded little violence against the monarchists.
When did Gaddafi decide to stage his coup?	In mid-1969, Idris travelled abroad to spend the summer in Turkey and Greece.
What was Gaddafi's coup called?	Operation Jerusalem
What did Gaddafi seize during the coup?	Gaddafi took control of the Berka barracks in Benghazi,
What did Hameidi do during the coup?	Hameidi was sent to arrest crown prince Sayyid Hasan ar-Rida al-Mahdi as-Sanussi, and force him to relinquish his claim to the throne.
What countries did Idris visit in the summer of 1969?	Turkey and Greece
What was the code name for Gaddafi's coup against the monarchy?	Operation Jerusalem
What leader's forces occupied the barracks in Tripoli?	Omar Meheisha
Who arrested Sayyid Hasan ar-Rida al-Mahdi as-Sanussi?	Khweldi Hameidi
What revolutionary leader took control of the anti-aircraft equipment in Tripoli?	Jalloud
How did Gaddafi announced his leadership?:	Addressing the populace by radio
List the two names of Gaddafi's coup.	"White Revolution", although was later renamed the "One September Revolution"
What did Gaddafi tell the people that the revolution represented?	freedom, socialism, and unity
What did Gaddafi insist that the coup be referred to as?	a revolution
What was the name of the government Gaddafi set up after overthrowing the monarchy?	Libyan Arab Republic
What was the Libyan coup called at first?	White Revolution
What was the Libyan coup later called, when it was renamed for the day it took place?	One September Revolution
What was the name of the revolutionary group led by Gaddafi?	Free Officers
How did Gaddafi characterize the monarchy in his radio address?	reactionary and corrupt
How did Gaddafi staff the RCC members?	All young men from (typically rural) working and middle-class backgrounds, none had university degrees;
Why did Gaddafi select these men as RCC members?	they were distinct from the wealthy, highly educated conservatives who previously governed the country.
Whose face was most closely associated with Libya's new government?	Gaddafi
Did everyone endorse Gaddafi?	some of the others attempted to constrain what they saw as his excesses
On what date were the members of the RCC announced?	10 January 1970
What was the general age group of the members of the RCC?	young
How many members of the RCC had graduated from university?	none
What was the sex of all the members of the RCC?	men
Along with the working class, what was the class background of RCC members?	middle
What did the RCC do with remnants of the monarchy?	They purged monarchists and members of Idris' Senussi clan from Libya's political world and armed forces
What happened to Idris?	Idris was sentenced to execution in absentia.
How did Gaddafi view the elite?	Gaddafi believed this elite were opposed to the will of the Libyan people and had to be expunged.
What happened to the monarchists and and journalists?	"People's Courts" were founded to try various monarchist politicians and journalists, and though many were imprisoned, none were executed.
What clan was King Idris part of?	Senussi
How many people were executed by the People's Courts?	none
What sentence was given to the absent King Idris?	execution
Along with the Senussi, who was purged from the military?	monarchists
Along with journalists, who was tried in the People's Courts?	monarchist politicians
What was the RCC's view of political parties?	Ruling by decree, the RCC maintained the monarchy's ban on political parties,
What did Gaddafi do in 1971?	In September 1971, Gaddafi resigned, claiming to be dissatisfied with the pace of reform, but returned to his position within a month.
What was the impact of incorporating the sharia into the legal system?	united secular and religious law codes
What did Gaddafi do in 1973?	In February 1973, he resigned again, once more returning the following month.
In what year did the Revolutionary Intellectuals Seminar occur?	1970
In what month and year did Gaddafi first resign?	September 1971
What did the RCC outlaw in 1970?	trade unions
What publications were shut down 1972?	newspapers
In what year did Gaddafi's second resignation occur?	1973
What was Libya's main export?	crude oil
How did Gaddafi's decisions in the oil industry impact other OPEC states?	In 1970, other OPEC states followed suit, leading to a global increase in the price of crude oil.
What was the main export of Libya?	crude oil
How much money did Libya accrue in a year as a result of the Tripoli Agreement?	$1 billion
What organization of oil producers was Libya a part of?	OPEC
Who was responsible for raising the price of Libyan oil in 1969?	Jalloud
In 1979, how much did the average per capita income change for Libyans?	by 1979 the average per-capita income was at $8,170, up from $40 in 1951
How did Libya's gross domestic product increase from 1969 to 1979?	while gross domestic product had been $3.8 billion in 1969, it had risen to $13.7 billion in 1974, and $24.5 billion in 1979.
What decision allowed Gaddafi to move Libya closer to socialism?	In September 1973, it was announced that all foreign oil producers active in Libya were to be nationalized.
How did the RCC begin their march toward nationalization?	starting with the expropriation of British Petroleum's share of the British Petroleum-N.B. Hunt Sahir Field in December 1971.
What company's property did Libya nationalize in December of 1971?	British Petroleum
In what month and year was a blanket nationalization of foreign oil production proclaimed?	September 1973
What was Libya's GDP in 1969?	$3.8 billion
In what year did Libya have a GDP of $24.5 billion?	1979
What was Libya's per-capita income in 1951?	$40
What sort of identity was promoted by the RCC?	pan-Libyan
What identities did the RCC try to dissuade?	regional and tribal
Where was the military court located that tried the tribal leaders in 1971?	Sabha
What were tribal leaders accused of in 1971?	counter-revolutionary activity
Of what party did Gaddafi become president in this period?	Arab Socialist Union
On what philosophy was the RCC's social reforms based?	sharia
What language was used in official communications by the government of Libya?	Arabic
During what period were oil-funded programs for social welfare created?	1969 to 1973
What religion was suppressed in Libya?	Christian
What beverage did the Libyan government ban?	alcohol
What philosophy influenced the RCC?	Arab nationalism
Along with Egypt, Iraq and Sudan, what country's Arab nationalist government recognized the Libyan revolutionary government?	Syria
What Arab nationalist thinker was influential with the RCC?	Nasser
What countries founded the Arab Revolutionary Front with Libya?	Egypt and Sudan
In what year was the Arab Revolutionary Front founded?	1969
Who did Anwar Sadat succeed?	Nasser
What was the alternative to creating an Arab political federation?	unified state
Along with Libya, what nations joined the political federation?	Egypt, Syria and Sudan
In what year was the merger charter signed?	1972
When did the federation have to be implemented by?	September 1973
What nations comprised the Four Powers?	France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union
Who told Gaddafi about a possible counter-coup in 1970?	U.S.
Along with the U.S., what major power recognized Gaddafi's government at an early date?	U.K.
In what month and year did the United States remove its military bases from Libya?	June 1970
Who removed their Libyan military bases in March of 1970?	British
How many Italians lived in Libya prior to October of 1970?	12,000
In addition to Italians, what people were kicked out of Libya in 1970?	Jews
Who did the RCC buy military equipment from?	France and the Soviet Union
Who were the adversaries of the Soviets during the Cold War?	U.S.
Who did Libya offer foreign aid to in 1971?	Malta
What Palestinian political figure had a poor relationship with Gaddafi?	Yasser Arafat
What organization did Arafat belong to?	Fatah
Who was responsible for the attack on Israeli athletes in 1972?	Black September Organization
In what city did the 1972 attack on Israeli athletes occur?	Munich
How many terrorists survived the 1972 Munich attack?	three
During what decade did Libya finance militant groups?	1970s
During what conflict did Gaddafi notably switch sides?	Eritrean War of Independence
On what continent did the Red Army Faction operate?	Europe
What was the Third World fighting against in the 1970s?	colonialism and neocolonialism
What was the ANC combating?	Apartheid
On what date did Gaddafi declare the beginning of a "Popular Revolution"?	16 April 1973
What type of revolution began as a result of the third point?	administrative
What happened to Libya's laws as a result of the first point of Gaddafi's speech?	dissolved
How many points did the Popular Revolution plan have?	5
Along with Libya and France, where did Gaddafi speak on the Popular Revolution?	Egypt
What were the Libyan people instructed to create in conjunction with the Popular Revolution?	General People's Committees
Along with the bureaucracy, who were the General People's Committees directed at?	traditional leaders
What political system did Gaddafi claim was less democratic than the General People's Committees?	traditional party-based representative
What kind of structure did the People's Committee system use?	pyramid
What negative consequence did the People's Committees lead to?	tribal divisions
Along with Ba'athists and Islamists, who was arrested as a result of the actions of the People's Committees?	Marxists
Along with the General People's Congress, what national body represented the People's Committees?	General People's Committee
Who was the founder of Three Worlds Theory?	Mao Zedong
In what month and year did Gaddafi begin Third International Theory?	June 1973
What sort of state did Gaddafi believe should be founded?	pan-Arab
Along with the United States, what country did Gaddafi believe to be imperialist?	Soviet Union
What economic philosophy was associated with the West?	capitalism
Gaddafi's written work on Third International Theory consisted of how many volumes?	three
When was the last volume of Gaddafi's work on Third International Theory published?	1979
What was the title given to Gaddafi's Third International Theory writings?	The Green Book
What volume of The Green Book discussed democracy?	one
What political philosophy was discussed in the second volume of The Green Book?	socialism
In what year was the Office for the Security of the Revolution founded?	1975
In what year did student protests occur in Benghazi?	1976
How many senior officers were expelled fro the army in 1975?	200
How many students were executed in January of 1977?	two
Who criticized the political execution of students and military officers that occurred in January 1977?	Amnesty International
Whose rise to the presidency of Egypt led to the decline in relations between Egypt and Libya?	Sadat
What nation's military destroyed Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114?	Israeli
What city was the destination of RMS Queen Elizabeth 2?	Haifa
Why did Libyan Arab Airlines Flight 114 accidentally fly into Israel's airspace?	sandstorm
Jews from what nation chartered the RMS Queen Elizabeth 2?	American
Who was allied with Egypt during the Yom Kippur War?	Syria
Who was the president of Sudan in 1975?	Gaafar Nimeiry
What revolutionary group sought to overthrow the president of Sudan?	Sudan People's Liberation Army
Prior to the Libyan invasion, what country was the Aouzou Strip a part of?	Chad
What element did the Aouzou Strip possess a great deal of?	uranium
What country formed a political union with Libya in 1974?	Tunisia
What was the name of the abortive political union between Tunisia and Libya in 1974?	Arab Islamic Republic
Who was the president of Tunisia in 1974?	Habib Bourguiba
With what country did Libya conclude the Hassi Messaoud defense agreement?	Algeria
Against what government was the Hassi Messaoud defense agreement directed against?	Moroccan
What was the name of the state founded in Libya on March 2, 1977?	Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
How many Basic People's Congresses existed in the Jamahiriya?	187
What body did the members elected by the Basic People's Congresses attend?	General People's Congress
What was the official name of Libya prior to the establishment of the Jamahiriya?	Libyan Arab Republic
How often did the General People's Congress occur?	annual
What was the GPC accused of being vis-à-vis Gaddafi?	a rubber stamp
What policy did Gaddafi propose that the GPC was against?	primary schools to be abolished
What type of education did Gaddafi prefer to primary schools?	home schooling
What was a policy that Gaddafi instituted without support from the GPC?	allow women into the armed forces
What book did the Jamahiriya look to for legal advice?	Qur'an
What tenet of sharia did Gaddafi believe was incompatible with socialism?	protection of private property
What relationship led the Soviets to invite Gaddafi to Moscow?	commercial
What did conservative Muslim clerics accuse Gaddafi of?	shirk
Who won a border war with Libya?	Egypt
In what year did Gaddafi resign from his position in the GPC?	1978
Prior to his resignation, what office did Gaddafi occupy in the GPC?	Secretary-General
After Gaddafi stepped down from the GPC, what title did he take?	Leader of the Revolution
What authority did Gaddafi have over the Libyan armed forces?	commander-in-chief
In September of 1978, what bureaucracy did Gaddafi speak out against?	public sector
What "dictatorship" did Gaddafi attack in September of 1978?	private sector
After People's Committees expropriated companies, what did they turn them into?	worker cooperatives
How many companies were taken over by People's Committees?	several hundred
On what date did the GPC separate the revolution from the government?	2 March 1979,
Who was the leader of the Revolutionary Committees?	Mohammad Maghgoub
What was the English name of the magazine published by the Revolutionary Committees?	The Green March
How often was al-Zahf al-Akhdar published?	weekly
What bodies represented the revolution after the separation of government and revolution?	Revolutionary Committees
Where did land redistribution begin in 1979?	Jefara plain
When did the Jefara plain land redistribution end?	1981
What was the maximum amount of money a person could have in their bank account without having it expropriated in 1980?	1000 dinar
What took the place of private businesses in 1981?	state supermarkets
As a result of the 1981 laws putting the government in control of commerce, what began to thrive?	black market
What tribe did Gaddafi belong to?	Qaddadfa
What Libyan government official allegedly plotted to kill Gaddafi in 1978?	head of military intelligence
In 1981, what Libyan opposition group was founded?	National Front for the Salvation of Libya
Who founded the NFSL?	Mohammed Magariaf
What group notably murdered Libyan diplomats?	al-Borkan,
What list did the United States add Libya to in 1979?	State Sponsors of Terrorism
In what Libyan city was the United States embassy burned in 1979?	Tripoli
What event prompted the burning of the US embassy in Libya?	Iran hostage crisis
How much money did Syria owe to the Soviets as of 1980?	£1 billion
What country's military was attacking Uganda in 1979?	Tanzanian
How much money did Libya earn from oil in 1986?	$5.4 billion
What was another name for the Great Man-Made River?	Gaddafi's Pet Project
In what country did FROLINAT operate?	Chad
In what year did the Libyan military pull out of Chad at the behest of the OAU?	1981
Who was the ruler of Morocco in 1984?	Hassan II
In what years did Gaddafi visit the Soviet Union?	1981 and 1985
What did Reagan wrongly believe Libya to be?	a puppet regime of the Soviet Union
As a result of American hostility, what military alliance did Libya say it would join?	Warsaw Pact
What Libyan aircraft were shot down by the United States in 1981?	Su-22
What was the occupation of Yvonne Fletcher?	policewoman
About how many Libyans died in Operation El Dorado Canyon?	100
What terrorist attack did the United States claim Libya supported?	1986 Berlin discotheque bombing
How many Americans died in the Berlin disco bombing of 1986?	two
What was the name of Gaddafi's daughter who may not have existed?	Hanna
What country did the CIA believe Reagan should attack instead of Libya?	Syria
In what year did the "Revolution within a Revolution" begin?	1987
In what year was the Ministry for Mass Mobilization and Revolutionary Leadership created?	1988
How many articles were contained in the Great Green Charter on Human Rights in the Era of the Masses?	27
Who won the Al-Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights in 1989?	Nelson Mandela
What was Mandela's nationality?	South African
What bodies were intended to be replaced by the popular militia created in 1988?	army and police
Where did Libya manufacture mustard gas?	Rabta
What chemical weapon did Libya start making in 1987?	mustard gas
Where did an abortive coup occur in 1993?	Misrata
Where did a Muslim insurgency take place in 1995?	Benghazi
Along with Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, who was a founding member of the Arab Maghreb Union?	Mauritania
Along with Lamin Khalifah Fhimah, who was suspected of the attack on Pan Am Flight 103?	Abdelbaset al-Megrahi
How many people not on Pan Am Flight 103 were killed by its destruction?	11
What 1992 UN Resolution imposed sanctions on Libya for its refusal to hand over the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing suspects?	748
What was the value of the economic losses experienced by Libya as a result of Resolution 748?	$900 million
What organization did Libya join in 1999?	Community of Sahel-Saharan States
Where did the OAU summit in July 1999 occur?	Algiers
What organization was founded in July of 2002?	African Union
What is COMESA?	Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Who was the president of South Africa circa 2002?	Thabo Mbeki
What world leader notably visited Libya in 2002?	Jiang Zemin
What conflict prompted Libya to end its nuclear weapons program?	Iraq War
What world leader visited Gaddafi in 2004?	Tony Blair
In what city is the EU headquarters located?	Brussels
How much money did Libya receive to stem the flow of African migrants into Europe?	€50 million
In what month and year did Gaddafi make a speech promoting economic privatization?	March 2003
How much direct foreign investment existed in Libya circa 2004?	$40 billion
By what factor did direct foreign investment in Libya increase between 2003 and 2004?	sixfold
According to the plan of 2010, what fraction of Libya's economy was intended to be privatized?	half
As of October 2009, who was the head of the PSLC?	Saif al-Islam Gaddafi
In what year did the so-called Arab Spring occur?	2011
Who was the president of Tunisia in 2011?	Zine El Abidine Ben Ali
About what percentage of the Libyan population was unemployed in 2011?	30
On what date in 2011 did protests begin in Libya?	17 February
Along with corruption, what were Libyans upset with in 2011?	patronage
Who did Gaddafi accuse the Libyan rebels of being linked to?	al-Qaeda
How many protesters were killed in Benghazi?	hundreds
What rebel organization was founded in Benghazi?	National Transitional Council
Cities in what geographic part of Libya were controlled by rebels?	eastern
Along with Benghazi and Misrata, what cities did the rebels control in February?	al-Bayda and Tobruk
As a result of Resolution 1970, what body was Libya suspended from?	UN Human Rights Council
In what month did the UN Security Council set up a no fly zone?	March
How many troops did Qatar send to Libya?	hundreds
Along with Qatar and France, what nation helped to train the NTC?	United Arab Emirates
On what date did NATO kill Gaddafi's son?	30 April
At the time of these events, what was Robert Gates' title?	Secretary of Defense
What organization killed Gaddafi's grandsons?	NATO
What city did NATO bomb on 25 April?	Tripoli
What position was held by Gaddafi's brother-in-law?	head of state security
About how many governments recognized the legitimacy of the NTC at a meeting on July 15, 2011?	30
Where did the July 15, 2011 meeting take place?	Istanbul
Which child of Gaddafi did the ICC issue an arrest warrant for on June 27?	Saif al-Islam
Who is Gaddafi's brother-in-law?	Abdullah Senussi
What is another term for the Amazigh?	Berber
What language did the Berbers living in the Nafusa Mountains not speak?	Arabic
On what date did the NTC government enter the Arab League?	25 August
What organization provided air support to the Libyan rebels?	NATO
What were the last two cities to be controlled by Gaddafi's government?	Zliten and Tripoli
In what geographic part of Libya is Bani Walid located?	western
After Tripoli was conquered, where did Gaddafi go?	Sirte
Leaving Sirte, what valley did Gaddafi hope to travel to?	Jarref
About how many people were killed in the October 20 bombing of Gaddafi's convoy?	53
After fleeing to a construction site, how was Gaddafi injured?	grenade blast
Who claimed to have murdered Gaddafi?	Senad el-Sadik el-Ureybi
What son of Gaddafi, present in the convoy, was found dead shortly after being captured?	Mutassim
Where did an ambulance take Gaddafi after he was murdered?	Misrata
Who was the chief forensic pathologist of Libya?	Dr. Othman al-Zintani
How many bodies of Gaddafi supporters were found at the Mahari Hotel?	66
Who was the prime minister of the NTC?	Mahmoud Jibril
For how many days was Gaddafi's corpse displayed in public?	four
Who was killed by Gaddafi supporters for his role in Gaddafi's capture?	Omran Shaaban
Near what town was Oran Shaaban killed?	Bani Walid
On what date did the NTC announce Gaddafi's burial?	25 October
What philosophy was named for Gamal Abdel Nasser?	Nasserism
What did Gaddafi call his political philosophy created in the 1970s?	Third International Theory
What philosophy was combined with socialism and nationalism to form Third International Theory?	Third World revolutionary theory
The Green Book consisted of how many volumes?	three
What is the occupation of Sami Hajjar?	political scientist
What variety of Islam was Gaddafi raised in?	Sunni
In what country is Kampala Mosque located?	Uganda
In what ethnic culture was Gaddafi raised?	Bedouin
In what year did Gaddafi notably visit Italy?	2010
What country did Gaddafi refer to as "the embodiment of evil"?	United States
How did Gaddafi believe the Israel-Palestine conflict should be resolved?	Isratin single-state solution
Who compared Gaddafi to Hitler?	Blundy and Lycett
What was a major factor in Gaddafi's hatred of the United States?	support of Israel
Whose efforts did Gaddafi see himself as continuing?	Nasser
Who stated that Gaddafi was fond of children?	Mirella Bianco
What was Gaddafi's religious affiliation?	Muslim
What is Mirella Biano's occupation?	Reporter
Who remarked on Gaddafi's family orientation?	His father
What publication did Annick Cojean work for?	Le Monde
What is the nationality of Seham Sergewa?	Libyan
What ICC prosector claimed that Gaddafi had ordered soldiers to rape opposition women?	Luis Moreno Ocampo
What book was written by Annick Cojean?	Gaddafi's Harem
How far is the Bab al-Azizia barracks from Tripoli?	two miles
Who designed Gaddafi's Azizia home?	West German engineers
How many tennis courts existed in Gaddafi's compound?	two
What was the value of Gaddafi's supposed British property holdings as of November 2011?	£1 billion
How much did Gaddafi pay for his Airbus A340?	$120 million
Who was Gaddafi's first father-in-law?	General Khalid
When was Gaddafi's son by Fatiha al-Nuri born?	1970
What was the maiden surname of Gaddafi's second wife?	el-Brasai
What tribe did Safia Farkash belong to?	Obeidat
When did Khamis Gaddafi die?	2011
Who referred to Gaddafi as a populist?	Blundy and Lycett
Who stated that Gaddafi was a gifted speaker?	Bianco
Who noted that Gaddafi made long speeches?	Daniel Kawczynski
What sort of virus did Gaddafi describe HIV as?	peaceful
Who did Gaddafi claim created H1N1?	a foreign military
According to Gaddafi, what insects made up God's armies?	tsetse fly and mosquito
What illnesses did Gaddafi claim would afflict invading colonialists?	malaria and sleeping sickness
What was the name of Gaddafi's female bodyguard?	Amazonian Guard
In what decade was Gaddafi first accompanied by his female bodyguard?	1980s
What is Halyna Kolotnytska's nationality?	Ukrainian
What is the profession of Halyna Kolotnytska?	nurse
What sort of relationship did Gaddafi have with Halyna Kolotnytska?	professional
What diseases were minimized by Gaddafi's health care policies?	cholera and typhoid
What was the cost of primary and secondary education under Gaddafi?	free
Why did living standards decline in 1980s Libya?	economic stagnation
Due to his opposition to West governments, who notably respected Gaddafi?	Euro-American far right
What is the occupation of Lillian Craig Harris?	Libyan studies specialist
What did Reagan call Gaddafi?	mad dog of the Middle East
According to Human Rights Watch, how many prisoners were killed on June 29, 1996?	1,270
Under Gaddafi, how did Freedom House rate Libya?	Not Free
What did Gaddafi call Libya dissidents based outside the country?	stray dogs
At what prison did extrajudicial executions occur according to HRW?	Abu Salim
Who referred to Gaddafi as a martyr?	Hugo Chávez
Who noted Gaddafi's opposition to apartheid?	Nelson Mandela
Who expressed pride at overthrowing Gaddafi's government?	David Cameron
In what country was there a notable Muslim vigil for Gaddafi?	Sierra Leone
Who said something about tyranny?	Barack Obama
Who was elected president of the GNC?	Mohammed Magariaf
Who was initially named prime minister by the GNC?	Mustafa A.G. Abushagur
Why did Mustafa A.G. Abushagur not become prime minister?	failed to gain congressional approval
Who did the GNC eventually make prime minister?	Ali Zeidan
What official name did the GNC give to Libya?	State of Libya
What is the official name of Cypus?	Republic of Cyprus
Where is Cyprus located?	Eastern Mediterranean Sea
What countries are nearby Cyprus?	Syria and Turkey
What is Cyprus' affiliation with the European Union?	member state
Is Cyprus an island country or land-locked country?	island country
What does Cyprus rank in terms of size in the Mediterranean?	third largest
Which country is north of Cyprus?	Turkey
What is the date of the earliest known human activity on Cyprus?	10th millennium BC
What is Cyprus home to of?	the oldest water wells in the world
Who was Cyprus settled by in 2nd millennium BC?	Mycenaean Greeks
What empires have occupied Cyprus?	empires of the Assyrians, Egyptians and Persians
When did Ottoman rule occur in Cyprus?	between 1571 and 1878
When was Cyprus placed under British administration?	1878
What year was Cyprus annexed by Britain?	1914
What year was Cyprus granted independence?	1960
What year did the intercommunal violence between Greek and Cypriots occur?	1963
How many Turkish Cypriots were displaced due to the 11 year violence in 1963?	25,000
The Republic of Cyprus does not have de jure sovereignty over what two British territories?	Akrotiri and Dhekelia
How many parts is the Republic of Cyprus partitioned into?	two main parts
How much area of the island does the Republic control?	59%
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is only recognized by what country?	Turkey
What does the international community consider the northern part of Cyprus?	territory of the Republic of Cyprus occupied by Turkish forces
During what Age did Cyprus experience two waves of Greek settlement?	late Bronze Age
Who did the first wave of Greek settlement consist of?	Mycenaean Greek traders
What year did Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus begin visiting Cyprus?	1400 BC
Cyprus is the birthplace of what two Greek mythological figures?	Aphrodite and Adonis
Cyprus is home to which Greek mythological figures?	King Cinyras, Teucer and Pygmalion
In what year did James II die?	1473
Who assumed control of the island after the death of James II?	Republic of Venice
In what year did Venice formally annex the kingdom of Cyprus?	1489
Which empire frequently raided Cyprus during Venetian rule?	Ottoman Empire
In what year did the Ottomans destroy Limassol?	1539
In what year did Cyprus face a full-scale Ottoman assault?	1570
Ottoman forces massacred which types of people?	Greek and Armenian Christian inhabitants
Turkish peasants and craftsman were brought to the island from where?	Anatolia
What system did the Ottomans abolish in favor of the millet system?	feudal system
Who was invested as the leader of the Greek Cypriot population?	head of the Church of Cyprus
Who was the Church of Cyprus hoping to end encroachments of?	Roman Catholic Church
How many years did Cyprus face of economic decline?	250 years
How many Muslims made up the island's population in 1777-78?	47,000
How many Christians made up the island's population in 1777-78?	37,000
What was the population of the island in 1872?	144,000
In 1872 the island contained how many Muslims?	44,000
In 1872 the island contained how many Christians?	100,000
What year did the Greek war of independence break out?	1821
How many Greek Cypriots were arrested and executed by the Ottoman governor of Cyprus?	486
Who was modern Greece's first president?	Ioannis Kapodistrias
What did Ioannis Kapodistrias call for?	union of Cyprus with Greece
The island of Cyprus serves as a key military base to what western country?	Britain
What years was the Famagusta harbour completed?	1906
Cyprus was a naval outpost which overlooked what canal?	Suez Canal
Which side did the Ottoman Empire join in World War 1?	Central Powers
The Megali Idea was actively pursued by whom?	Cypriot Orthodox Church
Historically, the idea of enosis was part of which other idea?	Megali Idea
What guerrilla organization was founded by religious officials and military officers?	Ethniki Organosis Kyprion Agoniston or National Organisation of Cypriot Fighters (EOKA).
In what year decade did the pursuit of enosis become a part of national Greek policy?	1950s
Who viewed themselves as a distinct ethnic group of the island of Cyprus?	Turkish Cypriots
Initially Turkish Cypriots favoured the continued rule of what Western power?	British
What percentage of the population did Turkish Cypriots make up?	20%
What slogan was frequently used in Turkish Cypriot protests?	"Partition or Death"
In what year did the Church of Cyprus organize a referendum?	1950
In 1946, the Greeks made up what percent of Cyprus' population?	80.2%
In what year was the EOKA organization founded?	1955
What is the name of the policy that the British adopted?	"divide and rule"
Which countries were part of the Zurich and London Agreement?	United Kingdom, Greece and Turkey
What was Cyprus' total population when it gained independence?	573,566
What is the date that Cyrpus attained independence?	16 August 1960
What was the percentage of Greeks in the Cyprus population?	(77.1%
What was the percentage of Turks in the Cyprus population?	18.2%
National militants had the support of what two countries?	Greece and Turkey
What was the goal of the Akritas plan?	reforming the constitution in favour of Greek Cypriots
Which president called for constitutional changes?	President Archbishop Makarios
Who rejected the constitutional changes proposed by President Archbishop Makarios?	Turkey
In December of what year did intercommunal violence erupt?	1963
The violence beginning in 1963 resulted in the deaths of many Turks?	364
How many Turkish Cypriots were displaced due to the violence?	25,000-30,
Turkish Cypriots were prevented from doing what?	travelling and entering government buildings
Who tried to invade Cyprus in 1964?	Turkey
Which US President prevented Turkey from invading Cyprus?	Lyndon B. Johnson
What policy could not be abandoned in 1964?	enosis
How many troops did Greece send to Cyprus?	10,000
What date was a coup d'etat carried out in Cyprus?	15 July 1974
Who lead the coup d'etat attempt?	Dimitrios Ioannides
Who replaced president Makarios Ill?	Nikos Sampson
What did the Turkish army to do respond to the coup d'etat?	invaded the island
Which organization rejected the justification used by Turkey to invade?	United Nations
What did the Turkish troops capture first on the island?	Kyrenia
What was the date of the second Turkish invasion?	14 August
What locations were seized in the second invasion?	Morphou, Karpass, Famagusta and the Mesaoria
How much of the island was controlled by Turks after international pressure led to a ceasefire?	37%
How many Greek Cypriots had been displaced from their homes?	180,000
How many Turkish Cypriots moved into areas that were under Turkish control?	50,000
In what year did the US impose an arms embargo on Turkey?	1975
Why did the US impose an arms embargo on Turkey?	using American-supplied equipment during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974
How many settlers from Turkey were living in the north?	150,000
What terms did the Turkish government violate by sending people?	Geneva Convention and various UN resolutions
What happened to ports on Cyprus after capture of its northern territory by Turkish troops?	all of its ports of entry in the north were closed
In what year did the last major effort to settle the Cyprus dispute take place?	2004
In 2006 people fled to Cyprus from what country?	Lebanon
In what year did Cyprus join the European Union?	2004
How many Turkish Cypriots voted for the Annan Plan in 2004?	65%
How many Greek Cypriots voted against the Annan Plan in 2004?	74%
What two mountains ranges are located on the island of Cyprus?	Troodos Mountains and the smaller Kyrenia Range
What plain is located in between the Troodos Mountains and the Kyrenia Range?	the Mesaoria
Which river drains the Mesaoria plain?	Pedieos River
What is the highest point on the island of Cyprus?	Mount Olympus
How tall is Mount Olympus?	1,952 m (6,404 ft)
In Cyprus, what is the average temperature during the day?	24 °C (75 °F)
What type of climate does Cyprus have?	one of the warmest climates in the Mediterranean
What month typically marks the end of summer on Cyprus?	November
How long do summers generally last on Cyprus?	eight months
Which cities has one of the warmest winters in the European Union?	Limassol
What is the average day emperature of Limassol during winter?	17–18 °C (63–64 °F)
What is the general temperature of coastal location during the night?	6–8 °C (43–46 °F)
When does the middle of summer occur on Cyprus?	July and August
What is the average day temperature on the coast during summer?	33 °C (91 °F)
What is the average day temperature on the coast in June and September?	30 °C (86 °F)
Where are temperatures more extreme compared to the coast of Cyprus?	Inland
When did Cyprus receive enough rainfall to fill up their water reserves?	Between 2001 and 2004
What do people living in Cyprus rely on for household water?	rain
Why has the water supply shrunk in previous years?	more frequent droughts
What resource is scarce on Cyprus?	water
Why has demand for water increased annually on Cyprus?	local population growth, foreigners moving to Cyprus and the number of visiting tourists
What do the people of Cyprus rely on for domestic and agricultural supply of water?	Dams
What is the total number of completed dams located on Cyprus?	107
What is the capacity of water that the dams on Cyprus can hold?	330,000,000 m3 (1.2×1010 cu ft).
What percentage of domestic water do desalination plants provide on Cyprus?	almost 50 per cent
What has the government invested in to help supply water for Cyprus?	desalination plants
What types of branches did the 1960 Constitution provide?	legislative and judicial branches
What type of person was the vice-president?	Turkish Cypriot
Where did Legislative power rest?	the House of Representatives
Which part of Cyprus was occupied by the Turkish army?	northern third of the island
In what years was Cyprus divided?	1974
In 1983, Turkish Cypriots declared what?	independence
What organization recognizes the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus?	The United Nations
How many members are currently in the House of Representatives?	59 members
How long is the term for an elected member of the House of Representatives?	five-year term
How many seas are allocated to the Turkish community?	24
Who became the country's first Communist head of state in 2008?	Dimitris Christofias
Who is the current president of Cyprus?	Nicos Anastasiades
Why does the United Nations question the Human rights status of Cyprus?	ongoing division of Cyprus continues to affect human rights throughout the island
What is the rating for Cyprus in the "Freedom in the World 2011" report?	free
What is one of the reasons for the human rights issues on Cyprus?	division of the island
How much was Turkey ordered to pay in compensation to Cyprus?	over $100m
Who was accused of violating the Geneva Conventions?	Turkey
What year was Turkey ordered to pay fines to Cyprus?	2014
Why was Turkey accused of violating the Geneva Conventions?	directly or indirectly transferring its civilian population into occupied territory
What incident was the most deadly military accident that occurred on Cyprus?	Evangelos Florakis Naval Base explosion
What is one of the senior officer titles of the Cyprus air force?	Supreme Commander
What date did the Evangelos Florakis Naval Base explosion occur?	11 July 2011
What affected the Cypriot economy in 2012?	Eurozone financial and banking crisis
How much many did the Cypriot government initially announce it needed?	€1.8 billion
What was the amount of additional money requested by Cyprus?	€4 billion
What are the names of Cyprus' three largest banks?	Bank of Cyprus, Cyprus Popular Bank and Hellenic Bank
What did the March 2013 agreement decide?	split the country's second largest bank
Who would eventually absorb the "good" bank of Cyprus Popular Bank?	Bank of Cyprus
What was the amount of bailout money given to Cyprus?	€10 billion
Who was using Cyprus as a tax haven?	wealthy Russians
What is the per capita GDP of Cyprus given by the IMF?	$30,769
What are three of the largest contributors to the Cyprus economy?	Tourism, financial services and shipping
When was the Euro declared as the national currency of Cyprus?	1 January 2008
Why has Cyprus been sought out by offshore businesses?	low tax rates
What resource has been discovered offshore in recent years?	natural gas
With what two countries did Cyprus first demarcate its maritime border?	Egypt in 2003, and with Lebanon in 2007
Which country did Cyprus demarcate its maritime border in 2010?	Israel
What is the name of the US-based firm in a production-sharing agreement with Cyprus?	Noble Energy
What are the three modes of transport available on Cyprus?	road, sea and air
How many miles of roads are paved on Cyprus?	6,249 km (3,883 mi)
How many miles of roads are unpaved on Cyprus?	4,414 km (2,743 mi)
Which side of the road do vehicles on Cyprus drive on?	left-hand
What was the number of Greek Cypriots on Cyprus in 1973?	482,000
What did the Cypriot government find was the Greek population on Cyprus?	506,000 (78.9%)
What did the Cypriot government find was the Turkish population on Cyprus?	118,000 (18.4%)
In what years did the Greeks conduct extra censuses?	1976, 1982, 1992 and 2001
Who was excluded from the censuses conducted by the Greeks?	the Turkish population
How many people were living in Northern Cyprus according to the 2006 census?	256,644
How many citizens born in Cyprus also have parents who were born in Cyprus?	120,031
How many of the citizens in Northern Cyprus was born in Cyprus?	147,405
What religion do most Greek Cypriots identify with?	Greek Orthodox
What religion do most Turkish Cypriots identify with?	Sunni Islam
What country is the second most religious in the European Union?	Cyprus
Who is the current head of the Greek Orthodox church in Cyprus?	Archbishop Chrysostomos II
How many official languages does Cyprus have?	two
What are the two official languages of Cyprus?	Greek and Turkish
What are the minority languages are spoken in Cyprus?	Armenian and Cypriot Maronite Arabic
Are there any Western languages spoken in Cyprus?	English
Are there any Eastern languages spoken in Cyprus?	Russian
What do Cypriot universities ignore when looking at admission?	high school grades
What is required for university attendance?	high-school diploma
What plays a large factor in determining admission at a university?	university entrance examinations
What percentage do grades obtained account for in a students final grade?	25%
Where do most Cypriots receiver higher education?	Greek, British, Turkish, other European and North American universities
What nation has the highest level percentage of working citizens with higher-level education?	Cyprus
What percentage of the 25-34 Cyprus population has tertiary education?	47%
How many Cypriots students attend school outside of the country	78.7%
Which foods do Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots have in common?	souvla and halloumi
Which art forms are integral parts of everyday life?	music, dance and art
What is something that Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots do not have in common?	religions and religious
What religion do Greek Cypriots usually practice?	Greek Orthodox
What religion do Greek Cypriots usually practice?	Sunni Muslims
Who was the first important Cyprus painter of modern times?	Vassilis Vryonides
Where did Vassilis Vryonides study?	Academy of Fine Arts in Venice
Name one of the individuals considered the founding fathers of modern Cypriot art.	Adamantios Diamantis
Name the other individual considered the founding fathers of modern Cypriot art.	Christopheros Savva
Where do many Cypriot artists train?	England
What type of art is being promoted by art institutions in Cyprus?	conceptual art
What types of places can Cypriots visit to experience art?	Municipal art galleries
What year was Cyprus supposed to host the international art festival Manifesta?	2006
Traditional Cyprus music has what other types of genres in common?	Greek, Turkish, and Arabic
What are the names of the Greco-Turkish dances?	sousta, syrtos, zeibekikos, tatsia, and karsilamas
What are the names of the Middle-Eastern inspired dances?	tsifteteli and arapies
What is chattista?	form of musical poetry
Where is chattista performed?	traditional feasts and celebrations
What influences popular music in Cyprus?	Greek Laïka scene
What are some famous Cypriot artists?	Anna Vissi, Evridiki, and Sarbel
What other genres of music are enjoyed in Cyprus?	Hip Hop, R&B and reggae
What are some famous metal Cypriot bands?	Armageddon (rev.16:16), Blynd, Winter's Verge and Quadraphonic
Which artists are associated with Cypriot rock music?	Michalis Hatzigiannis and Alkinoos Ioannidis
What type of artistic form flourished at the time of the Middle Ages?	Epic poetry
What was the time period of Frankish rule?	4th century–1489
Who is one of the scholars that fled Cyprus during troubled times?	Ioannis Kigalas
Where did scholar Ioannis Kigalas flee to in the 17th century?	Italy
Who are some famous Cypriot folk poets?	Dimitris Lipertis, Vasilis Michaelides and Pavlos Liasides
Which Turkish Cypriot writer has been nominated for the Nobel Prize in literature twice?	Osman Türkay
Who is a modern Greek Cypriot writer and poet?	Kostas Montis
Where was William Shakespeare's Othello set?	Cyprus
Where did British writer Lawrence Durrell reside from 1952-1956?	Cyprus
Which 2014 novel uses Cyprus as its main location?	The Sunrise
What book did Lawrence Durrell write while living on Cyprus?	Bitter Lemons
What is the name of a local television company in Cyprus?	Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation
What is BRT?	the Turkish Cypriot equivalent to the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation
Which television broadcasters produce art and cultural programming?	Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation and BRT
What is the amount in Euros of money set aside for the Cinema Advisory Committee?	850,000 Euros
Who finances European film co-productions?	Council of Europe's Eurimages Fund
What was the first feature film to receive funding  from Eurimages?	I Sphagi tou Kokora
Which film was awarded the Best Screenwriting and Best Photography at the London Greek Film Festival?	Cyprus Guilt
What are some famous seafood and fish dishes?	squid, octopus, red mullet, and sea bass
What fruits are commonly used in foods?	Cucumber and tomato
What is lountza?	smoked pork loin
What is souvlaki?	pork and chicken cooked over charcoal
What is sheftalia?	minced meat wrapped in mesentery
Can you name some common vegetables used in Cyprus?	courgettes, green peppers, okra, green beans
Can you name some common fruits used in Cyprus?	pears, apples, grapes, oranges, mandarines
Can you name some common pulses used in Cyprus?	beans, broad beans, peas, black-eyed beans
Which Cypriot tennis player ranked 8th in the world?	Marcos Baghdatis
How high did Kyriakos Ioannou jump in Osaka in 2007?	2.35 m
What organization does Costas Philippou participate in?	Ultimate Fighting Championship
Where does Tio Ellinas race?	GP3 Series for Marussia Manor Motorsport
What issue did Spielberg address in his movie Schindler's List?	the Holocaust
What issue did Spielberg address in his movie Amistad?	the transatlantic slave trade
What issue did Spielberg address in his movie Munich?	terrorism
How long has Steven Spielberg had his career so far?	more than four decades
In what film did Spielberg address humanistic issues?	Schindler's List
In what film did Spielberg cover the slave trade?	Amistad
In what films did Spielberg address war?	Empire of the Sun, Saving Private Ryan, War Horse and Bridge of Spies
In what film did Spielberg address terrorism?	Munich
What type of films did Spielberg find early success with?	y science-fiction and adventure
Where was Steven Spielberg born?	Cincinnati, Ohio
What religion was Steven Spielberg's family?	Orthodox Jewish
Where were Steven Spielberg's granparents from?	Ukraine
Where did Steven Spielberg's family move to in 1953?	Phoenix, Arizona
What job did Steven Spielberg's father have?	electrical engineer
Where was Spielberg born?	Cincinnati, Ohio
What religion was Spielberg's family?	Orthodox Jewish
What was Spielberg's father's career?	electrical engineer involved in the development of computers
What was Spielberg's mother's career?	restaurateur and concert pianist
Where did Spielberg's paternal grandparents immigrate from?	Ukraine
How much money has all of Steven Spielberg's movies grossed worldwide?	exceeds $9 billion
What composer has Steven Spielberg been associated with since 1974?	John Williams
How much money is Steven Spielberg worth?	more than $3 billion
What record does Steven Spielberg have?	the highest-grossing director in history
Who has composed most of Steven Spielberg's movies?	John Williams
When was Jaws released?	1975
When did Jurassic Park come out?	1993
What did Spielberg win for Schindler's List?	Academy Award for Best Director
Who composes music for most of Spielberg's movies?	John Williams
What is Spielberg's net worth?	more than $3 billion
When did Steven Spielberg have trouble dealing with being an Orthodox Jew?	As a child
How did Steven Spielberg feel about being an Orhtodox Jew?	embarrassed
What kind of prejudice did Spielberg have to deal with in High school?	anti-Semitic
How many bloody noses did Spielberg get in High School?	Two
At what age was Spielberg embarrassed by his family being Jewish?	seven, eight, nine years old
What was Spielberg bullied because of?	anti-Semitic prejudice
How many bloody noses did Spielberg get in high school?	Two
What was Spielberg's first indepenent film?	Firelight
How long was Spielberg's film "Escape to Nowhere"?	40-minute
How much money did Spielberg spend to film Close Encounters?	$500
Who did Spielberg get money from to film Close Encounters?	his father
What genre was Spielberg's first film "The Last Gunfight"	Western
When did Spielberg join the Boy Scouts?	1958
What film did Spielberg make to earn a merit badge?	The Last Gunfight
Why did Spielberg make a movie instead of taking still photos for the photography merit badge?	dad's still-camera was broken
At what age did Spielberg make 'Escape to Nowhere'?	thirteen
What film led to Close Encounters?	Firelight
What job was SPielberg offered when he was a student?	Universal Studios
Who offered Spielberg a contract at Universal Studios?	Sidney Sheinberg
What short film did Spielberg make for theatrical release?	Amblin
What did Steven Spielberg do to begin directing TV prouctions for Universal?	dropped out of college
How did Sidney Sheinberg feel about the film "Amblin'"	impressed
What studio gave Spielberg an unpaid internship?	Universal Studios
What department did Spielberg have an unpaid internship with?	editing
How long was 'Amblin'?	26-minute
What was Sidney Sheinberg's position with Universal?	vice president
How long of a contract did Sheinberg give Spielberg?	seven-year
Who starred in the TV show segment "Eyes"	Joan Crawford
What genre was Steven Spielberg's episode of "The Name of the Game"?	science fiction
What was Steven Spielberg's first feature-length assignment?	an episode of The Name of the Game called "L.A. 2017".
What year was Spielberg hired to direct one of the segments for "Night Gallery"?	1969
What was the relatioship between Joan Crawford and Steven Spielberg?	reportedly close friends
What was the first TV episode Spielberg directed part of?	1969 pilot episode of Night Gallery
What was Spielberg's first full TV episode to direct?	an episode of The Name of the Game called "L.A. 2017"
Who starred in Spielberg's TV debut?	Joan Crawford
What law show did Spielberg work on?	Owen Marshall: Counselor at Law
What genre was 'LA 2017'?	futuristic science fiction
How many TV films did Universal sign Spielbergo to direct?	four
What British critic helped boost Steven Spielberg's career?	Dilys Powell
Who starred in the TV show "Savage"?	Martin Landau
How did Steven Spielberg's film "The Sugarland Express" do in the box office?	poorly
What were the married couple in Steven Spielberg's film "The Sugarland Express" trying to regain?	custody of their baby
How many TV movies was Spielberg signed to direct?	four
What kind of truck was 'Duel' about?	Peterbilt 281 tanker
Which British critic praised 'Duel'?	Dilys Powell
Which TV film Spielberg directed played off 'The Exorcist'?	Something Evil
Who starred in 'Savage'/	Martin Landau
What film did Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown offer Steven Spielberg to direct?	Jaws
Why was Jaws nearly shut down?	delays and budget over-runs
How many Academy Awards did the film "Jaws" win?	three
What was the film "Jaws" nominated for?	Best Picture
How much money did the film "Jaws" gross worldwide?	$470 million worldwide
Who made Spielberg the 'Jaws' director?	Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown
How many Academy Awards did 'Jaws' win?	three
Who wrote the 'Jaws' book?	Peter Benchley
How much did 'Jaws' earn in theaters?	more than $470 million worldwide
How many times did Spielberg work with Richard Dreyfus?	three
What films did Spielberg turn down in the 70s?	Jaws 2, King Kong and Superman
How many Oscars did Close Encounters win?	two
How many Oscars did Close Encounters get nominated for, besides Best Director?	six
What was the genre of '1941'?	World War II farce
How much did '1941' earn?	over $92.4 million worldwide
When did Spielberg re-release Close Encounters?	1980
What new footage did Columbia require for a Close Encounters revisit?	the interior of the mothership
What was the Close Encounters revisit called?	Close Encounters: The Special Edition
Which studio funded Close Encounters?	Columbia Pictures
When did a Close Encounters DVD come out?	2001
Who was responsible for Star Wars?	George Lucas
Who played Indiana Jones?	Harrison Ford
Who played Han Solo?	Harrison Ford
What was the first Indiana Jones movie?	Raiders of the Lost Ark
When did the first Indiana Jones movie come out?	1981
What rating did 'Temple of Doom' receive?	PG
What movie caused 'PG-13' to be created?	Gremlins
When did 'Temple of Doom' debut?	1984
Why did Gremlins need 'PG-13'?	the high level of violence in films targeted at younger audiences
What was Spielberg's future wife's career?	actress
Who wrote 'The Color Purple'?	Alice Walker
What was 'The Color Purple' about?	a generation of empowered African-American women during depression-era America
Who starred in 'The Color Purple'?	Whoopi Goldberg and future talk-show superstar Oprah Winfrey
What did Ebert think of 'The Color Purple'?	proclaimed it the best film of the year and later entered it into his Great Films archive
How many Oscar nominations did 'The Color Purple' get?	eleven
Until the 1980s, when had an American film last been shot in Shanghai?	the 1930s
Who wrote 'Empire of the Sun'?	J. G. Ballard
Who starred in 'Empire of the Sun'?	John Malkovich and a young Christian Bale
Who thought 'Empire of the Sun' was the best film of the year?	Andrew Sarris
What was Spielberg's role on 'Batteries Not Included'?	co-producer
When did the 3rd Indiana Jones film come out?	1989
What was the 3rd Indiana Jones film called?	Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
Who played Indiana Jones's father?	Sean Connery
Who directed 'Batman'?	Tim Burton
What was 'Always' about?	a daredevil pilot who extinguishes forest fires
Whose life was 'Schindler's List' based on?	Oskar Schindler
How many Jews did Schindler save?	1,100
What did Spielberg first win Best Director for?	Schindler's List
What did Spielberg do with 'Schindler's List' profits?	set up the Shoah Foundation, a non-profit organization that archives filmed testimony of Holocaust survivors
Where did the American Film Institute rank 'Schindler's List' in 1997?	#9
Who did Tom Hanks play in 'Saving Private Ryan'?	Capt. Miller
What war was 'Saving Private Ryan' about?	World War II
How much did 'Saving Private Ryan' earn?	over $481 million worldwide
Which film beat 'Saving Private Ryan' worldwide?	Armageddon
Who directed 'Armageddon'?	Michael Bay
What movie did Spielberg collaborate with Cruise for?	Minority Report
When is Minority Report set?	2054
What was the Rotten Tomatoes rating for Minority Report?	92%
How much did Minority Report earn?	over $358 million worldwide
When was Minority Report released?	2002
Which studios produced Spielberg's 'War of the Worlds'?	Paramount and DreamWorks
Who wrote the 'War of the Worlds' book?	H. G. Wells
When was the first 'War of the Worlds' movie released?	1953
Who did the visual effects for 'War of the Worlds'?	Industrial Light & Magic
How much did 'War of the Worlds' earn?	over $591 million worldwide
What was 'Munich' about?	the 1972 Munich Massacre of Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games
What book was 'Munich' based on?	Vengeance
Who wrote 'Vengeance'?	George Jonas
How many Oscar nominations did 'Munich' get?	five
Who composed music for 'Munich'?	John Williams
When did Spielberg announce what would become 'Interstellar'?	June 2006
Who took over directing 'Interstellar'?	Christopher Nolan
What was the concept for 'Interstellar'?	a group of explorers who travel through a worm hole and into another dimension
Who wrote the 'Interstellar' script?	Jonathan Nolan
What university provided scientific consultation for 'Interstellar'?	Caltech
What was the first non-Pixar movie to win the Best Animated Feature Film award?	The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn
When did Adventures of Tintin debut?	October 22, 2011
Where did Adventures of Tintin debut?	Brussels, Belgium
When was Adventures of Tintin released in the US?	December 21, 2011
How much did Adventures of Tintin earn?	over $373 million worldwide
Where was 'War Horse' filmed?	England
When did 'War Horse' come out?	December 25, 2011
Who wrote the 'War Horse' book?	Michael Morpurgo
When did the 'War Horse' book come out?	1982
Who distributed 'War Horse'?	Disney
Who starred in 'Lincoln' as Abraham Lincoln?	Daniel Day-Lewis
What book was 'Lincoln' based on?	Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln
What part of Lincoln's life did the film cover?	the final four months
Where was 'Lincoln' filmed?	Richmond, Virginia
Who played Mary Todd Lincoln in 'Lincoln'?	Sally Field
When was 'Bridge of Spies' released?	October 16, 2015
How many Oscar nominations did 'Bridge of Spies' get?	six
When was 'Bridge of Spies' set?	1960
Where was 'Bridge of Spies' filmed?	New York City, Berlin and Wroclaw, Poland
Who played Donovan in 'Bridge of Spies'?	Tom Hanks
Which Warner Bros. cartoons did Spielberg produce?	Tiny Toon Adventures, Animaniacs, Pinky and the Brain, Toonsylvania, and Freakazoid!
What films did Spielberg produce for Don Bluth?	An American Tail and The Land Before Time
What video game did Spielberg come up with the concept for?	The Dig
When was 'The Dig' released?	1995
What charity did Spielberg's 'Lego Moviemaker' kit fund?	Starbright Foundation
When was 'Men In Black' released?	1997
Who wrote the book 'Memoirs of a Geisha' is based on?	Arthur Golden
Who did Spielberg collaborate with in 2006?	Robert Zemeckis
What film did Spielberg first collaborate with Zemeckis on?	Back to the Future Part III
Which studio produced 'Super 8'?	Paramount Pictures
When did 'Into the West' air?	2005
How many Emmys did 'Into the West' win?	two
Who wrote the music for 'Into the West'?	Geoff Zanelli
When was 'The Pacific' released?	2010
How much did 'The Pacific' cost?	$250 million
Which channel aired 'Falling Skies'?	TNT
In what year does 'Terra Nova' begin?	2149
How far back in time do people in 'Terra Nova' travel?	85 million years
Which channel aired 'Terra Nova'?	Fox
What show did Spielberg work with Rodat on?	Falling Skies
Who wrote the script for 'Someone's in the Kitchen'?	Paul Rugg
When was 'Skullmonkeys' released?	1997
When was Boombots released?	1999
When was The Neverhood released?	1996
What video game did Spielberg say in 2013 he's working on a TV show based on?	Halo
Who wrote 'The BFG'?	Roald Dahl
Who wrote E.T.'s script?	Melissa Mathison
What film festival will first air 'The BFG'?	Cannes Film Festival
In what month is Cannes held?	May
When will 'The BFG' be in most theaters?	July 1, 2016
Who wrote 'The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara'?	David Kertzer
When does 'The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara' take place?	1858
Where does 'The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara' take place?	Italy
Who plays Pope Pius IX in 'The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara'?	Mark Rylance
When is 'Ready Player One' planned to be released?	2018
Who was going to star in 'Robopocalypse'?	Anne Hathaway and Chris Hemsworth
When was 'Robopocalypse' scheduled for release?	April 25, 2014
How far in the future was 'Robopocalypse' set?	15–20 years
Who wrote the book 'Robopocalypse' is based on?	Daniel H. Wilson
What was the budget for 'Robopocalypse'?	$200 million
What theme is common to Spielberg's films?	ordinary characters searching for or coming in contact with extraordinary beings or finding themselves in extraordinary circumstances
When in his life did Spielberg 'feel like an alien'?	during childhood
When did Spielberg give an interview saying he had 'felt like an alien'?	August 2000
Why does Spielberg think aliens would visit?	curiosity and sharing of knowledge
Which of Spielberg's parents liked sci-fi?	his father
Which Spielberg films are examples of a childlike sense of wonder?	Close Encounters of the Third Kind, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Hook, A.I. Artificial Intelligence and The BFG
What camera style does Spielberg often use?	low height camera tracking shots
What are some Spielberg films that included kids?	E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Empire of the Sun, Jurassic Park
How were the water scenes in Jaws filmed?	from the low-angle perspective of someone swimming
Who is naive in 'Catch Me if You Can'?	Frank
What was Indy's father's career?	professor of medieval literature
What artifact did Indy's father focus on?	the Holy Grail
What is Spielberg's most common theme?	tension in parent-child relationships
Whose son disappeared in 'Minority Report'?	John Anderton
Whose parents divorced in 'Catch Me If You Can'?	Frank Abagnale
Which Spielberg films has Dreyfuss been in?	Jaws, Close Encounters of the Third Kind, and Always
Who was Ford going to play in E.T., until the scene was removed?	a headteacher
Which Spielberg TV shows has Frank Welker been a voice actor for?	Tiny Toons, Animaniacs, and SeaQuest DSV
Which Spielberg films has Tom Hanks been in?	Saving Private Ryan, Catch Me If You Can, The Terminal, and Bridge of Spies
Which Spielberg films has Tom Cruise been in?	Minority Report and War of the Worlds
Which film did Kathleen Kennedy first work with Spielberg on?	E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial
Which childhood friend worked on Spielberg's films?	Allen Daviau
Which film did Kaminski first work with Spielberg on?	Schindler's List
Which film did Daviau first work with Spielberg on?	Amblin
Which film did Kahn first work with Spielberg on?	Close Encounters
What are the only Spielberg films since Sugarland Express to not have music by John Williams?	Bridge of Spies, The Color Purple and Twilight Zone: The Movie
What happens at the end of 'Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'?	they ride into the sunset
Who are the 'Movie Brats', besides Spielberg?	George Lucas, Francis Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, John Milius, and Brian De Palma
Who are the only screenwriters Spielberg has worked with on more than one film?	Tony Kushner and David Koepp
Who did Spielberg begin dating in 1976?	Amy Irving
What was Amy Irving's career?	actress
Who introduced Irving to Spielberg?	Brian De Palma
How did Irving describe Spielberg's house?	"bachelor funky"
Why did Irving not want to be in Spielberg's films while dating?	"I don't want to be known as Steven's girlfriend,"
When did Spielberg and Irving initially break up?	1979
When did Spielberg and Irving get back together?	1984
When did Spielberg and Irving marry?	November 1985
When did Spielberg and Irving divorce?	1989
How expensive was Spielberg and Irving's divorce?	third most costly celebrity divorce in history
In which Olympics was Spielberg a flagbearer?	2002 Winter Olympic Games
Where was Spielberg an Olympic flagbearer?	Salt Lake City
How did Time Magazine recognize Spielberg?	one of the 100 Most Important People of the Century
What honorary degree did Spielberg receive from Boston University?	Doctor of Humane Letters
How did Life Magazine recognize Spielberg?	the most influential person of his generation
When was Spielberg named the 'most influential celebrity in America'?	2014
How much of the US believes Spielberg is influential?	47%
Who is Gerry Philpott?	president of E-Poll Market Research
How did Spielberg influence the public's behavior?	many will think for a second before going into the water this summer
When was Citizen Kane released?	1941
When was 'The War of the Worlds' radio broadcast?	1938
When did Spielberg buy a sled from Citizen Kane?	1982
When did Spielberg buy Orson Welles' personal script copy from 'The War of the Worlds'?	1994
What does Spielberg do with Academy Awards he buys?	donated them to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, to prevent their further commercial exploitation
What was the first video game Spielberg played?	Pong
When did Spielberg first play a video game?	1974
What movie was Spielberg working on when he first played Pong?	Jaws
What game consoles does Spielberg own?	a Wii, a PlayStation 3, a PSP, and Xbox 360
How does Spielberg feel about cutscenes in games?	intrusive
What Boy Scout merit badge did Spielberg help develop?	cinematography
Which Spielberg movie showed its main character was a Boy Scout?	Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
What was Indy's rank in Boy Scouts when shown in a movie?	Life Scout
Which major Spielberg movie character was a Boy Scout?	Indiana Jones
When was Spielberg's merit badge launched?	1989
What award did Spielberg receive on Jul 15, 2006?	Gold Hugo Lifetime Achievement Award
Who made Spielberg a knight?	Jacques Chirac
Where was Spielberg honored on Dec 3, 2006?	Kennedy Center
Who narrated a short Spielberg bio at the Kennedy Center?	Tom Hanks
When was Spielberg added to the Science Fiction Hall of Fame?	2005
When did the Visual Effects Society give Spielberg a Lifetime Achievement Award?	February 2009
When did Spielberg win the Cecil B. DeMille Award?	2009
Why was Spielberg's Cecil B. DeMille Award postponed from 2008?	watered-down format of the ceremony resulting from conflicts in the 2007–08 writers strike
For which industry were elevators first used?	coal mines
In the mid 1800s what were elevators fueled by?	steam power
What were elevators originally built for?	moving goods in bulk in mines and factories
Who built the "ascending room", in 1823?	Burton and Hormer
The "ascending room" gave customers a view of what city's downtown?	London
Who invented the hydraulic crane in 1846?	Sir William Armstrong
Were was the hydraulic crane initially used?	Tyneside docks
In what manner did hydraulic cranes employ Pascal's law?	they provided a much greater force
The water pump supplied water pressure to a plunger located where?	encased inside a vertical cylinder
besides water pressure, what else was used to increase the lifting power?	Counterweights and balances
What Neapolitan architect created the "Flying Chair" elevator?	Gaetano Genovese
At what location was the "Flying Chair" installed in 1845?	Royal Palace of Caserta
What type of wood was used on the inside ?	maple
What controlled the traction?	a motor mechanic utilizing a system of toothed wheels
What did the safety system consist of?	a beam pushed outwards by a steel spring
Who created the safety elevator in 1852?	Elisha Otis
What feature did the safety elevator display?	prevented the fall of the cab if the cable broke
What did the govenor device engage to lock the elevator?	knurled roller(s)
At what location was it first presented?	New York exposition in the Crystal Palace
Where was the first safety elevator installed?	488 Broadway in New York City
Which was built first, the first elevator shaft or the first elevator?	first elevator shaft
What year did constructrion begin for the Cooper Union Foundation?	1853
What design did Peter Cooper feel was the most efficient?	cylindrical
The Otis Elevator Company is today a subsidiary of what major corporation?	United Technologies Corporation
What title does United Technologies Corporation hold?	world's largest manufacturer of vertical transport systems
Who built the first electric elevator?	Werner von Siemens
The first electric elevator, built in 1880, was in what Country?	Germany
Who is credited with increasing the safety and speed of electric elevators?	Frank Sprague
Who ultilized von Siemens ideas to build a succesful business?	Anton Freissler
To whom did Frank Sprague sell his company to in 1895?	Otis Elevator Company
What is another name for an elevator shaft?	hoistway
Elevator drive mechanisms have, in the past been, powered by what?	steam and water hydraulic pistons or by hand
What is the weight of the elevator cage balanced by?	a counterweight
How do elevators built in pairs work?	their cars always move synchronously in opposite directions,
How do most elevator doors work?	have two panels that meet in the middle, and slide open laterally
What is a single panel door referred to as?	"slab" door
What design allows wider entryways within limited space?	a cascading telescopic configuration
The single door is sometimes located where?	on the shaft way
What do elevator doors protect riders from?	falling into the shaft
Throughout history, what type of engines were used for elevator machines?	AC motors
Why were AC motors used?	cost and lower usage applications where car speed and passenger comfort were less of an issue
What problem arises for fast and large capacity elevators?	the need for infinitely variable speed control over the traction machine
Generally, what powered the relay contoller?	MG set
What is a known advantage of the MG set?	electrically isolating the elevators from the rest of a building's electrical system
In a gearless traction engine, what is the drive sheave attached to?	directly attached to the end of the motor
What speed is a gearless traction elevator capable of attaining?	20 m/s (4,000 ft/min)
What motivates an external drum brake held open electrically?	spring force
One exception that is not high speed high rise and large capacity is what?	Kone MonoSpace's EcoDisc
What reduces the amount of force needed to propel the cab?	cables are attached to a hitch plate on top of the cab
Where will the counterweight be found?	in the hoist-way
What guides the traction machine?	the controller
The counterweight runs equal to the cab weight plus what percentage of the elevator capacity?	40-50%
Maintaining that the ropes all have equal tension may reduce what?	Sheave and rope wear
"Compensation" is the name of the system used for what type of elevators?	Elevators with more than 30 m (98 ft) of travel
"Compensation" consists of what?	a separate set of cables or a chain attached to the bottom of the counterweight and the bottom of the elevator cab
What is the chain guided by in a compensation system that uses chains?	a bar mounted between the counterweight railway lines
What exactly does this system compensate for?	the differing weight of cable between the hoist and the cab
What type of installations are hydraulic elevators best suited for?	low rise, low traffic installations
Why do hydraulic elevators use more energy?	the pump works against gravity to push the car and its passengers upwards; this energy is lost when the car descends on its own weight
What else contributes to a higher demand from the electrical system?	The high current draw of the pump when starting up
What concerns arise when the lifting cylinder leaks fluid into the ground?	environmental concerns
What defines a climbing elevator?	a self-ascending elevator with its own propulsion
What settings are climbing elevators used in?	guyed masts or towers
What is the Glasgow Tower?	an observation tower in Glasgow, Scotland
How is the propulsion powered in a climbing elevator?	by an electric or a combustion engine
What does this type of elevator use to propel the cage?	a vacuum on top of the cab and a valve on the top of the "shaft"
For sudden surges in pressure above the cab, what is used as a "brake"?	a diaphragm or a piston
How does it enable the cab to go down by it's own weight?	it opens the valve so that the air can pressurize the top of the "shaft"
What is the shaft made of?	acrilic
How much weight is permitted on a low capacity elevator?	up to 525 lbs
Until the mid 1900s most elevators lacked what?	automatic positioning of the floor on which the cab would stop
How were most elevators built before 1939 powered?	by elevator operators using a rheostat connected to the motor
 Many earlier built  freight elevators were controlled by what?	switches operated by pulling on adjacent ropes
A rheostat is the size and shape of what?	a cake
Where was the rheostat mounted?	upright or sideways on the cab wall
Where is the elevator motor found?	at the top of the shaft or beside the bottom of the shaft
Moving the helve forward causes the cab to do what?	to rise
The more pressure applied to the handle caused what?	the faster the elevator would move
Why was the handle considered a "dead man switch"?	if the operator let go of the handle, it would return to its upright position, causing the elevator cab to stop
Eventually safety locks were used to guarantee what?	that the inner and outer doors were closed before the elevator was allowed to move
What function does a "destination operating panel" feature?	a passenger registers their floor calls before entering the car
What is another benefit of a "destination operating panel"?	the computer distributes adjacent stops to different cars in the bank
What is one benefit of a "destination operating panel"	travel time is reduced as the elevator makes fewer stops for individual passengers
What is the downside to a :destination operating panel"?	passenger waiting times may be longer as they will not necessarily be allocated the next car to depart
What is one example of a limitation on the system?	the system is subject to gaming
What is generally unable to support variations in the number of people for a particular destination?	The dispatching algorithm
For what reason do people repeatedly push the up/down buttons on a panel?	people believe this to be an effective way to hurry elevators
Why is this a bad practice?	this will make the computer think multiple people are waiting and will allocate empty cars to serve this one person
What is one way to implement destination control?	every user gets an RFID card to identify himself
How does this help the system?	the system knows every user call and can cancel the first call if the passenger decides to travel to another destination to prevent empty calls
Newer systems know where and how many people are at a location for what reasons?	either for the purposes of evacuating the building or for security reasons
What is another name for up-peak mode?	moderate incoming traffic
Generally, up-peak mode takes place during what times of the day?	most typically in the morning
What are the reasons for up-peak mode early in the day?	people arrive for work or at the conclusion of a lunch-time period
For what reasons are elevators routed one-by-one?	when they reach a pre-determined passenger load, or when they have had their doors opened for a certain period of time
Why is a "this car leaving next" sign used?	to encourage passengers to make maximum use of the available elevator system capacity
How is the special sercice mode enabled?	by a key switch either inside the elevator itself or on a centralized control panel in the lobby
What is the impact on an elevator set to independant service mode?	it will no longer respond to hall calls
At what times is Independant service best utilized?	when transporting large goods or moving groups of people between certain floors
During independant service mode how is a single cab in a hall kept from being used?	the hall buttons are disabled
Who is authorized to provide inspection and/or maintenance of the elevator?	qualified elevator mechanics
What is the purpose of the Inspection service?	to provide access to the hoistway and car top for inspection and maintenance
What action initiates it's activation?	a key switch on the car operating panel usually labeled 'Inspection', 'Car Top', 'Access Enable' or 'HWENAB
WWhat's the first thing to happen when the switch is activated?	the elevator will come to a stop if moving
Once activatated, what is the only way to deactivate it?	The elevator can now only be moved by the corresponding 'Access' key switches
What initiates Phase one mode?	a corresponding smoke sensor or heat sensor in the building
What happens when an elevator goes into Phase one mode?	The elevator will wait an amount of time, then proceed to go into nudging mode to tell everyone the elevator is leaving the floor
Where does the elevator go from there?	the elevator will go to the fire-recall floor
How is the elevator enabled for service after the incident?	The only way to return the elevator to normal service is to switch it to bypass after the alarms have reset
What happens if the mode is activated on the fire-recall floor?	the elevator will have an alternate floor to recall to
How is the Phase-two mode enabled?	Phase-two mode can only be activated by a key switch located inside the elevator on the centralized control panel
What actions must a firefighter take to activate Phase-two mode?	manually pushes and holds the door close button
What does Phase-two do?	enables the car to move
What is the purpose of the Phase-two mode?	This mode was created for firefighters so that they may rescue people from a burning building
Where is the Phase-two key switch to be found?	on the COP
Upon arriving at the desinated floor, what does the elevator do?	it will park with its doors open and the car buttons will be disabled to prevent a passenger from taking control of the elevator
What steps do medical personnel take at that point?	Medical personnel must then activate the code-blue key switch inside the car, select their floor and close the doors with the door close button
Where then does the elevator go?	The elevator will then travel non-stop to the selected floor
Once it arrives what does the elevator do	will remain in code-blue service until switched off in the car
What does the hold feature do?	allows the elevator to remain at a floor locked out of service until code blue is deactivated
What sequence of events happens when the power shuts off in a traction elevator and the elevators all stop?	One by one, each car in the group will return to the lobby floor, open its doors and shut down
What do any passengers experience at this point?	People in the remaining elevators may see an indicator light or hear a voice announcement informing them that the elevator will return to the lobby shortly
After all cars go to the lobby, what is the next step?	the system will then automatically select one or more cars to be used for normal operations and these cars will return to service
How are the selected cars then readied for passengers?	The car(s) selected to run under emergency power can be manually overridden by a key or strip switch in the lobby
What is a safety feature to prevent entrapment?	when the system detects that it is running low on power, it will bring the running cars to the lobby or nearest floor, open the doors and shut down
How do hydraulic elevators work in emergencies?	emergency power will lower the elevators to the lowest landing and open the doors to allow passengers to exit
Once the passengers have exited, what happens?	The doors then close after an adjustable time period and the car remains unusable until reset, usually by cycling the elevator main power switch
For what reason are hydraulic elevators not powered by the standard emergency system?	due to the high current draw when starting the pump motor
What are current-limiting motor starters referred to as?	"soft-start" contactors
What types of elevator hold the highest safety record?	cable-borne elevators
In the late nineties, what was considered the rate of cable-borne elevator problems?	eight millionths of one percent (1 in 12 million) of elevator rides
What was the severity of the majority of elevator failures recorded?	minor things such as the doors failing to open
What is an example of a maintenance-related elevator death?	technicians leaning too far into the shaft or getting caught between moving parts
Before the Twin Towers attack in 2001 , what was the only reported freefall accident attributed to a modern cable-borne elevator?	1945 when a B-25 bomber struck the Empire State Building
Underground electrolytic malfunctions in hydraulic elevators can result in the destruction of what?	the cylinder and bulkhead
What Elevator Safety Code change required a second dished bulkhead?	1972 ASME A17.1
Before the code change was enacted what was the only permitted hydraulic cylinder type?	single-bottom
Once the cylinder is breached, what calamity does the loss of fluid cause?	uncontrolled down movement of the elevator
What testing does the code require?	periodic testing of the pressure capability
What part of the mine shaft requires routine testing?	elevator rails
What is  the first step in destructive testing?	The ends of the segment are frayed, then set in conical zinc molds
Afterwards, what type of machine is the segment secured in?	hydraulic stretching machine
What type of testing is done to the an area of the cable?	destructive testing
What types of information are collected in the process?	Data about elasticity, load, and other factors is compiled
What dictates passenger elevator capacities?	the available floor space
What capacities are passenger elevators availablee in?	from 500 to 2,700 kg (1,000–6,000 lb) in 230 kg (500 lb) increments
What types of passenger elevators are installed in structures of up to eight floors?	hydraulic or electric
Hydraulic elevators can reach speeds up to 1m/s or how many feet per minute?	200
Electric elevators can reach speeds up to 3 m/s or how many feet per minute?	500
Passenger elevators, used in city transport share similarities to what other ascending and descending vehicles counterbalancing each other?	funiculars
What type of public elevator in Yalta, Ukraine, transport passengers from a hill above the Black Sea to a tunnel down on the beach?	underground public elevator
The elevator located at the Casco Viejo station in the Bilbao Metro is also used for what?	city transportation
How is that set up?	ticket barriers are set up in such a way that passengers can pay to reach the elevator from the entrance in the lower city, or vice versa
What is another name for a freight elevator?	goods lift
What type of notice is required to be visible in most freight elevators?	a written notice in the car that the use by passengers is prohibited
Some freight elevators allow transport of both freight and passengers by using what?	an inconspicuous riser
How do freight elevators differ from passenger elevators?	Freight elevators are typically larger and capable of carrying heavier loads than a passenger elevator
What type of elevator is better suited for carrying freight?	electric elevators
How are stage lifts powered?	by hydraulics
How many hydraulic elevators are there at Radio City Music Hall?	four
What is an orchestra lift used for?	to raise an entire orchestra, or an entire cast of performers (including live elephants) up to stage level from below
What is on the background of the image which can be used as a scale to represent the size of the mechanism?	a barrel
What type of elevators are generally less costly than full commercial elevators?	residential
What type of doors do commercial elevators use?	metal sliding
What safety mechanisms are still required, despite lower design costs?	locks on shaft access doors, fall arrestors, and emergency phones
What type of elevator has a hinged wooden shaft-access door?	residential
What types of elevators occassionaly do not use a traditional elevator shaft, machine room or hoistway?	residential
In what year were Machine-room-less elevators first allowed?	2007
This decision reflected a revision of what?	the ASME A17.1
What benefits does this serve?	allows an elevator to be installed where a traditional elevator may not fit, and simplifies installation
What are small freight elevators used for things such as food, called?	Dumbwaiters
What rooms are dumbwaiters frequently used in?	They often connect kitchens to rooms on other floors
What is a safety feature found in passenger elevators they generally do not have?	various ropes for redundancy
What is the height restriction on dumbwaiters?	they can be up to 1 meter (3 ft.) tall
What features do they have that mimic passenger elevators?	calling, door control, floor selection
What do the partians do on the conveyor?	ensure that the material moves forward
An inclined plane with a conveyor belt describes what type of elevator?	Material transport elevators
What industries are these types of elevators generally used in?	industrial and agricultural applications
What are spiral screws used for?	to elevate grain for storage in large vertical silos
What type of elevators are used for loading loose materials into bulk carriers?	Belt elevators
The invention of elevators brought with it questions of social etiquette and formalities, generally referred to as what?	social protocols
The last tsar of Russia, Nicholas ll encountered his first elevator at the Hotel Adloin in what city?	Berlin
This caused a stir in deciding who should enter first and who should do what?	press the buttons
Andreas Bernard wrote about the social aspects of the new elevators in what book?	Lifted: A Cultural History of the Elevator
Modern elevator position or floor indicaters often use what type of bulbs?	LED
What type of lanterns are used outside elevators as well as inside most cabs?	direction lanterns
What do floor indicaters often consist of?	successively illuminated floor indications or LCDs
What generally indicates the arrival of the elevator at a new floor?	a sound
What is the main function of direction lanterns?	to help people decide whether or not to get on the elevator
What might change your mind about whether or not to enter an elevator?	If somebody waiting for the elevator wants to go up, but a car comes first that indicates that it is going down
What type of etching might you see on a direction indicator?	arrows or shaped like arrows
Some elevators may use the color convention for only what purpose?	to differentiate between directions
New technologies aim to provide a better elevator experience to passengers who suffer from what?	claustrophobia, anthropophobia or social anxiety
What Israeli company uses motion sensors to display information on a screen embedded in the wall of the cabs?	DigiGage
LiftEye uses virtual window technology for what?	to turn common elevator into panoramic
How does it produce the panoramic effects?	It creates 3d video panorama using live feed from cameras placed vertically along the facade and synchronizes it with cab movement
Where is the video projected?	on a wall-sized screens
In what neighboring countries are passenger elevators required to adhere to Standard A17.1?	most US and Canadian jurisdictions
What is the equivilent to the US Standard A17.1 called in Canada?	CAN/CSA B44 Safety Standard
 What is Standard A17.1?	Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators
What are passenger elevators tested with?	ASME A17.2 Standard
Whose name is on the permit required for operation of an elevator?	the building owner
Do all jurisdictions require the permit to be displayed in the elevator?	some jurisdictions require the permit to be displayed in the elevator cab, other jurisdictions allow for the operating permit to be kept on file elsewhere
Aside from the elevator, where else might a permit be displayed?	the maintenance office
What type of notice can be displayed in the elevator in lieu of the permit?	a notice is posted in its place informing riders of where the actual permits are kept.
What country had the second most elevators installed?	United States
In 2008, what country had the largest number of elevators?	Spain
How many elevators had China installed since 1949?	610,000
What country boasts the worlds largest market for elevators?	Italy
How many elevators are in Brazil?	300,000
What type of elevators are used in the Taipei 101 office tower?	Double deck elevators
During what hours is the lower deck turned off?	low-volume hours
During the low volume hours, what can the upper deck function as?	a single-level elevator stopping at all adjacent floors
On what floor must restaurant customers clear their reservations?	at the reception counter on the 2nd floor
What levels make up the "sky lobby"?	36 and 60, upper-deck car
How fast do the observation deck elevators travel?	1,010 metres per minute (61 km/h) in 16 seconds
This speed holds what record?	world-record certified speed
What does cabin pressure control do?	help passengers adapt smoothly to pressure changes
How fast does the elevator drop down?	600 meters per minute
At what floor do the doors open on the way down?	52nd
What is the name of the elevator attraction at the Disney World parks across the world?	The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror
What is the main feature of this attraction?	a simulated free-fall achieved through the use of a high-speed elevator system
Do ride goers stand or sit?	passengers are seated and secured in their seats rather than standing
What unique feature does this ride provide guests?	downward acceleration greater than that of normal gravity
What type of motor is used?	high-speed drive motor
How are passenger cabs separated from the lift?	mechanically
What type of vehicles are the passenger cabs?	automated guided vehicles or AGVs
What action do the cabs take before the elevator begins to move?	move into the vertical motion shaft and lock themselves in
What is special about the doorways of the top floors?	The doorways of the top few "floors" of the attraction are open to the outdoor environment
What does this allow riders to do at the top?	look out from the top of the structure
What are the 67th, 69th, and 70th floors of the GE Building at Rockerfeller Center nicknamed?	"Top of the Rock"
What do these floors serve as?	observation decks
What type of elevator is featured?	high-speed glass-top
How long is the short trip?	about 60 seconds
The special effects include blue light, music playing and what else?	various animations are also displayed on the ceiling
 The Haunted Mansion at Disneyland in California and the one in Paris, France sharewhat attribute?	takes place on an elevator
What is the name of area that is really an elevator?	The "stretching room"
What is included in the elevator's design?	The elevator has no ceiling and its shaft is decorated to look like walls of a mansion
What is the illusion given by these effects?	the illusion of the room stretching
What planet is Neptune's near-twin?	Uranus
What is Neptune named after?	Roman god of the sea
How much more dense is Neptune compared to Earth?	17 times
What does the astronomical sign of Neptune represent?	god Neptune's trident
How many Earth years does Neptune orbit the sun?	164.8 years
How was Neptune found?	mathematical prediction
When was Neptune first observed?	23 September 1846
Who discovered Neptune?	Alexis Bouvard
What is Neptune's largest moon?	Triton
What flew by Neptune in 1989?	Voyager 2
Which planet is compositionally similar to Neptune?	Uranus
What is Neptune's atmosphere primarily composed of?	hydrogen and helium
What is the interior of Neptune composed of?	ices and rock
What makes Neptune blue?	methane
What "ices" makes up Neptune?	water, ammonia, and methane
What weather did Voyager 2 observe on Neptune?	Great Dark Spot
What weather feature does Neptune have stronger than any other planet?	sustained winds
What were the wind speeds recorded on Neptune?	2,100 kilometres per hour
What is the cloud tops on Neptune temperature?	55 K (−218 °C).
What is Neptune's planet center temperature?	5,400 K (5,100 °C)
Who drew Neptune after observing it with a telescope?	Galileo
What was Neptune mistaken for at first?	a fixed star
What happens when Neptune goes retrograde?	Earth's orbit takes it past an outer planet
What date was Neptune drawn first?	28 December 1612
Who recently researched the original observation of Neptune?	David Jamieson
What year did Alexis Bouvard publish relevant astronomical tables?	1821
What did Alexis Bouvard study?	the orbit of Neptune's neighbour Uranus
When did John Couch Adams begin working on the orbit of Uranus?	1843
Who gave John Couch Adams extra data?	Sir George Airy
What did the extra data John Couch Adams received produce?	several different estimates of a new planet
Who was Henrich d'Arrest?	student at the observatory
When did Galle discover Neptune?	23 September 1846
How many degrees off was Adams' prediction?	12°
What did Henrich d'Arrest seek to find?	the displacement characteristic of a planet
What was Challis looking for when he saw Neptune the first two times?	comet observations
What two countries argued over credit for the discovery of Neptune?	French and the British
Who ultimately deserved credit for the discovery of Neptune?	Le Verrier and Adams
Who questioned Adams's claim to co-discovery of Neptune?	Dennis Rawlins
Who predicted Neptune's place and convinced astronomer's to search for it?	Le Verrier
Who did not deserve credit to co-discovery of Neptune?	Adams
Who claimed the right to name Neptune?	Le Verrier
What country approved Neptune's first name?	France
What did the discoverer want to name Neptune first?	Le Verrier
What first introduced Neptune and Uranus's names?	French almanacs
Who did not approve of the first name for Neptune?	French Bureau des Longitudes
What is the Chinese, Japanese, and Korean translations for Neptune?	sea king star
What god was Neptune?	god of the sea
What is the Mongolian name for Neptune?	Dalain Van
What did the Greeks call Neptune?	Poseidon
What was the Biblical sea monster that Neptune is named in Hebrew?	Rahab
What was Neptune before Pluto was discovered?	farthest known planet
What discovery made astronomer's debate Pluto's status as a planet?	the Kuiper belt
What year did the International Astronomical Union define the word planet?	2006
Now that Pluto isn't a planet, what is Neptune known for in our solar system?	the outermost known planet
What period was Pluto closer to the sun than Neptune?	between 1979 and 1999
What is Neptune's mass?	1.0243×1026 kg
How much more mass does Neptune have compared to Earth?	17 times
What is Neptune's gravity at 1 bar?	11.15 m/s2
What is Neptune's equatorial radius?	24,764 km
What is Neptune referred to due to it's size and concentration of volatiles?	ice giant
What is Neptune's mantle rich in?	water, ammonia and methane
What is the hot, dense fluid in Neptune referred to as?	icy
What does the fluid in Neptune have a high conductivity of?	electrical
How deep does Neptune's water-ammonia ocean go?	7000 km
What rains on Neptune?	diamond crystals
What is Neptune's atmosphere made of?	80% hydrogen and 19% helium
Where are absorption bands of methane on Neptune?	wavelengths above 600 nm
What gives Neptune it's blue hue?	absorption of red light by the atmospheric methane
What planet also gets it's color from atmospheric constituent?	Uranus
What color is Uranus, compared to Neptune?	cyan
What is Neptune's clouds competition variants dependent on?	altitude
Which clouds on Neptune are suitable for methane to condense?	upper-level
What clouds form between one and five bars on Neptune?	ammonia and hydrogen sulfide
On Neptune, what do clouds above five bars consist of?	ammonia, ammonium sulfide, hydrogen sulfide and water
What is the temperature on Neptune's clouds that are at 50 bars?	273 K (0 °C)
On Neptune, which clouds cast shadows on the cloud deck below it?	High-altitude clouds
What are the widths of the cloud bands on Neptune?	50–150 km
Where are the high altitude bands of clouds on Neptune?	50–110 km above the cloud deck.
What does Neptune have more of compared to Uranus?	volume of ocean
Where on Neptune does weather not occur?	higher stratosphere or thermosphere
What is Neptune's temperature in the thermosphere?	750 K
What would interact with Neptune's magnetic field to make it warm?	atmospheric interaction with ions
Where would gravity waves in Neptune's interior dissipate?	in the atmosphere
What does Neptune's thermosphere containers traces of?	carbon dioxide and water
What is the rotational axis of Neptune's magnetic field?	47°
Where is Neptune's magnetic field offset from the physical centre?	0.55 radii
What planet besides Neptune has a sideways rotation?	Uranus's
What might cause Neptune's extreme orientation?	flows in the planets' interiors
What fluids are in Neptune's interior?	ammonia, methane and water
What is Neptune's dipole magnetic moment?	2.2 × 1017 T·m3
What is one of Neptune's non-dipolar component what may exceed the dipole moment in strength?	strong quadrupole moment
Which three planets have small quadrupole moments compared to Neptune?	Earth, Jupiter and Saturn
Besides the geometrical constraints of Neptune's dynamo generator, what is another result of the quadrupole moment?	the planet's centre
What is the dipole component of the magnetic field at the magnetic equator of neptune?	14 microteslas (0.14 G)
What system, like Saturn, does Neptune have?	planetary ring system
What might Neptune's rings consist of?	ice particles
What might the ice particles of Neptune's rings be coated with?	silicates or carbon-based material
Where is Adams ring from the center of Neptune?	63,000 km
Where is the La Verrier ring from the center of Neptune?	53,000 km
What dynamic weather does Neptune have?	storm
What does Neptune's wind speeds reach?	600 m/s (2,200 km/h; 1,300 mph)
What is the high wind speed on Neptune's cloud tops?	400 m/s
Which direction does Neptune's winds move relevant to the plant's rotation?	opposite
What is the effect called that describes the flow direction on Neptune?	skin effect
How much warmer is Neptune's south pole to the rest of it's atmosphere?	10 K
Where does methane in the south pole escape to on Neptune?	the stratosphere near the pole.
What is the average temperature of Neptune's south pole?	73 K (−200 °C).
How many earth years is Neptune's south pole exposed to the sun?	40
To which pole will Neptune's methane shift to as it moves to the opposite side of the sun?	north pole
What white cloud group on Neptune is farther south than the dark great spot?	The Scooter
When was The Scooter on Neptune observed?	1989
What type of storm is The Scooter on Neptune?	southern cyclonic storm
What detected the storms on Neptune?	Voyager 2)
What is the second most intense storm on Neptune?	The Small Dark Spot
Where are Neptune's dark spots thought to occur?	in the troposphere
What do Neptune's dark spots appear as in the cloud decks?	holes
Since Neptune's dark spots persist for several months, what are they thought to be?	vortex structures
What on Neptune are associated with dark spots that are brighter?	methane clouds
When Neptune's dark spots migrate too close to the equator, what do they do?	dissipate
Why might Neptune have more varied weather than Uranus?	higher internal heating
How much farther is Neptune from the Sun than Uranus?	50%
How much percentage of the sun does Neptune get compared to Uranus?	40%
How much more energy does Neptune radiate than it receives?	2.61
The current heat flow on Neptune might be explained by what?	heat left over from Neptune's formation
When did Neptune complete it's first barycentric orbit since it's discovery?	11 July 2011
What is the Earth's orbit?	365.26-day
Why didn't Neptune appear to be in it's exact discover position?	Earth was in a different location
Using the heliocentric coordinate system, when did Neptune reach the discovery longitude?	12 July 2011
What is the region behind Neptune called?	Kuiper belt
What does the Kuiper belt consist of?	small icy worlds
Where is the Kuiper belt relative to Neptune?	30 AU out to about 55 AU from the Sun
What dominates the Kuiper belt?	Neptune's gravity
What did Neptune's gravity do to Kuiper belt?	gaps in the Kuiper belt's structure
What is the fraction of the most heavily populated resonance in the Kuiper belt?	2:3 resonance
What is the best known, and largest, object in the Kuiper belt?	Pluto
How many known objects is in the most populated resonance of the Kuiper belt?	200
What is the resonance of Pluto in the Kuiper belt?	2:3
Which resonances are less populated in the Kuiper belt?	3:4, 3:5, 4:7 and 2:5
What is the resonance of Neptune trojans?	1:1
Where did most Neptune trojans form?	alongside Neptune
What is the only object identified with Neptune's trailing L5 Lagrangian point?	2008 LC18
What is Neptune's temporary quasi-satellite named?	(309239) 2007 RW10
How long has Neptune's quasi-satellite been with Neptune?	12,500 years
What could have blasted Neptune and Uranus's atmosphere with radiation, aiding in creation?	nearby massive OB star
What is too low to account for the formation of Neptune?	matter density
If Neptune was formed from instabilities within the original protoplanetary disc, what was it not formed by?	core accretion
If Neptune formed closer to the sun, what is the matter density?	higher
If Neptune formed closer to the sun, what caused it to migrate to it's current orbit?	removal of the gaseous protoplanetary disc
What is the most widely accepted explanation of Neptune's formation called?	the Nice model
What does The Nice model consider effected the migration of Neptune?	Kuiper belt.
How many moons does Neptune have?	14
What is Neptune's largest moon?	Triton
Who discovered Triton?	William Lassell
What orbit does Triton have around Neptune?	retrograde orbit
What does Triton's orbit suggest about it's relation to Neptune?	that it was captured
What discovered six moons of Neptune in 1989?	Voyager 2
What is the second most massive Neptunian moon?	Proteus
What is notable about the moon Proteus?	irregularly shaped
Which are Neptune's four innermost moons?	Naiad, Thalassa, Despina and Galatea
When was Neptune's moon Larissa discovered?	1981
What is Neptune's angular diameter range?	2.2 to 2.4 arcseconds
The advent of what telescope made it easier to study Neptune?	Hubble Space Telescope
When was the first useful observation of Neptune from the ground?	1997
What seasons are Neptune currently entering?	spring and summer
What was discovered around Neptune in 2004 and 2005?	five new small satellites
What is the only spacecraft to visit Neptune?	Voyager 2
When did a spacecraft get closest to Neptune?	25 August 1989
What near Neptune did a spacecraft visit dangerously close?	Triton
What program aired on PBS about Neptune?	Neptune All Night
When is the next hypothetical mission to Neptune?	late 2020s
What about Neptune did NASA propose in 2003 in their "Vision Missions Studies"?	Neptune Orbiter with Probes
When will Argo be launched?	2019
What will Argo visit?	Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune, and a Kuiper belt object
When can we expect Argo to visit Triton?	2029
What is of the factors the capital cost of electrification system depends on?	maintenance
How do some locomotives function in order to be more flexible in operation?	can switch to different supply voltages
What are two types of revenue obtained through railway transportation?	freight and passenger traffic
What is the main disadvantage of railway electrification?	significant capital expenditure
What is used to haul passengers cars?	electric locomotives
How is electricity being generated for electric locomotives?	generating stations
What entity provides distribution lines, switches and transformers?	railway
What is the principal alternative to electric railways?	diesel engine
What locomotives are usually more reliable?	Electric locomotives
What do some electric traction systems provide?	regenerative braking
What type of fuel do diesel locomotives use?	petroleum
What is one of the sources electricity is being generated from?	geothermal
What is a safety hazard to track workers?	voltages on contact wires
What issue can complicate electric railway service?	different supply voltages and frequencies,
What is a safer alternative to third rails?	Overhead wires
Why overhead wires are not being widely used?	considered unsightly.
What is speed limit for railways?	variable speeds
Why is DC motor being used more than AC type?	conversion was not well developed
What are two types of railway transportation still use DC motor?	rapid transit (subways) and trams
Why do motors have little space for insulation?	low voltage ratings
Why 1kV voltage is almost always used by rail systems?	safety reasons
What is most common volatage range used by railway system?	below 1 kV
Which system uses higher voltages?	overhead wires
Is "low" voltage used by trains safe for people?	lethal
What type of electric power garantees lesser loss?	DC
Which type of supply for electric motors creates electromagnetic radiation?	AC
Which type of power does require three-phase transmission?	AC
What can electromagnetic radiation interfere with?	signalling and communications
Where was an experimental 6kV DC railway built?	the Soviet Union
What is most common voltage for DC supply?	1,500 V
How many narrow-gauge lines in Slovakia?	two
What railway line is DC being used in Portugal?	the Cascais Line
Where in India line has been converted to AC?	Mumbai area
What voltage is being used in railway system of South Africa and Chile?	3 kV DC
Besides using 3kV DC what other power type is used in the former Soviet Union countries?	25 kV 50 Hz AC
What was New Jersey Transit called before?	Western Railroad
What does the railway system of US use DC or AC?	AC
What type is mostly used third rail or overhead wires?	overhead wires
Is trird rail system being used exclusively with AC or DC ?	DC distribution
What depth does the alternating current penetrate in a steel rail?	skin depth
What is more prefferable for subway lines?	Third rail
What is physically more compact tird rail or overhead wires?	Third rail
Why DC system can effect the speed of trains?	low voltages
Can DC systems use low-level platform?	cannot
Besides speed and size what else the low voltage of DC system can effect?	air-conditioning
What is the speed limit for third rail system trains?	160 km/h
What can become unreliable if the speed exceeds the limit of 100 mph for DC system trains?	contact between the shoe and the rail
What is the other name for the street trams?	streetcars
Where is third rail situated in the street trams system?	below street level
What area in US discontinued using overhead wires for streetcars in 1962?	Washington, D.C.
What external and weather factors can effect conduit slot?	leaves and snow
What are the main reasons the conduit lines were converted to overhead  wire system?	cost and operating efficiency
What year the "second generation" of tram system began to operate in France?	2003
When was the original system discontinued?	1958
How is the circuit of the third rail divided?	energized segment
Does energized segment of third rail pose the threat to pedestrians if uncovered?	no danger
What type of system does London Underground use?	four-rail system
What is the purpose of the forth rail?	carries the electrical return
What is the volatage surge of the third rail of London Underground system?	+420v DC
What is the voltage of the return rail?	−210v DC
Where was the system similar to London Underground used as well?	Milan
What danger can return currents cause?	electrolytic damage
How are stray earth currents kept to a manageable levels?	by using resistors
What insures minimal current leak during power rails instalation?	ceramic chairs
How did return current effect water and gas in iron pipes?	water and gas mains
What is the crucial advantage of four-rail system?	running rail carries any current
Why some sections of Bakerloo and District lines were rewired to three-rail system?	to simplify rolling stock use
What is the voltage shared two types of trains UK railroad system?	660 V
How did it become possible to share the voltage for different types of train?	the centre rail is connected to the running rails
Why some lines of Paris Metro have to operate on a four-rail system?	rubber tyres
What was the solution for the return current problem in Paris Metro?	two guide rails
What is required in order for the guide rails to operate properly?	a single polarity supply
How train is able to turn around after each completed journey?	reversing loops
Why was the reversing loop created?	having to 'run around' the rest of the train
How can different range of voltages be supplied for AC locomotives?	multiple taps on the transformer
What was a disadvantage of DC system?	power-wasting resistors
What taps can provide lighting supply?	low-voltage transformer windings
What will AC/DC motor be replaced with?	three-phase induction motor
What is the main advantage of an induction motor?	can run equally well on DC or AC of any frequency
How can DC motor turn universal?	if fitted with laminated pole pieces
What problems did AC distribution cause?	inductive reactance and eddy current losses
How do railways try to solve the problem of inductive reactance of AC system?	low AC frequencies
How can low frequencies be obtained?	converted from utility power
How did non-standard gauge trains start to operate with high-voltage AC?	adopting the already proven RhB system.
When was the first trail of RhB system tested?	1913
What frequency was typically used on US Amtrak?	25 Hz
What voltage does SEPTA system use?	12 kV voltage
What specification is similar for both Amtrak and Septa systems?	catenary voltage
When was a 11kV system of NY, New Haven and Hartford was converted to 12.5 kV?	1987
When was overhead wires system being used for the first time in UK?	1 December 1909
What line used the overhead wire system first Victoria to Crystal Palace or Peckham Rye to West Noorwood?	Victoria to Crystal Palace
What was the cause of lines not being extended?	the First World War
What voltage was used in the two lines opened in 1925 of Southern Railway?	6.7 kV 25 Hz
What countries  used three-phase AC system in the the beginning of 20th century?	Italy, Switzerland and the United States
What country was a bigger user compare to the three of them?	Italy
Where did Italy start using the AC system?	in the mountainous regions of northern Italy
How long did the AC system last in northern Italy?	1901 until 1976
How long did three-phase system operate in Cascade Tunnel?	1909 to 1927
What country has first tried to use single-phase AC?	Hungary
What frequency did the line of Hungarian rail system used in 1923?	16 kV at 50 Hz
What type of the converter was used in hungarian locomotives of that time?	four-pole rotating phase converter
How could the locomotives run on four speed levels?	motor could be changed using slip rings
What system was adopted in Hungary after WWII?	Russian
What was the main requirement for electric feeder stations?	line fed from different feeder stations must be kept strictly isolated
What invention prevented lines from getting mixed?	Phase Breaks
What was the part of wire in Phase Break sections an arc being drawn from one wire to another?	The earthed section
How were the drivers warned to start coasting the train?	warning board
What should the driver do in order to open and close the circuit breaker?	to shut off power and coast
What nowdays electrification systems can use?	DC motors which directly use the DC or they may be 3-phase AC motors
What is the main action AC and DC systems have to deal with?	converting and transporting
What type of losses happen during conversion and transmission in wires and electronics?	ohmic losses
What kind of losses take place in transformers and inductors during conversion/transmission process?	magnetic field losses
What two systems were compare in the Soviet Union in 1970?	3 kV DC and 25 kV AC (50 Hz
Which system had higher losses in overhead wires?	3 kV DC
Which system was used in Soviet Union after all calculations?	3 kV DC
What came with lesser lesser cost mobile conversion hardware or stationary hardware?	stationary hardware
What can be seen in the newly electrified lines?	"sparks effect"
What can electrification of modern trains effect?	patronage / revenue
How can better service quality be achieved?	rolling stock overhaul / replacement
What is a major factor whn it comes to electrification?	Network effects
What was the reason some electrifications were removed after a while?	through traffic to non-electrified lines
What can be a drawback of electrification of long distance freight trains?	electrification to isolated areas
Where can the issue of through traffic benefits occur?	long distance trips
What does the increasing demand for container traffic make companies use more often?	diesel trains
What is the other issue that comes to sight when using electrification system?	connections between different electrical services
Why the commuter lines built to different standards can cause be complicated?	the implications on the sections it is connecting
What is the solution many lines came up with in order to avoid replacing present rolling stock?	to be overlaid with multiple electrification standards
Why are disel trains  still used on electrified routes?	due to incompatibility of electrification standards
Which of two can be more efficiently electricified?	Central station
How can electric power plant become more power efficient?	it will shut down its least efficient generators
How can electric train be more energy efficient?	by regenerative braking
Which type of train continues to use energy while coasting or being stopped?	diesel
What causes electric trains to waste energy?	cooling blowers
Can renewable source of electricity be used in mobile power plants?	unsuitable
What is the recent incentive in  order to overcome oil scarcity?	to substitute other fuels
What type of natural resources is more scarce?	liquid fuel
What research can be used in the future if translated?	Soviet studies from the 1980s
What type of trains became more energy-efficient in the former Soviet Union?	electric
What year could be marked as year when electric railways more efficient than diesel ones?	1965
How much fuel did electric train used less than diesel in the middle of 1970 in USSR?	25% less fuel per ton-km
What could be a factor of lower energy consumption for electric trains?	better operating conditions on electrified lines
How much more expensive was diesel compare to electricity per unit?	1.5 times more (per unit of heat energy content
What caused the energy efficiency to go up?	energy-intensity dropping
What type of locomotives got improved during 1950-1973 in Soviet Union?	electric
How much of energy was saved and re-used due to regenerative braking in 1989?	2.65%
Was there an energy efficiency improvement in the period 1974 through 1980?	no improvement
Elimination of what helped the efficiency of diesel traction to go up?	2-axle freight cars
How many people speak Spanish as a first or second language in the United States?	There are 45 million Hispanophones who speak Spanish as a first or second language in the United States,
How many Hispanics speak English too?	Roughly half of all American Spanish-speakers also speak English "very well," based on their self-assessment in the U.S. Census.
What type of language id Spanish?	Spanish is the Romance language and the Indo-European language with the largest number of native speakers in the world.
What other language is often spoken in the United states?	The Spanish language is the second most spoken language in the United States.
How many Spanish speaking students are there in the United States?	six million Spanish language students.
How old is the Spanish language in the United States?	The Spanish language has been present in what is now the United States since the 16th and 17th centuries
Where in the United States did the Spanish explore?	The Spanish explorers explored areas of 42 future U.S. states
Were there states ruled by the Spanish?	western regions of the Louisiana Territory were under Spanish rule between 1763 to 1800,
Did the Spanish conquer land in the United States?	Spanish colonization in North America that would later become the states of Florida, Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, and California.
Do the Spanish have a legacy in America from their forefathers?	after the French and Indian War, further extending the Spanish influence throughout modern-day United States of America.
When did the Spanish arrive to America?	Spanish arrived in the territory of the modern United States with Ponce de León in 1513.
Did Europeans speak Spanish in America?	Spanish was the language spoken by the first permanent European settlers in North America.
How was St. Augustine founded?	the Spaniards, by way of Juan Ponce de León, founded St. Augustine, Florida
Where is the oldest settlement in America?	St. Augustine, Florida
What is the oldest city of the United States territory?	The oldest city in all of the U.S. territory, as of 1898, is San Juan, capital of Puerto Rico
Was Texas a part of Mexico?	In 1821, after Mexico's War of Independence from Spain, Texas was part of the United Mexican States as the state of Coahuila y Tejas
When did the Americans come to Texas?	A large influx of Americans soon followed, originally with the approval of Mexico's president. In 1836
Was there a war between the Mexicans and the Texans?	Texans, fought a war of independence from the central government of Mexico
When did Texas become a state?	In 1846, the Republic dissolved when Texas entered the United States of America as a state.
Was Texas a primarily a Spanish speaking state?	Per the 1850 U.S. census, fewer than 16,000 Texans were of Mexican descent, and nearly all were Spanish-speaking people
What states made up of Alta California	California, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, western Colorado and southwestern Wyoming became part of the Mexican territory of Alta California
When did other states become part of Mexico?	After the Mexican War of Independence from Spain
What states were part of Santa Fe de Nuevo	most of New Mexico, western Texas, southern Colorado, southwestern Kansas, and Oklahoma panhandle were part of the territory of Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Why is  there still Bilingual  spoken in these states?	The geographical isolation and unique political history of this territory
Why isn't the southwest Spanish speaking?	Through the force of sheer numbers, the English-speaking American settlers entering the Southwest established their language, culture, and law
Is Canada bilingual?	United States never developed bilingualism as Canada did.
Was California a bilingual state?	California constitutional convention of 1849 had eight Californio participants; the resulting state constitution was produced in English and Spanish,
Why didn't California officially become  bilingual?	the convention's English-speaking participants felt that the state's remaining minority of Spanish-speakers should simply learn English
Was there a court ruling?	the convention ultimately voted 46-39 to revise the earlier clause so that all official proceedings would henceforth be published only in English.
Did America try to make Puerto Rico an English speaking territory?	U.S. federal government strenuously tried to force Puerto Ricans to adopt English
How did America try to make Puerto Rico's language English?	making them use English as the primary language of instruction in their high schools.
Was English in Puerto Rico successful?	It was completely unsuccessful,
Does Puerto Rico have many English speaking residents?	the territory was never hit with a massive influx of millions of English speakers like the vast territory acquired from Mexico 50 years earlier.
How did Puerto Rico stay a Spanish speaking territory?	Puerto Rico was able to maintain its Spanish language, culture, and identity because the relatively small, densely populated island
How many Puerto Ricans are there?	At over 5 million, Puerto Ricans are easily the 2nd largest Hispanic group. Of all major Hispanic groups
Does Florida have a high Hispanic population?	increasing the Spanish-speaking populations and in some areas being the majority of the Hispanophone population, especially in Central Florida. In Hawaii
Do they speak Spanish fluently?	Puerto Ricans are the least likely to be proficient in Spanish
Are Hispanics in Hawaii?	7.0 per cent of the islands' people are either Hispanic or Hispanophone or both.
Where are the biggest population of Puerto Ricans on the mainland?	many Puerto Ricans have migrated to New York City, Orlando, Philadelphia, and other areas of the Eastern United States
Why did Cubans come to the United States?	Immigration to the United States of Spanish-speaking Cubans began because of Cuba's political instability
What year did most Cubans start coming to America?	The deposition of Fulgencio Batista's dictatorship and the ascension of Fidel Castro's government in 1959 increased Cuban immigration to the United States
Do Cubans speak Spanish in America?	most are fluent in Spanish
Where do most Cuban Americans live?	, most settled in southern and central Florida, while other Cubans live in the Northeastern United States
Is there a particular place where Cubans live and speak Spanish in the U.S.?	In the city of Miami today Spanish is the first language mostly due to Cuban immigration.
What other Spanish Speaking people come to America?	Spanish-speaking Nicaraguans
Why did the Nicaraguans come to America?	political instability during the end of the 1970s and the 1980s
When did the Nicaraguans arrive?	Throughout the 1980s with the United States supported Contra War (or Contra-revolutionary war) which continued up until 1988
Where did Nicaraguans settle in America?	The states of the United States where most Nicaraguans migrated to include Florida, California and Texas.
Was there a specific reason many Nicaraguans fled to the U.S.?	the economic collapse of the country many more Nicaraguans migrated to the United States amongst other countries.
Why did Salvadorans come to America?	The exodus of Salvadorans was a result of both economic and political problems.
When did Salvadorans come to America?	The largest immigration wave occurred as a result of the Salvadoran Civil War in the 1980s
How many Salvadorans immigrated?	20–30% of El Salvador's population emigrated. About 50%, or up to 500,000 of those who escaped headed to the United States,
What is the population of Salvadorans living in America?	United States, which was already home to over 10,000 Salvadorans, making Salvadorans Americans the fourth-largest Hispanic and Latino American group
Where do Salvadorans fall on the scale for Hispanic living in America?	Salvadorans Americans the fourth-largest Hispanic and Latino American group, after the Mexican-American majority, stateside Puerto Ricans, and Cubans.
Why did Central Americans flee to the U.S.?	civil wars engulfed several Central American countries in the 1980s
When did Salvadorans flee	Salvadorans fled their country and came to the United States. Between 1980 and 1990
Are the Salvadorans a large population in the U.S.?	the Salvadoran immigrant population in the United States increased nearly fivefold from 94,000 to 465,000.
Is the  Salvadoran population still growing?	the United States continued to grow in the 1990s and 2000s as a result of family reunification and new arrivals fleeing a series of natural disasters
How many  Salvadorans  are in America now?	By 2008, there were about 1.1 million Salvadoran immigrants in the United States.
When did the Venezuelans emigrate to the united states?	Until the 20th century, there was no clear record of the number of Venezuelans who emigrated to the United States.
Does Venezuela have immigrates from other countries?	Between the 18th and early 19th centuries, there were many European immigrants who went to Venezuela
Why did Venezuelans come to America?	Many Venezuelans settled in the United States with hopes of receiving a better education, only to remain in there following graduation.
 Do Venezuelans still come to America for the same reasons as they did before?	since the early 1980s, the reasons for Venezuelan emigration have changed to include hopes of earning a higher salary
How did Chavez affect the Venezuelans?	In the 2000s, more Venezuelans opposing the economic and political policies of president Hugo Chávez migrated to the United States
What areas of America did the Venezuelans settle in?	mostly to Florida, but New York City and Houston are other destinations). The largest concentration of Venezuelans in the United States is in South Florida
Are there any other areas of America Venezuelans settled in?	New York, California, Texas (adding their existing Hispanic populations), New Jersey, Massachusetts and Maryland.
Where are the most populated city's Venezuelan live in?	Some of the urban areas with a high Venezuelan community include Miami, New York City, Los Angeles, and Washington, D.C.
Is there such a thing as bilingual state?	Some states, such as New Mexico, provide bilingual legislated notices and official documents
Do American Hispanics speak English in the home?	there was a trend that most Americans and American residents who are of Hispanic descent speak only English in the home.
What language is spoken in the U.S.A?	English is the dominant language of business, education, government, religion, media, culture, civil society, and the public sphere.
Is there an official language of the United States?	United States has no de jure official language, English is the dominant language
Has some states like Arizona embraced their Mexican history?	The state (like its southwestern neighbors) has had close linguistic and cultural ties with Mexico
What is the states history?	The state outside the Gadsden Purchase of 1853 was part of the New Mexico Territory until 1863, when the western half was made into the Arizona Territory.
Has New Mexico had a majority of Spanish speaking natives.	The area of the former Gadsden Purchase contained a majority of Spanish-speakers until the 1940s
Are Arizona and New Mexico residents speaking Spanish or English?	the continuous arrival of Mexican settlers increases the number of Spanish-speakers.
Does New Mexico have an official language?	the state has no official language.
What language is New Mexico's language written in?	New Mexico's laws are promulgated bilingually in Spanish and English.
How long has New Mexico been speaking Spanish?	Spanish has been spoken in the New Mexico-Colorado border and the contemporary U.S.–Mexico border since the 16th century
Is New Mexico known for the Spanish language?	New Mexico is commonly thought to have Spanish as an official language alongside English because of its wide usage and legal promotion of Spanish in the state
Why is New Mexico always an after thought in American -Spanish speaking society?	Because of its relative isolation from other Spanish-speaking areas over most of its 400-year existence
Is New Mexico's language different than from other Spanish dialect	, New Mexico Spanish, and in particular the Spanish of northern New Mexico and Colorado has retained many elements of 16th- and 17th-century Spanish
How does New Mexico's Spanish dialect differ?	has developed its own vocabulary. In addition, it contains many words from Nahuatl, the language spoken by the ancient Aztecs of Mexico.
Does New Mexico's language also include other dialect?	New Mexican Spanish also contains loan words from the Pueblo languages of the upper Rio Grande Valley, Mexican-Spanish words (mexicanismos)
Does New Mexico also use language from the  American language when spoken in Spanish?	borrowings from English. Grammatical changes include the loss of the second person verb form, changes in verb endings
What is Texas official language?	In Texas, English is the state's de facto official language
Are there exceptions to Texas official language?	, the continual influx of Spanish-speaking immigrants increased the import of Spanish in Texas.
How does Texas handle people who don't speak English, but live in Mexico?	. The Government of Texas, through Section 2054.116 of the Government Code, mandates that state agencies provide information on their websites in Spanish
How does this mandate help Spanish speaking residents?	websites in Spanish to assist residents who have limited English proficiency.
What language, other than English, is spoken in the U.S.?	Spanish is currently the most widely taught non-English language
Are students taught Spanish in american schools?	More than 1.4 million university students were enrolled in language courses
How popular are Spanish language classes in the U.S,?	Spanish is the most widely taught language in American colleges and universities with 53 percent of the total number of people enrolled
What other languages are popular among American students?	French (14.4%), German (7.1%), Italian (4.5%), American Sign language (4.3%), Japanese (3.7%), and Chinese (2.4%)
Are these other languages learned in the U.S. as popular as Spanish?	totals remain relatively small in relation to the total U.S population.
What political speaches are delivered in English and Spanish?	The State of the Union Addresses and other presidential speeches are translated to Spanish
Was this always the case in American political addresses?	following the precedent set by the Bill Clinton administration. Official Spanish translations are available at WhiteHouse.gov.
Does Washington (government) operate in both languages (bilingual-Spanish?)	politicians fluent in Spanish-speak in Spanish to Hispanic majority constituencies
If someone is not bilingual and only speaks Spanish, how do they learn about current events?	There are 500 Spanish newspapers, 152 magazines, and 205 publishers in the United States; magazine and local television
Is the Hispanic population relevant to the American media?	local television advertising expenditures for the Hispanic market have increased much from 1999 to 2003, with growth of 58 percent and 43 percent, respectively.
Are there studies on Hispanic-American language?	Calvin Veltman undertook, for the National Center for Education Statistics and for the Hispanic Policy Development Project
What is Calvin Veltman' study about?	the most complete study of English language adoption by Hispanophone immigrants
Is Calvin Veltman' relevant to today's Hispanic Americans?	his study based itself upon a large 1976 sample from the Bureau of the Census (which has not been repeated),
Are there other similar findings similar to Calvin Veltman' for the modern age?	data from the 1990 Census tend to confirm the great Anglicization of the US Hispanic American origin population.
What was Calvin Veltman' findings?	high bilingualism rates and subsequent adoption of English as the preferred language of Hispanics, particularly by the young and the native-born.
What is the oldest city in South Carolina?	Charleston
What county is Charleston, South Carolina located in?	Charleston County
Charleston is located on what harbor?	Charleston Harbor
Charleston Harbor is an inlet of what ocean?	Atlantic Ocean
What river mergers with the Cooper River to form Charleston Harbor?	Ashley Rivers
What county is Charleston located in?	Charleston County
Charleston Harbor is formed on what ocean?	Atlantic Ocean
What river merges with the Ashley River to from the Charleston Harbor?	Cooper Rivers
What year was Charleston founded?	1670
What was Charleston's original name?	Charles Town
Charles Town was named after which king?	King Charles II of England
Where was the city originally located?	Albemarle Point
What was Charleston's population in 2010?	120,083
What year was Charleston originally founded?	1670
Who was Charles Town named after?	King Charles II of England
What was the originally name of Charleston?	Charles Town
How many people lived in Charleston in 2010?	120,083
Where was Charleston's first location?	Albemarle Point
How large is Charleston, South Carolina?	127.5 square miles (330.2 km2)
Which city blocks Charleston for expanding up the peninsula?	North Charleston
How much of Charleston is covered by water?	18.5 square miles (47.9 km2)
How of Charleston's total area is dry land?	109.0 square miles (282.2 km2)
What town occupies the land directly east of the Cooper River?	Mount Pleasant
What season is the wettest in Charleston?	Summer
In what form does half of Charleston's annual rainfall occur?	thundershowers
What season is characterized as short in Charleston?	Winter
What is Charleston's seasonal record of snowfall?	8.0 in (20 cm)
What season is considered short in Charleston?	Winter
What is the wettest season in Charleston?	Summer
Half of Charleston's annual rainfall occurs in what form?	thundershowers
How much snow did Charleston's Airport recieve on December, 23 1989?	6.0 in (15 cm
What is hottest temperature recorded with Charleston's city limits?	104 °F
What hurricane hit Charleston in 1989?	Hurricane Hugo
What was the lowest temperature ever recorded Charleston's city limit?	7 °F (−14 °C)
What type of storm is a major threat to Charleston in the summer and early fall?	Hurricanes
What day did Charleston's airport hit the coldest day on record?	January 21, 1985
How many people lived in the Charleston=North Charleston Urban Area in 2010?	548,404
What is the third largest city in South Carolina?	North Charleston
How many people lived in Moncks Corner in 2000?	9,123
Charleston and Berkeley is combined with what other county to form a metropolitan statistical area?	Dorchester
In which county is Moncks Corner located?	Berkeley County
What era brought counties to South Carolina?	Reconstruction Era
Counties replaced what system in South Carolina?	traditional parish system
What is the main use of the parish system nowadays?	public service districts
The city of Charleston is defined by the limits of the Parish of St. Michael and what other parish?	Parish of St. Philip
What other parish besides St. John's Parish is  mostly an incorporated rural parish?	St. Andrew's Parish
What year was Charles Town founded?	1670
How long did it take to establish settlement expeditions for the Province of Carolina?	seven years
What was the plan to settle and develop the Province of Carolina?	the Grand Model
Who prepared the plan known as "the Grand Model"?	John Locke
When was Charles II of England restored to the throne?	1660
Where did Charleston's original settlers come from?	Bermuda
Bermuda is located near which North Carolina town?	Cape Hatteras
Who was the first governor of Charleston?	William Sayle
Who predicted Charleston would become a 'great port towne'?	Earl of Shaftesbury
The settlement was relocated east to what river?	Ashley River
What religious group was not allowed to settle in South Carolina?	Catholics
About what year did Charleston cease to have the wealthiest Jewish community in America?	1830
What European country did many of the first Charleston settlers come from?	England
After what war did the state ban on Catholics end?	American Revolution
Along with Bermuda, what other English colony did many settlers come from?	Barbados
Which country along with France contested England's claim to the Charleston region?	Spain
Which group raided the settlement as a means to protect themselves from settlers?	Native Americans
The majority of the fort walls were removed in what decade?	1720s
Whose 1704 plan was used to fortified the city?	Governor Johnson
Beside European nations and Native Americans, who else attacked the Charleston settlement?	pirates
What author paid for the simple bench at Sullivan's Island?	Toni Morrison
What percentage of those sold as slaves in North America landed at Sullivan's Island?	40%
What stage of the slave trade provided slaves to Charles Town?	Middle Passage
What peoples were brought to Charles Town to be slaves?	Africans
Which African coast did many slaves that were sold in Charles Town come from?	Windward Coast
African slaves had great knowledge of the cultivation of what product?	rice
By what year was indigo was a leading export for the Lowcountry?	1750
Which nation subsidized indigo crops from the Lowcountry?	Britain
By what year was rice a successful commodity crop for the Lowcountry?	1700
What products were exported along with indigo from the Lowcountry?	naval stores
What lucrative trade contributed greatly to Charles Town's growth?	slave trade
When did Charles Town become the fourth largest colonial port?	1770
Who made up the majority of Charles Town population in 1708?	slaves
People of African descent were the majority in Charleston until what mass movement?	the Great Migration
When did the Great Migration occur?	the early 20th century
What other Native American nation supplied Charles Town with deer hides other than the Cherokee nation?	Creek nations
What is the  estimation of deer slaughtered in Charles Town from 1739 to 1761?	500,000 to 1,250,000
Records indicate how many pounds of deer skins were exported from Charles Town during the height of its deerskin trade?	5,239,350
What trade was the basis of Charles Town's original economy?	the deerskin trade
What was the average amount of deer skins  that Charles Town exported to Europe between 1699 to 1715?	54,000
What is the oldest college in South Carolina?	College of Charles Towne
Charleston supported the College of Charles Towne until what year?	1970
What year was the Charles Towne Library Society established?	1748
When was the College of Charles Towe founded?	1770
What is located where the first theatre building in Charles Town once stood?	Dock Street Theatre
Which general tried to seize Charles Town during the American Revolution?	General Sir Henry Clinton
Who was the commander of the American forces defending South Carolina?	Col. Moultrie
When did General Clinton attack South Carolina?	June 28, 1776
What was the British hoping to inspire by their attack on Charles Town?	a simultaneous Loyalist uprising
Fort Sullivan was renamed  what after the battle?	Fort Moultrie
What was the greatest American defeat of the American Revolution?	Siege of Charles Towne
How many soldiers did General Clinton return with?	14,000
In what year did General Clinton return to Charles Towne?	1780
Who was the leader of the American forces defending Charles Towne?	General Benjamin Lincoln
How many soldiers did General Lincoln lead?	5,400
What city became the state capital of South Carolina?	Columbia
Charleston was the state capital of South Carolina until what year?	1786
In what year was the cotton gin invented?	1793
What became South Carolina's major export commodity after 1793?	cotton
Who made up most of the primary labor force of cotton plantations?	Slaves
How many free people of color lived in Charleston in 1860?	3,785
What percentage of Charleston's population were free people of color?	8%
What percentage of Charleston's black population were free people of color?	18%
In what year was the Brown Fellowship Society created?	1790
In what year did the Brown Fellowship Society end?	1945
What was planned by Denmark Vesey?	slave revolt
When was Vesey's plan for a slave revolt revealed?	May 1822
How was Vesey executed in 1822?	hanged
How many slaves were executed with Vesey?	five slaves
What revolution made whites fearful of retribution of slaves?	Haitian Revolution
Black left which religious denomination is great numbers after slavery?	Southern Baptist Church
How many African Americans lived in Charleston in 1860?	17,000
What  barred product ,along with dogs and guns ,  did the Freemen want after slavery ended?	liquor
How many African American lived in Charleston in 1880?	27,000
AME Zion Churches were first established in what part of America?	the North
What association founded the Avery Normal Institute?	the American Missionary Association
What type of school was the Avery Normal Institute?	free secondary school
Who attended the Avery Normal Institute?	Charleston's African American population
What general supported the conversion of a US Arsenal into Porter Military Academy?	William T. Sherman
Soldiers and boys helped by Porter Military Academy were affected by what?	war
What percentage of Charleston's population was black in 1875?	57%
What percentage of Charleston County's was black in 1875?	73%
In 1876, Charleston's Black Republicans fought against whom?	white Democrats
The second riot of 1876 happened when?	the day after the election in November
How many major riots between blacks and whites occurred in Charleston in 1876?	two
What were white Democratic paramilitary groups in Charleston known as?	the Red Shirts
What granted Freeman were American citizenship?	federal constitutional amendments.
The Cainhoy Incident occurred on what day?	October 15
The violent 1876 incident that took place on King's street happened on what day?	September 6
Who won the 1876 election as a result of voter intimidation?	Wade Hampton
What nearly destroyed Charleston in 1886?	an earthquake
What date was the Charleston earthquake of 1886?	August 31, 1886
How many buildings were damaged by the 1886 earthquake in Charleston?	2,000 buildings
What was the cost of the damage of the 1886 earthquake to the city of Charleston?	$6 million
What was the total value of all of Charleston's city buildings before the earthquake?	$24 million
Which party dominated South Carolina's state legislature?	Democrat
What year was a new constitution passed that discriminated against blacks were passed?	1896
The William Enston Home was built in what year?	1889.
Blacks were the majority in South Carolina until what year?	1930
A large post office and courthouse was built in what year?	1896
On what day were nine people killed in the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church?	June 17, 2015
What was the name of 21 year old that killed nine church members in Charleston, South Carolina?	Dylann Roof
Clementa Pinckney served what public office for the state of South Carolina?	state senator
A memorial service for the nine victims was held on which college's campus?	College of Charleston
On what day was the Confederate flag removed from South Carolina State House?	July 10, 2015
What season is Spoleto Festival USA held?	spring
Spoleto Festival USA is a counterpart to what Italian festival?	Festival dei Due Mondi
What year was Spoleto Festival USA founded?	1977
What  the profession of Gian Carlo Menotti?	composer
What major award did Gian Carlo Menotti win?	Pulitzer Prize
What is Charleston's oldest community theater group?	the Footlight Players
Where is the  annual Charleston Fashion week held?	Marion Square
The Footlight Players  started creating theatrical productions in what year?	1931
Charleston is known for what type of food?	seafood
Charleston cuisine is influenced by what two cultures?	British and French
"Charleston's Provincialisms" was published in what year?	1887
To which two early cultures are the unique characteristics of Charleston's accent attributed to?	French Huguenots and Sephardic Jews
To which college did Sylvester Primer belong?	College of Charleston
Who was the author of the work entitled, "The Huguenot Element in Charleston's Provincialisms"?	Sylvester Primer
What type of journal were Primer's work on Charleston's accent published?	German journal
How many days does the Spoleto Festival USA run each year?	17
What kind of festival is Spoleto Festival USA?	art festival
The Holiday Festival of Lights are held where?	James Island County Park
About how many performances are there in the Spoleto Festival USA?	over 100 performances
Who founded the Spoleto Festival USA?	Gian Carlo Menotti
Who wrote the "Charleston"?	Chris Smith
What decade was the Charleston dance popular nationally?	1920s
Who created the song "Charleston Rag"?	Eubie Blake
Which Charleston community had a large influence on jazz music?	the Gullah community
Geechee dances are associated with the music of what type of worker?	dock workers
What year was the Jenkins Orphanage created?	1891
What type of donations did the Jerkins Orphanage accept?	donations of musical instruments
What Charleston Reverend established the Jenkins Orphanage?	Daniel J. Jenkins
Whose graduates tutored many boys from the Jenkins Orphanage?	Avery Institute Graduates
What city was Louis Armstrong from?	New Orleans
What other president did the Jenkins Orphanage play for other than Taft?	Theodore Roosevelt
What play did the Jenkins Orphanage band play for on Broadway ?	Porgy
What was the name of the "folk opera" based on 'Porgy'?	Porgy and Bess
Where did Gershwin and Heyward write their folk opera?	Folly Beach outside of Charleston
When did Gershwin and Heyward write their folk opera?	summer of 1934
How many companies are there in the City of Charleston Fire Department?	19
How many full time firefighters do Charleston have?	300
Who was the Fire Chief until June 2008?	Russell (Rusty) Thomas
Who became the Fire Chief in November 2008?	Chief Thomas Carr
How many tower companies does the fire department have?	two
What is the largest police department of South Carolina?	The City of Charleston Police Department
How many reserve police officers do the Charleston Police Department have?	27
How many civilians serve on the Charleston Police Department?	137
Who is the current Chief of the Charleston Police Department?	Greg Mullen
What year did Reuben Greenberg retire as Chief of Charleston Police Department?	2005
What is the state's first school of medicine?	Medical University of South Carolina Medical Center
Where is East Cooper Regional Medical Center?	Mount Pleasant
Where is the Trident Regional Medical Center is located?	City of North Charleston
Bon Secours-St Francis Xavier Hospital is located at what portion of the city?	West Ashley portion
What medical district is experiencing growth in biotechnology and medical research field?	The downtown medical district
What airport provides service to the City to Charleston?	Charleston International Airport
The Charleston International Airport is located in what city?	North Charleston
How far is the airport from downtown Charleston?	12 miles (20 km)
Charleston Executive Airport is located where?	the John's Island section of the city of Charleston
What military base is located near the airport?	Charleston Air Force Base
What area in Charleston is considered the 'industrial area'?	the city's Neck area
What highways is King Street in downtown Charleston?	U.S. Highway 78
U.S. Highway 78 merges with what street?	Meeting Street
Interstate 526 begins and ends at what Highway?	U.S. Highway 17
Interstate 26 begins on what part of Charleston?	downtown Charleston
What year did the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge open?	2005
What is linked to downtown Charleston by the bridge?	Mount Pleasant
What year was the Grace Memorial Bridge built?	1929
What year was the Silas N. Pearman Bridge built?	1966
The Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge crosses what river?	Cooper River
Some of the oldest private schools in Charleston date back how long?	150 years
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Charleston oversees what kind of schools?	K-8 parochial schools
How old are some of Charleston's private school?	150 years
Which school is Charleston's diocesan high school?	Bishop England High School
Which organization oversees several K-8 Parochial Schools?	The Roman Catholic Diocese of Charleston Office of Education
Bishop England High school , Porter-Gaud School and a what other school is among Charleston's most prominent private schools?	Ashley Hall
What is the nation's 13th-oldest university?	College of Charleston
Where is the Art Institute of Charleston located?	downtown on North Market Street
What year did the Art institute of Charleston open?	2007
What Charleston College offers a degree in Building Arts?	The American College of the Building Arts
What Technical college have a campus at downtown Charleston?	Trident Technical College
What is the name of Charleston's sister city?	Spoleto
In what country is Spoleto located?	Italy
Who selected Charleston to host an American version of a festival?	Gian Carlo Menotti
What is the name of festival held in Spoleto?	Festival of Two Worlds
What is the profession of Gian Carlo Menotti?	composer
What year was the Polaris Missile Facility Atlantic station closed?	1996
How many nuclear warheads were stored at the Polaris Missile Facility Atlantic station?	2,500 nuclear warheads
How many SSBN "Boomer" squadrons were homeported at the Weapons Station?	Two
Submarine Squadron 4 is homeported at what type of military base?	Naval Base
What type of security force guards the 2500 nuclear warheads?	a U.S. Marine Corps security force company.
What year did South Carolina pass a law allowing them to repeal Federal Law?	1832
After South Carolina passed an ordinance of nullification, who was sent to Charleston's forts?	federal soldiers
After South Carolina passed an ordinance of nullification, who was sent to Charleston Harbor?	five United States Coast Guard cutters
The federal action of sending soldiers to Charleston in 1832 is known as what?	the Charleston incident
A compromise law from the state politicans achieved what?	in Washington to gradually reduce the tariffs
What industry depended on the port of Charleston?	The slave trade
Where was  fresh food sold daily in Charleston in 1840?	the Market Hall and Sheds
What year did the legal importation of slaves end?	1808
The region where cotton plantations were developed was known as what?	Black Belt
In what era did one million slaves get trade throughout the South?	in the antebellum years
What percentage of those elected from 1868 to 1876 were Freemen?	26%
Freeman became the leaders of what party in Charleston?	postwar Republican Party
What else did freed slaves face in postwar Charleston besides discrimination?	poverty
For what did the Federal forces remain in Charleston?	city's reconstruction
Which side was defeated in the war before Reconstruction?	Confederacy
Red is opposite what color of the spectrum?	violet
Which two colors besides red make up the RGB color system?	Green Blue
Which color is red next to on the spectrum of visible light?	orange
How many nanometres does red have?	roughly 620–740
Which colors are combined to make all other colors?	Red Green Blue
What spectrum of light is red within?	visible light
Which color is opposite of red on the visible spectrum?	violet
On the spectrum of light, where is red found?	620–740 nanometres
What color is beside red in the visible spectrum of light?	orange
Red Yellow and Blue are what kind of colors?	subtractive primary colors
From where does the color red in blood come from?	hemoglobin
What does hemoglobin contain?	iron
What causes the color of hematite and red ochre?	iron oxide
Why does a sky turn red when the evening comes?	Rayleigh scattering
What pigment is responsible for the color of leaves in fall?	anthocyanins
During what period did people use Kermes vermilio to make red dye?	Neolithic Period
What does Kermes vermilio eat to survive?	the sap of certain trees, especially Kermes oak trees
From where did Romans acquire Kermes?	Spain
What kind of bural was at Adaoutse, Bouches-du-Rhône?	Neolithic cave-burial
What was the earliest known writing about dye from Aermenian cochineal?	8th century BC
In which book of the Bible did God reference gifts of Blue Purple and Scarlet?	the Book of Exodus
What does coccumque bis tinctum translate to in english?	colored twice with coccus
In ancient greek, what is coccus referred to as?	Kokkos
What does Kokkos mean in english?	a tiny grain
In what century did the latin vulgate bible use the term coccumque bis tinctum?	4th century
When did Egyptians start to make red pigment?	4000 BC
What pigment was used for male skin tone in ancient wall art?	Red ochre
What root did Egyptians use to source their red pigment alizarin?	the rubia
What dye did the Egyptians make using the madder plant?	alizarin
What type of palette was found in Tutankhamun's tomb?	ivory painter's palette
Which color was said to be the Emperor's color in ancient Rome?	Tyrian purple
At what time were togas with red were worn by Romans?	holidays
What is a flammeum?	a red shawl
What color was correlated with the Army in ancient Rome?	Red
After what event would a general of the Roman army be painted red?	triumph
What pigment was used to paint villas in ancient Rome?	vermilion
From where did vermilion originate?	the mineral cinnabar
Cinnabar is an ore of what metal?	mercury
What mines did Romans use to acquire cinnabar?	Almadén, southwest of Madrid, in Spain
Along with slaves, who was sent to work in cinnabar mines in Rome?	prisoners
Which European emperor painted their palace red?	Emperor Charlemagne
In what year did cardinals in the Roman Catholic church start wearing red?	1295
When was Saint Denis Basilica rebuilt?	12th century
Who rebuilt the basilica of Saint Denis?	Abbe Suger
Christ and which other Christian figure were often painted red in medieval painting?	Virgin Mary
What status did the wearing of red in medieval times represent?	wealth
On what occasion would townspeople wear red?	holidays
What root was used for red clothing owned by commoners?	rubia tinctorum
Outside of sun exposure in what circumstance did pigment made from rubia tinctorum fade?	during washing
What was carmine made from?	the carminic acid in tiny female scale insects
How many elements did the Chinese philosophers think the world was made of?	five
What element was red associated with in Chinese philosophy?	fire
Outside of Fire and Earth, what three other elements did Chinese philosophers say the world was composed from?	metal, wood, water
At the time of the Han dynasty where would one fine the color Red?	all court ceremonies
In the time of the Ming Dynasty one would find what color used during sacrificial offerings?	Red
During what years did the Song dynasty occur?	906–1279
Which number of ranks wore purple clothing in the Song dynasty?	three
What color did sixth rank Song dynasty officials wear?	green
What ranks in the Song dynasty wore blue?	eighth and ninth
Who painted their mansions red during the Song and Tang dynasties?	nobles
who wrote A dream of Red Mansions?	Cao Xueqin
During what years was Cao Xueqin alive?	1715–1763
In late Chinese dynasties red was used only on what kind of architecture?	temples and imperial residences
Who painted the walls of the Forbidden city red after the fall of the Ming dynasty?	Qing Dynasty
What plant was used to make the most used red dye in Venice?	Rubia
Which group in Europe used Kermes dye?	the wealthy
The wealthiest in Europe used what red dye?	Polish Cochineal
What dye was known as the Blood of Saint John?	Kermes vermilio
The Blood of Saint John was made from an insect, which one?	Margodes polonicus
Which conquistador from Spain conquered the Aztec Empire?	Hernán Cortés
In what century did a new kind of red pigment arrive in Europe from the Aztec Empire?	16th
During what years was the Aztec Empire conquered?	1519-1521
In what year did Cortes send the first cochineal to Spain?	1523
How often could the Mexican cochineal be harvested?	several times a year
What did Renaissance painters call the pigment made from cochineal?	carmine
What would to the carmine pigment if not used diligently?	change color
What was madder lake made from?	rubia tinctorum plant
During what century did carmine start to see use?	15th
What was kermes lake made from?	kermes insects
During which revolution was red a symbol of liberty?	French Revolution
What kind of cap did the Jacobins wear?	red Phrygian cap, or liberty cap
Women with red caps crowded around guillotines during the Reign of Terror to do what?	celebrate
During what years did the Reign of Terror take place?	1792 and 1793
Who was Saint Denis?	Christian martyr and patron saint of Paris
What was Turkey red called in France?	rouge d'Adrinople
In what years did Turkey red begin to be used to dye cotton in England?	the 1740s
What other pigment was Turkey red compared to?	carmine
What did turkey red get its color from?	madder
In what century did quilts in America commonly use Turkey red?	19th
In which century did color theory begin to be systematically studied?	19th
Who painted the Night Cafe?	Vincent van Gogh
In what year was The Night Cafe painted?	1888
What was the name of vincent van Gogh's brother?	Theo
What occurred when red and green were put next to one another?	red and green reinforced each other
During which century did Matisse work?	20th
Placing red and green next to each other causes their color to be what?	strengthened
What color did Matisse claim would impact ones blood pressure?	red
What color did Matisse say could penetate ones soul?	blue
What part in the paintings of Matisse did color play?	the central element
To whom did Rothko donate Passion of Christ murals?	Harvard University
In what year did Rothko donate Passion of Christ murals?	1962
What organic reds did Rothko use in the Passion of Christ murals?	Naphtol and Lithol
In what year had the Passion of Christ murals by Rothko end up ruined?	1979
What was the result of the change in color in the Rothko Passion of the Christ murals?	ruined and had to be taken down
What was red ochre composed of?	minerals
How were pigments like red lake created?	mixing organic dyes
What was red lake composed of?	insects or plants, with white chalk or alum
What was the source of color in Red lac?	the dark red resinous substance secreted by various scale insects
The Laccifer lacca was crucial to making what pigment?	Red lac
Which colors are part of the RGB model?	red, green and blue
What color light is created when one mixes red, green, and blue?	white
The RGB color model has three colors in it that are described as what kind of colors?	additive primary colors
Which era did Cennino Cennini actively paint in?	the Renaissance
What colors are used to create purple on a computer screen?	red and blue
Over what numerical scale is color measured on a computer screen?	zero to 255,
What is the total number of possible sRGB colors?	16,777,216
What is the number used to indicate pure red in sRGB?	255, 00, 00
Crimson is identified by what sRGB number?	220, 20, 60
What type of scattering is responsible for the shift in the color of sunlight?	Rayleigh
What occurs to colors of short wavelengths in Rayleigh scattering?	scatter more strongly
What is the effect on blue and green light experiencing Rayleigh scattering during sunrise?	removed almost completely
In comparison to blue and green, what would describe the wavelength of orange or red light?	longer
When was the first ruby laser invented?	1960
In what year did a red helium-neon laser come to be?	1962
What type of laser is used in a LaserDisc player?	Red helium–neon
What type of laser diode is used in a DVD player?	a 660 nm laser
What type of laser is used in Raman spectroscopy?	671 nm diode-pumped solid state (DPSS) lasers
At which period of the year are phosphates high?	the summer growing season
What causes sugar created by chlorophyll to breakdown?	phosphate
Where does phosphate within a leaf move in the fall?	the stem of the plant
What is created in fall when phosphates retreat to the stems of plants?	anthocyanin pigments
What occurs in bright light to leaves during fall?	greater the production of anthocyanins
What pigment accounts for the majority of color in red hair?	pheomelanin
There is another part of the face which gets its red color from the pigment pheomelanin, what is it?	the lips
Aside from pheomelanin what color pigment contributes to red hair?	eumelanin
In what year can the earliest used of redhead be traced to?	1510
What type of temper are people with red hair considered to have?	fiery
In alpha male mandrills what party of the body is most red according to their rank?	the face
Wearing red is connected to what result in humans, in terms of sport?	increased performance
In what sport have judges been shown to favor athletes wearing red?	tae kwon do
What is the effect of exposing a human to red when it comes to cognitive skills?	decreases performance
The amount of red in mandrill males is directly related to levels of what?	testosterone
What trait do people most commonly link red with?	courage
Why did the Popes of the middle ages wear red?	to symbolize the blood of Christ and the Christian martyrs
What was depicted on the banners of Christians in the First crusade?	a red cross on a white field
What is the cross on the banners used during the First Crusade known as?	St. George's Cross
Who was Saint George believed to be?	a Roman soldier
When was Saint Valentine martyred?	296 AD
Who was Saint Valentine?	a Roman Catholic Bishop or priest
In which century did Saint Valentine's day become connected with lovers?	14th
In what kind of countries is the celebration of Valentine's day forbidden?	Islamic
Which nation forbade the sale of Valentine's Day products in 2002 and 2011?	Saudi Arabia
What color gowns are generally worn by recent Doctors of Philosophy at Oxford?	Scarlet
What good traits is the color red associated with in China?	good fortune and prosperity
In what century did Saint Nicholas become the influence for red being worn by Santa Claus?	4th
Who was Saint Nicholas?	the Greek Christian Bishop of Myra
In what nation is Myra?	Turkey
What did a red flag signal in the Middle Ages?	defenders of a town or castle would fight to defend it
What was the importance of a red flag flown by a warship in the Middle Ages?	they would show no mercy to their enemy
Which British law forbade cars from following a bearer of a red flag as a warning to horse drawn vehicles?	the Locomotives on Highways Act 1896
Under what circimstance is a red flag flown in auto racing?	if there is danger to the drivers
What is a football player shown before being ejected from a match?	a red penalty card
In what city did the standardization of red as a color of stop lights occur?	Vienna
In what year did nations standardize on red as a color for stop lights?	1968
At what event did the color red become the standard color of stop lights?	Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals of 1968
Red is the color of stoplights due to its universal affiliation with what?	danger and warning
At what time is red at its brightest?	daytime
In what way is red used in contemporary fashion?	to attract the eyes of the viewer to the person
What is the main impact of people wearing red as it relates to the perception of distance?	People wearing red seem to be closer
Why do monarchs sometimes wear red?	to be visible from a distance in a crowd
Some professions require employees to wear red because it allows them to be what?	easily found
How many heads did the scarlet beast which a woman sat on have?	seven heads
The horned scarlet beast that a woman sat on had how many horns?	ten
What kind of cup did the woman on the scarlet horned beast have?	golden
What was on the forehead of the woman on the scarlet horned beast?	a name
Outside of the blood of the saints, on what did the woman on the scarlet horned beast become drunken?	the blood of the martyrs of Jesus
Which cardinal direction is signified by red in China?	south
What season is red identified with in China?	summer
Red paper is used to wrap gifts of money during what special celebration in China?	Chinese New Year
Who wrote the Little Red Book?	Chairman Mao Tse-Tung
In what year was the Little Red Book published?	1966
What central African warriors are said to cover themselves in red for celebrations?	Ndembu warriors
What does the Ndembu culture believe red symbolizes?	life and health
What color do the Ndembu believe is better than red?	white
What alternative colors does the Red Cross use in certain parts of Africa?	green and white
What team did the Cincinnati Red Stockings become?	the Atlanta Braves
When did the Cincinnati Red Stockings come to be?	1869
What political movment was red identified with in the 1950s?	communism
What name did the Cincinnati Red Stockings become known as for a time in the 1950s?	Redlegs
Where did the Cincinnati Red Stockings move after leaving Cincinnati?	Boston
What color jersey does Bayern Munich wear?	red
What is the nickname given to A.C. Milan?	i rossoneri
What has to occur for a player in association football to be shown a red penalty card?	a serious infraction
What occurs when a player in association football is shown a red penalty card?	the player is immediately disqualified from further play
How is an association football team impacted when a player is shown a red penalty card?	his team must continue with one less player for the game's duration
In Christian nations what does the color red often become associated with?	Christ's blood
What cross is on the British flag?	the cross of Saint George
As it relates to England, who is Saint George?	patron saint of England
Which US armed force uses red as the main color of its flag?	the United States Marine Corps
In terms of a beach, why might one see a red flag?	bad water conditions
When did the Slavic solidarity movement choose red blue and white as their colors?	the late nineteenth century
In what year did the nation of George get a new national flag?	2004
What is in the middle of the Georgian flag?	one big red cross
How many small crosses are on the Georgian flag?	four
What were the Pan-Slavic colors originally?	the colors of the Russian flag
During what time period did the German Empire use the colors red white and black?	1870 to 1918
What did red white and black become associated with in Germany?	German nationalism
Whose design was the Nazi flag?	Hitler's personal design
In what era did red white and black become part of the Nazi flag?	1920s
Red was chosen as part of the Nazi flag to do what?	attract attention
After the demise of what was the red flag linked to the French Revolution?	Bastille
On what date was the Garde Nationale empowered to hoist a red flag to signal their intervention in a riot?	October 20, 1789
On what date did the Garde Nationale kill as many as fifty people on Champs de Mars?	July 17, 1791
Who wrote the words "Against us they have raised the bloody flag of tyranny?"	Rouget de Lisle
In what year did the most ardent revolutionaries in France adopt a red flag to symbolize the blood of their fallen comrades?	1790
When was the Communist Manifesto first created?	February 1848
Who wrote the Communist Manifesto?	Karl Marx
The French Revolution resulted in the fall of which monarch?	Louis Philippe
When did the 19th century workers of Paris construct barricades and hoist red flags to protest their new government?	June 1848
Who was tasked with stopping the late 19th century worker uprisings in France?	the French Army
Who was defeated in the Franco-Prussian war?	the French Army
After Paris was seized as a result of the Franco-Prussian war, what did revolutionaries and workers create?	the Paris Commune
For how long did the Paris Commune exist?	two months
Next to whom was a a Paris Commune banner placed?	Vladimir Lenin
In what year did people of the French Communist party go to Moscow to give the Soviet government a Paris Commune banner?	1921
How many days did the recount after the 2000 US election last for?	39
In the USA red states are known to do what, in terms of politics?	vote for Republican candidates in presidential elections
In what year did the concept of red and blue states become relatively fixed?	2000
In the United States states that vote for Democratic presidential candidates are known as what?	blue states
In what year was the Community Party of China created?	1920
The Community Party of China gained power in China, what year did it happen?	1949
Who was the Party leader of the Communist Party of China when it took power?	Mao Zedong
In terms of the Communist Party of China, what is "The East is Red?"	the Party anthem
How many members does the contemporary Communist Part of China have?	eighty million members
What did the biggest star on the flag of China in 1949 represent?	the Communist Party
What does the red color in the Nepalese flag represent?	the national flower
In the mid 20th century the flag of Laos was primarily what color?	red
Which group gained power in China in 1949?	the Communist Party of China
In what year during the 20th century did the Chinese flag become red?	1949
What was the beginning date of the aerial raids on Great Britain?	7 September 1940
How many days did the aerial raids on Great Britain last?	267 days
How many times was London attacked?	71 times
Who was the UK Prime Minster at the time of the aerial raids?	Winston Churchill
What city did Winston Churchill bomb in retaliation for the killing of civilians?	Berlin
How many nights did the Luftwaffe bomb London?	57 consecutive nights
What north sea port was the secondary target for bombers that could not find their primary target?	Sea port of Hull
How many homes in London were destroyed in London?	More than one million
How many people were killed in Liverpool?	nearly 4,000 deaths
Which city centre was destroyed?	Coventry
What was the name of the Luftwaffe plan to invade Britain?	Operation Sea Lion
How many people died in the bombing of Hamburg?	42,000
What was the date of the bombing of Hamburg?	July 1943
Who was the leader of the Luftwaffe?	Hitler
In the 1920's and 30's to theorist thought wars could be won by air forces what were their names?	Giulio Douhet and Billy Mitchell
Bombing of civilian's was believed to cause what?	collapse of civilian will
What does USAAC stand for?	United States Army Air Corps
What kind of populace was believed to be most vulnerable?	Democracies
What kind of bombing raids were most favored?	night
Who believe air power alone would not be decisive?	Luftwaffe
What was the name of the Luftwaffe's bombing raids?	terror bombing
What year did the terror bombing policy become official?	1942
Who said the Luftwaffe General Staff should be taught grand strategy?	Wever
What is the mentality of potential opponents also known as?	mirror imaging
What did the Air Academies not focus on?	independent strategic air offensives
What army does the general staff belong to?	the Luftwaffe
How did Wever die?	air crash
What year did Wever die?	1936
Who took over for Wever after his death?	Albert Kesselring and Hans-Jürgen Stumpff
What two men were the most important in ground support?	Hugo Sperrle and Hans Jeschonnek
What long time careers were Sperrle and Jeschonnek involved in?	German air services
What year was the beginning of enemy bombing first promoted by Hitler?	1930s
Why did Hitler feel the Luftwaffe was unsuccessful in bombing raids?	prescribed targets are not hit
Why did Hitler feel bombing wasn't working?	inability to damage industries
In 1939 Hitler said bombing of Britain would begin when?	the moment was right
Who had skepticism towards strategic bombing?	Adolf Hitler
How did Hitler threaten small nations into accepting German rule?	air bombardment
What policy did Hitler hope the bombing of Allies would cause?	policy of moderation
What kind of prestige was Hitler hoping for?	political
Why did Hitler use terror bombing against Britain?	to produce a stalemate
Who did Hitler have a conflict over running the air force?	Hermann Göring
What strategy could have worked against the British Empire?	strangle British sea communications
What did the Kriegsmarine try to gain control over?	aircraft
Who did Goring refuse to work with in 1940 and 1941?	the Kriegsmarine
What was the major cause of the separation between the Luftwaffe and the other military structure?	communications gap
What did Goring do because of his fear of Hitler?	misrepresent what information
What year did Goring display the Luftwaffe's advanced equipment?	1939
Who's bombing program did Goring abandon in 1939?	Wever
In what city did Goring display the advance equipment?	Rechlin
Which two countries declared war on Germany on September 3 1939?	UK and France
The RAF bombed what Germany coast?	Wilhelmshaven
What kind of leaflets were dropped?	propaganda
What were the RAF operations trying to lessen?	civilian casualties
What year did the Luftwaffe destroy Rotterdam center?	1940
Which tactics were the Luftwaffe excepted to use against Britain?	air operations
Why did the Luftwaffe bomb the RAF Fighter Command?	to gain air superiority
What was the name of the Channel the Luftwaffe bomb to try to gain air superiority?	English
Which Navy was assumed not to be able to operate under German air superiority?	Royal
Why did the Luftwaffe fail to locate their targets?	poor intelligence
What did German crew members face if they were shot down over Britain?	capture
Britain's  fabrication  of fighter planes out paced Germany by what margin?	2 to 1
How big was the crew of a bomber?	four to five crewmen
How many aircraft did Britain produce in 1940?	10,000
What does OKL stand for?	Oberkommando der Luftwaffe
What month would the weather window begin to decline?	October
If serious loss had happened to the RAF where might they have pulled out of?	the north
What is the German name of Operation Sea Lion?	Unternehmen Seelöwe
Who had exponential larger naval forces?	British naval forces
The Luftwaffe air fleets were taking what kind of losses?	punishing
What did the punishing losses to the air fleet cause the Luftwaffe to do?	change in strategy
What kind of strategy did the Luftwaffe use to give their bombers better protection?	cover of darkness
What city did Hitler give a speech where he said he would erase British cities?	Sportspalast
In what year did Hitler give the speech at Sportspalast?	1940
Which British city did the Luftwaffe focus its bombing on?	London
What was the name of the large air raid that took place in daylight hours in Britain?	Battle of Britain Day
What was the main reason the Luftwaffe was not able to cause extensive damage with their missions?	bomb-load limitations
What kind of bombers was Germany not able to build?	four-engined bombers
What year did the OKL become aware that Britain would be a possible target?	early 1938
What disagreements did the  Luftwaffe staff center around?	tactics
Poor intelligence and what other problem made it difficult for the Luftwaffe to do extreme damage?	unclear strategy
What did the disputes between the staff cause to happen to the strategy against Britain?	failure before it began
Coupled with British quick reactions what cause operational capacity hard to achieve?	limitations in weapons technology
What was an important fuel in the Second World War?	coal
Who was given permission to restore power and move supplies to keep the war moving?	Regional commissioners
What kind of bombs were effective in the beginning but became less so with time?	delayed-action bombs
What did Britain do that helped make the new strategy less effective?	dispersed its production facilities
How many casualties did the British government estimate for every ton of bombs dropped?	50
As technology increased what was the amount of bombs that could be dropped in 1937 per day?	644
How many tons did experts expect Germany to drop in the first 24 hours of the war?	3,500
What committee estimated that 60 days of attacks would result in 600,000 deaths?	Imperial Defence
Who was the military theorist in 1939 who said 250,000 deaths and injury could occur in the first week of war in Britian?	Basil Liddell-Hart
What was the biggest fear aerial attacks would cause besides death and wounded?	psychological trauma
Psychiatrists believe in 1938  that mental trauma could reach how many millions?	three to four
Where did 150,000 migrate during the Munich crisis?	Wales
Who told Parliament that after long periods of attacks people would leave the cities for the country?	Winston Churchill
The government planned to evacuate 1.4 million from which city?	London
What trial took place on August 10 1939?	a blackout
What was most unpopular affect of the war with civilians ?	the blackout
How long were lights not allowed on after dark?	almost six years
Why did the government  and civil service not want to relocate during the war?	damage civilian morale
What civil-defense efforts were left to local authorities to handle?	shelters
What year did the shelter program finish?	1940
Why were the shelters soon abandoned in 1940?	unsafe
Why were Londoners forced to sleep in shelters?	attacks by night
What kind of sentiment did the government fear would developed in large group shelters?	anti-war
Who did the government see as a leading advocate for building deep shelters?	the Communist Party's
What was the name of the Pact of August 1939?	Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
Why did the government refuse to allow the London Underground stations to be used as shelters?	interfere with commuter and troop travel
Underground officials were ordered to lock the stations during raids but opened how long after the orders?	by the second week
In 1940 how many people were sleeping in the Underground stations?	150,000 a night
Muffling the sound of batter made what easier in the Underground Stations?	sleep
Why were many killed in Underground Stations?	direct hits
What was the largest number to use Underground shelters in September  27, 1940?	177,000
In 1940 what percentage used the Tube for a sleeping shelter?	4%
Where did 60% of populations stay?	at home
What year did the government start giving out Morrison shelters?	1941
Where could the Morrison shelters be used?	inside homes
What year did the government start to build new deep shelters?	1940
How many people were the new shelters going to hold?	80,000
What helped cut down time standing in the queue for shelters?	Tickets
Which two groups help improve life in the shelters?	British Red Cross and the Salvation Army
What kind of trains provided food in the shelters?	canteen
What witness wrote that these people are staunch to the bone and won't quit?	American
With the intense bomb what did not happen as great as prewar predictions expected?	psychiatric crisis
People called the raids very blitzy like they were talking about what?	weather
Anne Freud and Edward Glover said London civilians did not suffer from what?	widespread shell shock
Why did the psychiatric clinics close?	lack of need
What two things declined during the attacks in Britain?	suicides and drunkenness
The entire country was being attack and Glover believe it help people to do what?	accept and deal
What drink was never rationed?	beer
How many people attended cricket at Lord's?	13,000
What percent of Briton's expected to lose the war?	3%
What was Churchill's highest rating?	89%
What were Spitfire Funds used for?	to build fighters
What is ARP?	Air Raid Precautions
The Auxiliary Fire Service had how many members in July of 1939?	138,000
Who was given the name Blitz Scouts?	Scout Association
The Royal Army Pay Corps and what other group were in charge of salvage and clean-up?	Pioneer Corps
What group did Samuel Hoare set up in 1938?	Women's Voluntary Services for Civil Defence
Who was Home Secretary in 1938?	Samuel Hoare
How many members did the WVS have at the end of 1941?	one million
How many gas mask were issued before the war?	50 million
Who was the Air Officer Commanding Fighter Command after 1940?	Hugh Dowding
What credit did Dowding receive?	defence of British air space
What strategy could the German's have used instead of day raids?	bombing at night
Why were civic and political leaders worried about Dowdings?	lack of reaction to the new crisis
Who was reluctant to act quickly when urgent changes need to be made?	Dowding
Who thought Dowding was stubborn and didn't like to cooperate?	Air Staff
What did the Air Ministry plan to do with his failures?	attack him and his abilities
The Air Ministry was critical of Dowding after which battle?	Battle of Britain Day
Who was summoned to the Air Ministry conference on October 17, 1940?	Dowding
Lord Beaverbrook and Churchill's support of Dowding was what?	waning
Neglect of the RAF until 1938 caused what to happen?	sparse resources to build defences
The Air Ministry and which other group decided to not make night defense a top priority?	Chamberlain Government
People over the age of 35 reacted to the bombings with what?	great trepidation
Why had German raids decreased between 1916-1918?	countermeasures
How many people were killed by bomb drops during the first World War?	1,413
How many bombs had been dropped?	9,000
What did the RAF put most of their resources into?	daylight fighter defences
RAF bombers had trouble flying at night, so the British believe the Germans would do what?	suffer the same problems
What did the Air Force believe they could avoid if they carried out effective day missions?	night missions and their disadvantages
Britain believe German bombers would be unable to reach and identify what?	targets
What did the British offence become know as?	cult of the offensive
Why was the tactic of bombing German aircraft bases, factories and fuel reserves impractical?	lacked the technology and equipment
Until 1940 what type of aircraft did the RAF lacked?	specialist night-fighting
What was wrong with the anti aircraft units?	poorly equipped and lacking in numbers
What did the Lorenz beam allow aircraft to do?	land at night or in bad weather
The Germans developed the Lorenz into what system?	Knickebein
The Knickebein was the same as the Lorenz but used how many beams?	two Lorenz beams
The Germans flew along one beam until they picked up the second beam the sound telling them when to start doing what?	dropping their bombs
While Knickebein was used my most German crews who used the X-Gerat system?	specially trained pathfinder crews
What frequency did the X-Gerat system use?	66–77 MHz
What rate per minute did ground transmitters send?	180
When the bomber crossed the first beam the bomber-aimer did what?	start the bombing-clock
What mechanism cause the bombs to be released?	clock's timing
Which system was the most complex of the three?	Y-Gerät
Who operated the automatic beam system?	the bomber's autopilot
What kind of checks help to keep the plane on course?	Direction-finding
The crew could be order to drop the bomb by what?	a code word
Who issued the code word to the bombers?	ground controller
The beam was traced to what town?	Derby
The Bean Approach Training Development Unit were fitted with what kind of transmitter to search for the Knickebein?	30 MHz receiver
In 1940 a German prisoner overheard boasting that the British would never find what system?	Knickebein
Which RAF technical advisor was the conversation passed onto?	Dr. R. V. Jones
The first jamming operation was carried out using what machines?	electrocautery machines
The German beacons used what frequency band?	medium
What two letter identifier did the signal have?	Morse
What system used a separate locations for a receiver and a directional aerial?	Meacon
When a German bomber flew to close to its own beam what happened to the signal?	stronger on the direction finder
Anti-aircraft defenses became better after what?	Blitz was over
What did they use to lure German bombers away from their targets?	ruses
What kind of airfields were prepared to stand up to skilled observers?	dummy
What was the name given to these dummy airfields?	Starfish
Fake fires were used as what kind of technique?	diversionary
What was injected into the fires from time to time to produce a flash?	water
Two tanks one of oil, one of water fed what kind of fire?	boiler
What did these flashes simulate?	German C-250 and C-500 Flammbomben
What was the purpose of these fires?	deceive German bombardiers
The bombing of the Thames Estuary cause how many civilian casualties?	1,600
How many were killed in the bombing of the Thames Estuary?	around 400
How many aircraft did the Luftwaffe lose?	41
How many German pilots were killed?	six
How many Air Fleet 3 attacked that night?	247
What was the name of the airfield where heavy raids took place?	Farnborough
How many Bf 109s were lost?	13
FighterCommand lost how many fighters?	17
How many pilots did Fighter Command lose?	six
What caused the delay in the effort?	weather was poor
On September 15 the Luftwaffe made daylight raids on what target in London?	Thames Estuary
What two targets were the Luftwaffe trying to destroy?	docks and rail communications
What was the reason to try and draw the RAF into a battle?	destroy their fighters in large numbers
What was this air battle called?	Battle of Britain Day
The Luftwaffe lost what percentage of its bombers sent that day?	18
Who thought the Luftwaffe could win?	Göring
What day did Hitler postponed Operation Sea Lion?	17 September
What was the name of the man from the Soviet Union who was doubtful of Operation Sea Lion?	Joseph Stalin
Who did the Luftwaffe try to lure into battle using its bombers?	RAF
When did the OKL switch to night raids?	7 October
On October 14 how many German bombers attacked?	380
How many people were killed?	Around 200
Who fired anti-defense rounds?	General Frederick Alfred Pile
How many rounds of anti-defense were fired?	8,326 rounds
How many German bombers were shot down?	two
How much of the short tons of bombs were dropped during the day?	10 percent
What two cities had 500 short tons of bombs dropped on them during the end of October?	Birmingham and Coventry
What was targeted with 12 short tons of bombs?	The Metropolitan-Vickers works in Manchester
Which was targeted more heavily, bomber or fighter command airfields?	Bomber Command airfields
Liverpool had how many short tons dropped on it?	200
What was the Luftwaffe's second primary policy?	to interfere with production in the vast industrial arms factories of the West Midlands
Who was in command of the Luftflotte 2?	Kesselring
How many sorties a night was Luftflotte 3 doing?	250
What did the Fliegerkorps X concentrate on?	mining operations against shipping
By April of 1941 about how many mines had been dropped?	3,984 mines
In September how many railway hits were there in Great Britain?	no less than 667
By mid November of 1940 how many incendiaries were dropped on London?	1,000,000
What did the Ministry of Home Security fail to discover?	the slightest sign of a break in morale
What locations suffered strong diversionary tactics?	Birmingham, Coventry and Liverpool
About how many civilians were injured in September and October?	20,000
What was the name of the American observer?	Ingersoll
The American observer said what about the damage to London?	to sum up, was more general and more extensive than I had imagined.
How many bridges over the Thames were struck?	No bridge over the Thames had been hit
The Battersea Power Station took how many hits in two months?	one minor hit ("a nick")
What did German pilots use to gain knowledge of an airfield?	prewar commercial flights.
British night air defenses were effective to what height?	12,000 ft (3,700 m)
By July of 1940 how many guns were deployed in Britain?	only 1,200 heavy and 549 light guns
What was the practical ceiling of the effective heavy guns?	25,000 ft (7,600 m)
What type of light gun dealt with aircraft up to 6000 ft.?	Bofors 40 mm
What is believed to have caused many civilian casualties from anti-aircraft guns?	falling shell fragments
Who reorganised London's defences?	General Pile
The British were how far below the establishment of heavy anti-aircraft artillery?	one-third
Who relied on night fighters?	Dowding
Who's four squadrons shot down more enemy aircraft than any other type?	Boulton Paul Defiant
How were AA defenses improved?	by better use of radar and searchlights
The bombers used what out of desperation?	airborne search lights
What was considered unreliable?	Airborne Interception radar
Gunlaying radar and RAF controls combined to create what system?	Ground Control-led Interception
What used most of Fighter Command's resources?	the Battle of Britain
Who replaced Dowding on November 25?	Sholto Douglas
What supported the GL carpet?	six GCI sets controlling radar-equipped night-fighters
How many pilots remained in February 1941?	87 pilots
How many number of contacts and combats were there in May?	204 and 74
What did a bomber crew need to do for a good chance at evasion?	spot the fighter first
What was critical in the night battles over Britain?	radar
What concept eventually became successful?	airborne radar
On what day did airborne radar help intercept and destroy enemy aircraft for the first time?	the night of 22/23 July 1940
Who was the RAF night fighter ace that used airborne radar to destroy a Ju 88 bomber?	John Cunningham
The Luftwaffe's change in strategy targeted what primarily?	the West Midlands
How many parachute mines were dropped?	127
The Coventry raid led to what phrase being in widespread use?	"to conventrate"
What stopped work in 9 factories in Coventry?	loss of public utilities
What effect did the raid have strategically?	a brief 20 percent dip in aircraft production
How many bombers hit Birmingham?	369
For how many months did the night raids continue for?	two months
How many tons of bombs had to be dropped to be considered a major attack?	more than 100 tons of bombs dropped
December saw how many attacks?	only 11 major and five heavy attacks
On what day was London itself attacked?	the evening of 29 December
What group was the first to use incendiaries?	Kampfgruppe 100
How many fire bombs were dropped per minute?	300
How many civilians were killed in the bombing?	28,556 killed
The Luftwaffe dropped how many short tons of bombs?	18,291 short tons
Why were port cities targeted by the Luftwaffe?	to try to disrupt trade and sea communications
How many times was Swansea bombed heavily?	four times
What was primarily damaged in the attacks?	commercial and domestic areas
What cities had large sections of them destroyed?	Portsmouth Southsea and Gosport
What was left mostly unharmed?	the docks
What was the primary goal of the German air doctrine?	target civilian morale
In November and December of 1940 what changed to make attacks on civilians a moot point?	large-scale raids
What had nearly been considered indiscriminate bombing?	use of mines and incendiaries, for tactical expediency
Lighting targets hidden by haze had to be done without what?	regard for the civilian population
What was the group that used incendiaries and high explosives to mark targets?	Beleuchtergruppe
The Feuerleitung (Blaze Control) tactic led to what creation for marking targets?	Brandbombenfelder (Incendiary Fields)
What was the nickname of bombs used in streets and residential areas?	"Satan"
What was the weight of the "Max" bomb?	2,500 kg (5,512 lb)
Decision changes at organizational levels led to what type of attacks?	unrestricted area attack or Terrorangriff (Terror Attack)
What was one of the reasons for unrestricted area attacks?	inaccuracy of navigation
How was it known that precision bombing was changed to area attacks?	tactical methods and weapons dropped
What percentage of incendiaries were used in December?	92 percent
How was it determined that homes of industrial workers were targeted?	Captured German air crews
What did Erich Raeder believe the Luftwaffe needed to do?	support the German submarine force
Raeder convinced Hitler to do what?	attack British port facilities.
What ultimately convinced Hitler that Raeder was right?	the high success rates of the U-Boat force
Submarines and naval aircraft damaged what primarily?	British war economy
What became the new targets for the Kriegsmarine?	British coastal centres and shipping at sea west of Ireland
What was Hitler's Directive 23?	Directions for operations against the British War Economy
What was a top priority of Directive 23?	aerial interdiction of British imports by sea
What prevented the targeting of sea communications before?	Operation Eagle Attack and the following Battle of Britain
What was considered more important than the interdiction of sea communications?	bombing land-based aircraft industries
What was the concession Goring made with the strategic bombing against Britain?	Directive 23
What did Goring believe the Kriegsmarine would gain with further support?	control of more Luftwaffe units
Who was Raeder's successor?	Karl Dönitz
What was detrimental to the success of a strategic effect against Britain?	Göring's lack of cooperation
How did Goring expect to regain prestige?	by subduing Britain by air power alone
What was the first consideration for the OKL to support Directive 23?	difficulty in estimating the impact of bombing upon war production
What was the second consideration?	the conclusion British morale was unlikely to break
What did the OKL insist on maintaining?	pressure, or diverting strength, onto industries
When would other targets be considered available?	if the primary ones could not be attacked because of weather conditions
What was inflicting heavy losses and increasing the air war designed to do?	create the impression an amphibious assault on Britain was planned for 1941
What was preventing escalation of air operations?	meteorological conditions over Britain
What happened to airfields?	Airfields became water-logged
How many bomber groups were relocated to Germany?	18
How many sorties were flown in March 1941?	4,000
When did the Luftwaffe fly inland missions?	only on moonlit nights
Why were ports better targets?	Ports were easier to find
How did the Germans confuse the British?	radio silence was observed until the bombs fell
Why was the X-Gerat frequencies used more?	British selective jamming was degrading the effectiveness of Y-Gerät
What was focused in March?	western ports
What did these attacks accomplish?	breaks in morale
Why was the OKL forced to improvise?	shortage of bombers
How many Ju 87 Stuka dive-bombers and Jabos were used?	50
How many German bombs hit their target?	only one-third
How many sorties a night were crews asked to fly?	two or three sorties
What contributed to the exhaustion of crews flying extra sorties?	Bombers were noisy, cold, and vibrated badly
What happened to Peter Stahl when he fell asleep flying?	woke up to discover the entire crew asleep.
What did Peter's crew take to complete their mission?	oxygen and Dextro-Energen tablets
What did the British fear most?	intensification of submarine and air attack
What was an important destination for supply convoys from North America?	Liverpool
The Liverpool Blitz sank how much shipping?	39,126 long tons (39,754 t) of shipping
How many ships were destroyed on May 8, 1941?	57 ships
How much of the overseas trade did the Port of London take on?	one-third of overseas trade
How many houses were spared damage in Glasgow?	seven
How many people per week were losing housing?	40,000 people
Why was Plymouth targeted the most?	because of its vulnerable position on the south coast
What did the Germans use along with incendiaries and bombs?	aerial mines
How many AAA shells were fired?	Over 2,000
What were two large ports on the English east coast in the North?	Newcastle-upon-Tyne and Sunderland
Sunderland saw how many incendiaries used against it on 25 April?	9,000 incendiaries
How many bombers were used in a five-hour attack?	120
What was the result of the German attacks?	the Germans failed to prevent maritime movements or cripple industry in the regions
When was the last major attack London saw?	10/11 May 1941
How many tonnes of bombs did the Luftwaffe use on London?	800 tonnes
How many casualties were inflicted?	1,436 people were killed and 1,792 seriously injured
What was the damage done to London's streets?	One-third of London's streets were impassable
What showed RAF night fighter effectiveness was increasing?	63 German fighters were sent with the bombers
How was the British night fighter operations faring?	were proving highly successful.
How did the Bristol Blenheim F.1 perform against German aircraft?	was undergunned, with just four .303 in (7.7 mm) machine guns
What did interception rely upon?	visual sighting
How did the Bristol Blenheim F.1 compare to German aircraft speed?	struggled to reach the speed of the German bombers
What performed better during night fighting?	The Boulton Paul Defiant
How could aircraft engage bombers when fitted with a turret?	engage the unsuspecting German bomber from beneath
What benefits did attacking from below offer?	larger target, compared to attacking tail-on, as well as a better chance of not being seen by the bomber
What was the max speed of a Beaufighter?	320 mph (510 km/h)
What is the operational ceiling of the Beaufighter?	26,000 ft (7,900 m)
how many machine guns did the Beaufighter include?	six .303 in Browning machine guns
What day was the first victory the RAF had with airborne radar?	19 November
What was the most losses the Luftwaffe suffered on any mission?	one- to two-percent losses
How many bombers hit Plymouth on Hitler's birthday?	712
How many bombs hit Plymouth on Hitler's birthday?	1,000 tons of bombs
On May 3/4 how many German bombers were lost?	nine
How many German bombers were shot down by the RAF in May?	38 German bombers
The Luftwaffe used how many short tons of bombs during the Blitz?	45,000 short tons
The Luftwaffe helped the U-boats by sinking how much shipping?	58,000 long tons
How did the British production fare as a result of all the bombing?	overall the British production rose steadily throughout this period
What was the greatest achievement of the bombings?	British were denied the opportunity to reach the planned target of 2,500 aircraft in a month
How long was the recovery of industrial cities from raids?	most took from 10–15 days
How could have more been achieved in the air offensive?	had the OKL exploited their enemy's weak spot
What did the disputes in the OKL tend to be about?	about tactics rather than strategy
What was the Luftwaffe incapable of doing?	an economic-industrial analysis
How many casualties did the Blitz ultimately cause?	cost around 41,000 lives, and may have injured another 139,000
What helped increase the Bomber Command's offensives?	the German experience
What did the RAF conclude?	bombers should strike a single target each night and use more incendiaries because they had a greater impact on production than high explosives
What caused the most production disruption?	when city centres were devastated through the loss of administrative offices, utilities and transport.
What did the Luftwaffe fail?	failed in precision attack
What did the experience of German's using incendiaries mean?	using incendiaries was the way forward for operations over Germany.
What was the critical lesson Air Staff ignored?	Targeting German morale, as Bomber Command would do, was no more successful.
Aviation strategists disputed over what?	that morale was ever a major consideration for Bomber Command.
What did 16 of the Western Air Plans not mention?	morale as a target.
When was morale finally mentioned?	ninth wartime directive on 21 September 1940
When were industrial cities to be targeted?	if weather denied strikes on Bomber Command's main concern, oil.
Without what could morale collapse occur according to Arthur Harris?	without the destruction of the German economy.
What was the primary strategy for Bomber Command offensives?	to destroy the German industrial base (economic warfare), and in doing so reduce morale
Arthur Harris announced that Bomber Command would enable economic warfare to achieve what?	"a state of devastation in which surrender is inevitable."
What view became popular of the British people in WWII?	people locked in national solidarity.
When did this popular view come to be?	in the 1980s and 1990s, especially after the publication of Angus Calder's book The Myth of the Blitz (1991).
Political factions in Britain supported what view of Britains in WWII?	aggressive British patriotism successfully defending democracy.
What was the Historians' critical response to this view?	over-emphasised claims of righteous nationalism and national unity.
What did Calder try to expose in his book?	some of the counter-evidence of anti-social and divisive behaviours
What was the communist party agitated over?	the need for bomb-proof shelters.
What did Londoners use for bomb-shelters?	Underground railway system
What did Morrison warn he couldn't do?	that he could not counter the Communist unrest unless provision of shelters were made.
Who did the Communists blame for the damage in the Conventry raids?	the rich factory owners, big business and landowning interests
What was Morrison forced to do in response to the Communist Party?	the stoppage of the Daily Worker and The Week; the Communist newspaper and journal.
The success of the Communists helped what political group?	British Union of Fascists (BUF)
Where did anti-semitic attitude spread primarily?	particularly in London
What was one the rumors that Jews were doing in regard to shelters?	secured the best shelters via underhanded methods
What was feared would happen when different races were mixed in shelters?	race riots
What was another reason for populations moving?	industry dispersal may have been a factor
How much of London's population left?	Over a quarter
What locations saw an increase in populations?	south Wales and Gloucester
How much of the population returned in four months?	88% of evacuated mothers, 86% of small children, and 43% of school children
How many evacuees were there?	1.4 million
What are the audiobooks with wartime recordings?	The Blitz, The Home Front and British War Broadcasting
What are some of the things included in these recordings?	period interviews with civilians, servicemen, aircrew, politicians and Civil Defence personnel, as well as Blitz actuality recordings
What is one of the notable recordings included?	Thomas Alderson, the first recipient of the George Cross, John Cormack, who survived eight days trapped beneath rubble on Clydeside
What is a second recording that is of note?	Herbert Morrison's famous "Britain shall not burn" appeal for more fireguards in December 1940.
Which president signed the Act into law?	Richard Nixon
On what day was the Endangered Species Act signed?	December 28
What did the Supreme Court cite as the intent of Congress in enacting the Endangered Species Act?	to halt and reverse the trend toward species extinction, whatever the cost
Which two federal agencies administer the Act?	the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
In what year did the Endangered Species Act become law?	1973
What was the historical range of the whooping crane?	central Canada South to Mexico, and from Utah to the Atlantic coast
What two issues caused steady decline in the whooping crane population?	Unregulated hunting and habitat loss
What was the estimated population of the whooping crane in 1941?	16 birds
How many years after the noted absence of the whooping crane from its breeding range did the first law regulating wildlife commerce pass	eight years
What was the first federal law that regulated wildlife commerce?	Lacey Act of 1900
What did the first federal wildlife commerce law prohibit?	interstate commerce of animals killed in violation of state game laws
What wildlife was covered by the first federal wildlife commerce regulation?	all fish and wildlife and their parts or products, as well as plants
What law passed in 1940 regarding the population of the U.S. national bird?	Bald Eagle Protection Act of 1940
What did the Endangered Species Act authorize the Secretary of the Interior to do?	list endangered domestic fish and wildlife
The Endangered Species Act permitted how much annual expenditure by the US Fish and Wildlife Service for habitat purchase?	$15 million per year
The Endangered Species Act gave the Secretary of the Interior administrative power of what organization?	the National Wildlife Refuge System
How did the Endangered Species Act impact wildlife commerce?	The act did not address the commerce in endangered species and parts
How did the Endangered Species Act impact other agencies not specifically mentioned in the Act?	Other public agencies were encouraged, but not required, to protect species
What is the nickname given to the first listing of endangered species?	"Class of '67"
How was the first listing limited in what species were listed?	It included only vertebrates
What was concluded to be the biggest threat to the listed species?	habitat destruction
How did being listed initially impact species?	the animals on the endangered species list still were not getting enough protection, thus further threatening their extinction
When was the Endangered Species Conservation Act passed?	December, 1969
How did the Endangered Species Conservation Act benefit endangered species?	by prohibiting their importation and subsequent sale in the United States
What did the Endangered Species Conservation Act add to the wildlife definition of the Lacey Act?	mammals, reptiles, amphibians, mollusks and crustaceans
What two reptiles were particularly of interest for the inclusion of "reptiles" in the Endangered Species Conservation Act?	alligators and crocodiles
What important precedent did this set for invertebrates?	This law was the first time that invertebrates were included for protection
Who led the team of lawyers and scientists who crafted the Endangered Species Act of 1973?	Dr. Russell E. Train
The team leader was the first appointed head of what organization?	the Council on Environmental Quality
Who wrote the most challenged section of the Act?	Dr. Gerard A. "Jerry" Bertrand
Who was the core staffer to the legislation that worked for the EPA and continued to work in the Office of Endangered Species?	Dr. Earl Baysinger
What Congress called for the drafting of the Endangered Species Act of 1973?	the 93rd United States Congress
How many different ways can a species be added to the endangered list?	two ways
What federal program is used to list a species?	candidate assessment program
How long is the screening period of an individual's or organization's petition to add a species to the list	90-day screening period
In the case of vertebrates, what is the most lenient interpretation of "species"?	a "distinct population segment."
What word was added to the Endangered Species Act in 1982?	"solely"
Because of the change to the Endangered Species Act in 1982, what is the only consideration for being listed as endangered?	the biological status of the species
Which president issued an Executive Order that required financial consideration of all government actions?	Ronald Reagan
What did Congress do to the Executive Order that would have included financial considerations as a factor for a species to be listed?	Congress rejected
How is public notice given regarding a listing?	through legal notices in newspapers, and communicated to state and county agencies within the species' area
How long after a published notice of the listing may a public hearing regarding the listing be requested?	45 days
Do listing notices cross international soil?	Foreign nations may also receive notice of a listing
What section of the Endangered Species Act establishes critical habitat regulations?	Section 4
Critical habitat regulation links what two topics?	habitat protection and recovery goals
What does critical habitat regulation require?	the identification and protection of all lands, water and air necessary to recover endangered species
What is an example of a critical habitat consideration that would apply to plant wildlife?	seed germination and dispersal needs
How are non-federal government activities that might impact critical habitat often subject to the Endangered Species Act?	require a federal permit
What are some non-regulation actions that critical habitats encourage?	land purchases, grant making, restoration, and establishment of reserves
What does the Endangered Species Act detail about government action regarding critical habitats?	federal agencies are prohibited from authorizing, funding or carrying out actions that "destroy or adversely modify" critical habitats
What is the time limit for designating a species critical habitat after the species has been added to the endangered list?	within one year
Which presidential adminstration limited the protective status of critical habitat in 1986?	the Reagan Administration
After the limitations placed on critical habitat were lifted by the courts, where were critical habitats established primarily?	Hawaii, California and other western states
Where have the majority of critical habitats in the Midwest and Eastern states been located geographically?	primarily on rivers and coastlines
What four topics are required in an Endangered Species Recovery Plan?	goals, tasks required, likely costs, and estimated timeline to recover endangered species
What is the time limit for completing an Endangered Species Recovery Plan?	The ESA does not specify when a recovery plan must be completed.
What Recovery Plan duration the does Fish and Wildlife Service plan for in their policies?	completion within three years
What is the average time of completion of an Endangered Species Recovery Plan?	approximately six years
Which president had the most completed Recovery Plans during their administration?	Clinton (72)
What is the primary consideration for determining if projects may be carried out in areas with endangered species?	whether a listed species will be harmed by the action and, if so, how the harm can be minimized
If a species may be harmed, who holds final say on whether the project may proceed?	the Endangered Species Committee
How many members are on the ad hoc panel that allows project exemptions for cases where a species may harmed?	seven
How many votes must be in favor of the exemption in order to award the exemption?	Five
What is one specific requirement regarding the make-up of the exmeption panel?	at least one appointee from the state where the project is to occur
Who reviews exemption considerations before the Endangered Species committee?	the Forest Service, and either the FWS or the NMFS
During informal consultation, what is the goal?	to determine if harm may occur
What prompts the need for formal consultation?	if the harm is believed to be likely
What considerations are weighed during the consultations?	whether the species will be harmed, whether the habitat will be harmed and if the action will aid or hinder the recovery
How many times has the exemption process been used, as of 2009?	six
What were the results of those exemption petitions?	one was granted, one was partially granted, one was denied and three were withdrawn
Why is this exemption provision often considered a nonfactor?	few consultations result in jeopardy opinions
How can jeopardy opinions be dissuaded?	in the identification of reasonable and prudent alternatives to avoid jeopardy.
Who owns the majority of critical habitat?	non-federal property, owned by citizens, states, local governments, tribal governments and private organizations
What program gives incentives to private landowners to protect species on their land?	Habitat Conservation Plan
Before the amendment in 1982, under what situations could a listed species be displaced?	only for scientific or research purposes
An approved HCP results in what being issued for the species?	an Incidental Take Permit (ITP)
How long do ITPs last?	allow incidental takes for varying amounts of time
How is the public made aware of ITP applications?	A notice of the permit application action is published in the Federal Register
How long does the public have to comment on ITP applications?	30 to 90 days
What location held the first HCP?	San Bruno Mountain, California
What percentage of the critical habitat was protected for the area that received the first HCP?	87%
What type of animal was being protected in the area that received the first HCP?	butterflies
What 1981 court decision added to the power of HCPs and ITPs for conservation?	Palila v. Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources
Who wrote the article "Searching for Consensus and Predictability: Habitat Conservation Planning under the Endangered Species Act of 1973."	Robert D.Thornton
What did Thornton compare the scientific and legal advances to, from the viewpoint of the development community?	a major headache
What is the name of the rule that protects the landowner if their conservation efforts fall short?	The "No Surprises" rule
Why is this particular rule so controversial?	the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) loses much ability to further protect a species if the mitigation measures by the landowner prove insufficient.
If the landowner fails to adequately protect the species, what penalties do they face with the "No Surprises" rule?	The landowner or permittee would not be required to set aside additional land or pay more in conservation money
Who covers the cost of additional efforts if the ITP holder's efforts fall short?	The federal government would have to pay for additional protection measures
What two groups are bound by a "Safe Harbor" agreement?	the private landowner and FWS
In exchange for altering the property to a more beneficial state, what does the landowner gain from the Safe Harbor agreement?	assurances that the FWS will permit future "takes" above a pre-determined level
Which presidential administration developed Safe Harbor policy?	the Clinton Administration
Are Safe Harbor agreements and ITPs mutually exclusive?	A landowner can have either a "Safe Harbor" agreement or an Incidental Take Permit, or both.
How do Candidate Conservation Agreements differ from Safe Harbor agreements?	Candidate Conservation Agreements With Assurances(CCA) are meant to protect unlisted species
How does a CCA help protect a private landowner?	if, in the future the unlisted species becomes listed, the landowner will not be required to do more than already agreed upon in the CCA.
How does a CCA impact unlisted species?	enhance or maintain habitat of unlisted species which are declining and have the potential to become threatened or endangered
What animal species was delisted in August 2008?	the Virginia northern flying squirrel
How long had the squirrel been listed as endangered?	listed since 1985
Which president signed an Act directing the delisting of the Northern Rocky Mountain population of gray wolf?	President Obama
As of September 2012, how many species had been delisted due to recovery?	twenty-eight
Of the ten species removed due to extinction, how many are believe to have already been extinct when listed?	seven
How many species have been downgraded from endangered to threatened status?	Twenty-five
How many species were delisted due to discoveries of new populations?	six
How did a land owner impact the protected red-cockaded woodpecker species?	increased harvesting and shortened the age at which he harvests his trees to ensure that they do not become old enough to become suitable habitat
What is the success rate of the list and the Endangered Species Act initiatives?	1%
What is the name given to the act of pre-emptive habitat destruction by landowners fearing a protected species?	"Shoot, Shovel and Shut-Up."
How many species are currently listed?	over 2,000
What is one particular industry that exploits Endangered Species Act loopholes?	exotic pet trade
What is one particular loophole that aids roadside zoos and private collectors?	no provisions are made for in-state commerce
What allows exploitation of interstate commerce regulations?	the ESA allows listed species to be shipped across state lines as long as they are not sold
How can fake breeding loans be used to sell wildlife?	in return they can legally receive a reciprocal monetary "donation" from the receiving party.
Why are there not more arrests from undercover investigations of interstate wildlife commerce?	the US Fish and Wildlife Service revealed that the agency does not have sufficient staff to perform undercover investigations
The Center for Public Integrity found that 151 of what primate were moved from the New England Primate Research Center into exotic pet trade?	cotton-top tamarin
What happened in 1976 that impacted this primate's classification as Endanger?	over 800 cotton-top tamarins were imported into the United States
What school is affiliated with the New England Primate Research Center?	Harvard
Section 6 of the Endangered Species Act provided funding for what purpose?	development of programs for management of threatened and endangered species by state wildlife agencies
What is one notable drawback with state wildlife agencies creating their own lists?	These state lists often include species which are considered endangered or threatened within a specific state but not within all states
What states are listing species that are endangered in their own state, but that are not endangered in all other states?	Florida, Minnesota, Maine, and California
Is the public given incentive to report Endangered Species Act violations?	A reward will be paid to any person who furnishes information which leads to an arrest, conviction, or revocation of a license
Given that a violator caused wildlife harm, who may provide financial assistance for the care of the harmed wildlife?	The Secretary
Costs over what balance lead to the Secretary of the Treasury depositing money into the cooperative endangered species conservation fund?	$500,000
The word Vacuum stems from what Latin adjective?	vacuus
What does the term used by Physicists, partial vacuum, refer to?	imperfect vacuum
What is a vacuum?	space void of matter
What type of pressure is less than atmospheric pressure in a vacuum?	gaseous
What Latin term is used to describe an object in a vacuum?	in vacuo
The Vacuum state is considered what?	the ground state of matter.
A typical vacuum cleaner produces enough suction to do what to air pressure?	reduce air pressure by around 20%
The quality of a partial vacuum refers to what?	how closely it approaches a perfect vacuum
Outer space has a high quality vacuum with what equivalent?	a few hydrogen atoms per cubic meter
If all matter is removed from a vacuum, would it be empty space?	it would still not be "empty"
What did Aristotle believe about a void?	no void could occur naturally,
What was historically disputed about vacuums?	whether such a thing as a vacuum can exist.
What did something that was literally nothing at all,According to Plato, mean?	cannot rightly be said to exist
Aristotle thought what would fill any rarity that might give rise to a void?	denser surrounding material continuum
In what century did believes start to move away from Aristotle's idea regarding a void?	14th century
What thought process was used in the beginning belief of the existence of vacuums?	Stoic physics
Roger Bacon,Walter Burley and Blasius of Parma were from what century?	13th and 14th
What belief regarding a cosmic void was accepted by most in the 17th century?	a supernatural void beyond the confines of the cosmos itself
What does Rapid decompression do to the lungs?	rupture of the delicate alveoli
What causes barotrauma?	rapid decompression
What amount of pressure drop can kill you if it occurs suddenly?	13 kPa (100 Torr),
What does acceleration of oxygen consumption do?	hypoxia
rapid decompression is more dangerous than what?	vacuum exposure
What did Descartes believe about vacuums in nature?	that a vacuum does not occur in nature
Whose work with metaphysics would come to define the notion of empty space?	Descartes
What philosophy combined with Descartes to push quantum activity in the 20th century?	Cartesian mechanical philosophy
An infinite sea of particles with negative energy  was a model propesed by whom?	Paul Dirac
What year was the Dirac sea modeled?	1930
When werer virtual particles confirmed?	late 20th century
What year was the uncertainty principle formed?	1927,
What theorized that time and energy can be measured?	Werner Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
what is a perfect example of a filled vacuum showing a curvature?	The black hole
Who's equations  helped to imply vanishing of the Ricci tensor?	Einstein
what produces curvature in a vacuum?	tidal forces and gravitational waves
What has no electric charge?	black hole
Where do most satellites operate?	low Earth orbit
What system could possibly be used for interplanetary travel?	solar sails
why do satellites need to fire engines every few day to keep orbit?	atmospheric density
above what line location in outer space to satellites orbit?	Kármán line
Al-Farabi concluded a perfect vacuum was incoherent using what?	handheld plungers in water.
Ibn al-Haytham used geometry to demonstrate  what?	place (al-makan) is the imagined three-dimensional void between the inner surfaces of a containing body
who stated that there was no evidence to rule out a vacuum?	Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī
what did Al-Farabi say expanded to fill available space	air's volume
What type of pump appeared in the 15th century?	suction pump
Who required no restrictions regarding God's power?	Bishop Etienne Tempier
When did Buridan state that teams of ten horses could not open a bellow with a sealed port?	14th century
the 1277 Paris Condemnations led to what conclusion?	God could create a vacuum if he so wished.
What was a common belief about vacuums and nature?	nature abhorred a vacuum
what was the belief that nature abhorred a vaccuum called?	horror vacui
What was the vacuum created by the mercury displacement pump?	partial vacuum of about 10 Pa (0.1 Torr).
What year was the Toepler Pump invented?	1850
What was first invented by Otto von Guericke ?	vacuum pump
Who conducted the Magdeburg experiment?	Otto von Guericke
What was made visible at a partial vacuum of 10 Pa?	A number of electrical properties
What was originally believed the heavens were filled with?	aether
Why were experiments done on luminiferous aether in the 19 Century?	"While the interstellar absorbing medium may be simply the ether, [it] is characteris
Who stated that the character of a gas and free molecule were in ether?	Henry Pickering
Where are the highest amounts of naturally occurring partial vacuums?	outer space
What was ether originally thought to be made of?	rigid indestructible material
What indicated the quality of a vacuum?	amount of matter remaining in the system
How is vacuum generally measured?	its absolute pressure
What does the MFP of residual gases show?	average distance that molecules will travel between collisions with each other.
What is particle gas dynamics?	study of fluid flows
Absolute pressure  being equal to current atmospheric pressure means what?	"Below atmospheric"
What is a torr equal to?	displacement of a millimeter of mercury
What is another often used options to measure vacuum?	barometric scale
Why is mercury the better option for liquid used in a Hydrostatic gauge?	its high density and low vapour pressure
What is a vertical column of liquid in a tube which has different pressures at each end called?	Hydrostatic gauges
What is a hydrostatic gauge used for?	measure pressures ranging from 1 torr (100 Pa) to above atmospheric
Why is the McLeod gauge special?	can measure vacuums as high as 10−6 torr
An indirect measurement of pressure is most often calibrated by what?	McLeod gauge
The fact that gases ability to conduct heat decreases with pressure is used by what form of measurement?	Thermal conductivity gauges
How is the wire filament in a Thermal conductivity gauge heated?	by running current through it
What is a Pirani gauge sensitive to?	chemical composition of the gases being measured
What is a RTD used for on a Thermal Conductivity gauge?	to measure the temperature of the filament
A Pirani gauge is accurate within what ranges?	10 torr to 10−3 torr
What affects the number of ions in a gauge?	the pressure in the gauge
What must be used for accurate measurement on the composition of gases at a high vacuums?	mass spectrometer must be used in conjunction with the ionization gauge
What gauge is accurate from 10-2 torr to 10-9 torr?	Cold cathode gauges
Why does a mass spectrometer need to be used with gauge to be accurate at high vacuum gas measurement?	composition of gases at high vacuums will usually be unpredictable
What are the two types of Ion gauges?	hot cathode and cold cathode.
density of oxygen like that of sea-level atmosphere is needed to do what?	sustain life at pressures much lower than atmospheric,
What is the lowest altitude where acclimatization or a suit is not needed to prevent sickness in humans?	of up to 3 km
When will a person or animal lose consciousness  when exposed to a vacuum?	after a few seconds
A shuttle astronauts prevents ebullism at 2 kPa with what item?	the Crew Altitude Protection Suit (CAPS)
What is the forming of gas bubbles in body fluids at a lowered pressure called?	ebullism
What prevents body rupture at low altitude when human body is bloated by gas bubbles?	tissues are elastic and porous
What can boil away in extreme vaccum exposure?	Some oils and greases
How should the grain direct of metallic flanges run to flange faces?	parallel
What are 2 metals that can be absorbed in an ultra high vacuum system?	stainless steel or titanium
What becomes a concern in an ultra high vacuum system regarding aluminum or palladium?	water absorption
The state with the lowest possible energy in quantum mechanics defines what ?	vacuum
A vacuum state with no matter particles or photons is called what?	QED
why is a QED vacuum impossible to achieve ?	impossible to eliminate all the blackbody photons
What is a QCD?	vacuum of quantum chromodynamics,
When are electric and magnetic fields with zero average values, but their variances are not at zero?	In QED vacuum
What is a verified effect of vacuum fluctuation?	spontaneous emission
what is  vacuum fluctuation?	virtual particles that hop into and out of existence
Finite energy in a QED is called what?	vacuum energy
What modifies can Coulomb's Law in a vacuum?	vacuum near an electric charge
`Why does thermosphere past the Karman line vary so greatly?	due to space weather
What is commonly known as the boundary of outer space?	the Kármán line
What do Astrophysicists use to describe outer space beyond the karman line?	number density
What is more significant than isotropic gas pressure past the Karman line?	radiation pressure from the Sun and the dynamic pressure of the solar winds
What was the object to use first in widespread manner process of vacuum?	incandescent light bulb
What is produced by a vacuum and used in electron beam welding and vacuum frying?	chemical inertness
Hight to ultra-high vacuums removes what obstruction?	obstruction of air,
How does freeze drying, distillation and metallurgy benefit from a deep vacuum?	Deep vacuum lowers the boiling point of liquids and promotes low temperature outgassing
What are two things made possible by the electrical properties of vacuum?	electron microscopes and vacuum tubes
What provides power assistance for auto brakes?	vacuum servo
What are two available sources of vacuum on a moving airplane?	engine and an external venturi
Why are the Attitude indicator and heading indicator vacuum-powered?	protection against loss of all (electrically powered) instruments,
What does a manifold vacuum do on a car?	drive accessories
What no longer used accessories were powered by vacuum?	vacuum-driven windscreen wipers and Autovac fuel pumps
what is evaporation and sublimation in a vacuum?	outgassing
Why can outgassing products ruin a space mission?	obscure optical instruments
When does outgassing become important in all solid or liquid materials?	vacuum pressure falls below this vapour pressure
Repeatedly closing off a compartment of a vacuum allows what?	continue evacuating a chamber indefinitely without requiring infinite growth
How is a vacuum created inside of a manual water pump?	a mechanism expands a small sealed cavity
Why is fluid in a manual pump pushed into the pumps cavity when a small sealed cavity is expanded?	Because of the pressure differential
What are pumps based off principle of sealed compartment pulling,pushing and expanding called?	displacement pumps
What pump can capture gases in a solid or absorbed state?	Entrapment pumps
Entrapment pumps often work without seals, moving parts and what else?	no vibration.
What pump has a higher quality vacuum than a positive displacement pump?	Momentum transfer pumps
When multiple pumps are connected in series to produce higher vacuum it is called what?	stages
The choice of seals, or chamber geometry ,for example impact a pump. Together these are options are called what?	vacuum technique
What are two other relevant characteristics of a pumping system along with final pressure?	oil contamination, vibration
What period followed the Han dynasty?	Three Kingdoms
What dynasty came before the Han dynasty?	Qin
Who founded the Han dynasty?	Liu Bang
When did the Former Han period begin?	206 BC
When did the Later Han period end?	220 AD
When did the Qing dynasty fall?	AD 1911
What innovation was acquired from the Qin?	commanderies
What philosphy in education was sanctioned by the Chinese court?	Confucianism
What was an attributing factor that caused kingdoms to lose their Independence during the Han dynasty?	the Rebellion of the Seven States
What class did a majority of appointed ministers come from during the Han dynasty?	scholarly gentry
In what year did the central government issue coins?	119 BC
What industry did the government use to help pay for its military campaigns?	iron
In what period did several government monopolies become repealed?	Eastern Han
A money based economy was first entrenched in what dynasty?	Zhou
A seismometer during the Han dynasty used what type of pendulum?	inverted
Which confederation defeated the Han in 200 BC?	The Xiongnu
What type of campaign helped establish the Silk Road?	military
In what year was Nanyue annexed?	111 BC
Which confederation conquered the territories north of the Han's border?	Xianbei
In what year did Emperor Wu of Han's reign end?	87 BC
Which religious societies instigated the Yellow Turban Rebellion?	Daoist
Who killed the palace eunichs after the death of Emperor Ling?	military officers
Who was the last Emperor of the Han dynasty?	Xian
Which King took the seat of power from Emperor Xian?	Cao Pi
In what year did Emperor Ling die?	189 AD
With what action did the Qin bring together the Chinese Warring States?	conquest
Which commander did Liu Bang defeat in the Battle of Gaixia?	Xiang Yu
Who was the first emperor during the Qin dynasty?	Qin Shi Huangdi
What ultimately caused the Qin dynasty's authority to be dissolved?	rebellion
Who urged Liu Bang to become emperor?	his followers
How many commanderies were in the western third of the empire?	thirteen
Who could appoint staff to the kings?	imperial court
When was the Rebellion of the Seven States?	154 BC
From what source did kings derive their personal income from?	tax revenues
The Han court replaced several kings with members of what royal family?	Liu
Who was the chieftain of the Xiongnu?	Modu Chanyu
What group had a trade embargo created against them?	the Xiongnu
In what year were Han forces defeated in Baideng?	200 BC
What agreement established equality between the Xiongnu and the Han?	heqin
What type of clothing were sent as a tribute to the Xiongnu?	silk clothes
The heqin agreement was reaffirmed by a court conference in what year?	135 BC
In what year did Emperor Wu begin a series of attacks in Xiongnu territories?	133 BC
What type of colony did Chinese armies use to help firm their hold on the strongholds that they had taken over?	agricultural
In what year did the Battle of Mobei take place?	119 BC
Which Han commander died in the year 106 BC?	Wei Qing
Who made up a majority of the people on the frontier?	soldiers
Who forced peasant farmers to move to new settlements?	the court
In what year did Han forces stop a joint Xiongnu-Qiang invasion?	111 BC
Where were landowners encouraged to migrate willingly to?	the frontier
How many commanderies in the new frontier were created by the Han court in the year 111 BC?	four
What type of Roman item was traded on the Silk Road network?	glasswares
Which diplomat helped gather information on the country of Anxi?	Zhang Qian
When did Zhang Qian end his travels?	125 BC
Which network was used to exchange goods with Rome?	Silk Road
What empire had established an embassy in Anxi?	Han
Which group did Han forces fight in the Tarm Basin?	the Xiongnu
When was the first national census taken in China?	2 AD
What was the population of China in 2 AD?	57,671,400
What year was the Protectorate of Western Regions created in?	60 BC
Which kingdom did the Han conquer in 109 BC?	Dian
Who made up the bulk of the administrators of the new government monopolies?	former merchants
When was the liquor monopoly abolished?	81 BC
Which faction did the Reformists oppose?	Modernist
Which political faction favored budgetary reform?	The Reformists
In what year did Huo Guang die?	68 BC
Who tried to outlaw slavery?	Wang Mang
What caused the water level in the Yellow River to increase?	Gradual silt buildup
Who created a dam in the southern branch of The Yellow River?	Han engineers
What emptied out to the south of the Shandong Peninsula?	The Yellow River
What caused the end of Wang Mang's regime?	massive floods
Where did the capital move to after the reign of Guangwu?	Luoyang
What era does the reign of Guangwu fall under?	Eastern Han dynasty
What can the Eastern Han dynasty also be called?	Later Han dynasty
Where was the capital located during the Western Han dynasty?	Chang'an
What can the Western Han dynasty also be called?	Former Han dynasty
On what date did the Eastern Han dynasty begin?	5 August 25
Who started a rebellion against Han in the year AD 40?	The Trưng Sisters of Vietnam
Which state raided Han's Korean commanderies?	Goguryeo
In what year did Ma Yuan die?	AD 49
Who was the leader of the Xiongnu?	Bi
Which Basin did the Han lose authority of?	Tarim
When did Chen Mu die?	AD 75
Where did the Northern Xiongnu flee to in AD 91?	Ili River valley
Who was the Protector General of the Western Regions?	Chen Mu
Who conquered the Tarim Basin in AD 63?	the Northern Xiongnu
Which ruler requested a marriage alliance with the Han in AD 90?	Vima Kadphises
Who was the Protector General of the Western Regions in AD 91?	Ban Chao
Which empire sent armies to attack Ban Chao?	Kushan
Which empire was asked to help subdue Kashgar?	Kushan
Who was allied with Kashgar?	Sogdiana
Who translated written works into Chinese?	Buddhist monks
Which member of the Han Empire was sent to Daqin in AD 97?	Gan Ying
When did Emperor Huan's reign begin?	AD 146
Who reached the court of Emperor Huan in AD 166?	A Roman embassy
Which empire sent the Han gifts?	Parthian
Who was prevented from leaving their house?	Empress Dowager Dou
Who managed the state after the death of Emperor He?	Empress Deng Sui
When did Emperor He's reign end?	105 AD
Who concealed the identity of Emperor He's mother?	Empress Dowager Dou
When did the Qiang rebellion end?	118 AD
Who had forced a large number of Empress Dowager Deng's clan members to kill themselves?	Emperor An
Which person plotted to overthrew the regime of Empress Dowager Yan?	Sun Cheng
Who did Emperor Huan hire to depose Liang Ji?	eunuchs
Relatives of what family were exiled after Sun Cheng had overthrown the regime?	Yan
How did Liang Ji die?	forced to commit suicide
On what charge was Li Ying jailed for?	treason
Who was responsible for imprisoning Li Ying?	Palace eunuchs
During what type of crisis did Emperor Huan alienate the bureaucracy?	economic
Students from what university led a protest against members of Huan's court?	Imperial
When did Dou Wu die?	168 AD
Who arrested Chen Fan in a failed plot?	the eunuchs
How did Dou Wu pass away?	he was forced to commit suicide
Who made accusations of treason against Dou Wu?	General Zhang Huan
Which group was favorable to Zhang Huan?	the eunuchs
What type of action was attempted on the eunuchs?	coup d'état
In what year did the Partisan Prohibitions end?	184 AD
In what year did Zhang Lu's rebellion end?	215 AD
How many provinces did Zhang Jue's rebellion take place in?	eight
What type of healer was Zhang Jue?	faith
What religion did Zhang Jue practice?	Daoist
Who was assassinated on September 22, 189 AD?	He Jin
Who agreed to the execuation of the eunuchs?	Empress He
Who negated the execution order on the eunuchs?	He Miao
Who was the family member that Emperor Shao escaped with?	Liu Xie
What did General-in-Chief He petition Empress He for?	the eunuchs' execution
How was Luoyang destroyed?	burned
Who demoted Emperor Shao?	Dong Zhuo
What position would the young Liu Xie eventually be promoted to?	Emperor Xian
Who had taken control of Luoyang?	General Dong Zhuo
When did Dong Zhuo die?	192 AD
Who was defeated at the Battle of Red Cliffs in 208 AD?	Cao
Who did Emperor Xian give his throne to?	Cao Pi
What state was in a conflict with Eastern Wu, and Shu Han?	Cao Wei
Who was in control of the south of China?	Sun Quan
In what month did Cao Cao die?	March
During what period was it obvious that corruption was widespread in the government?	mid-to-late Eastern Han
What rank provided its holder territorial rule?	full marquess
What class did individuals who served as officials in the government belong to?	commoner social
What was considered to be more important to some than serving the local government?	cultivation of morally grounded personal relationships
What rank is below that of full marquess?	ordinary marquess
Who were considered to be below the social rank that scholars held?	The farmer
What color of clothing were merchants that had registered with the state forced to wear?	white-colored
Who was commonly considered by some to be social parasites?	State-registered merchants
Who would retainers in the employ of nobles occasionally have to fight?	bandits
How could a merchant prevent having to register as one?	working between a network of cities
How many family members would commonly live in a single household during the Han era?	four to five
Whose opinion on the spouse of an arranged marriage was considered to be more important?	the father's
Who were rich enough to afford multiple lovers?	nobles and high officials
What type of family was your typical Han era family considered to be?	patrilineal
What type of marriage was thought of as a normal occurrence in this era?	Arranged marriages
How did daughters get their portion of the family fortune?	marriage dowries
What type of title could be passed down?	noble
What type of document could be produced to distribute some of an inheritance?	a will
Was is guaranteed that a first born son would receive all of the family's fortune?	inheritance practices did not involve primogeniture
Which family member commonly sent an adult married offspring away with their portion of the families fortune?	the father
Which gender was exempt from performing the yearly corvee labor duties?	Women
What emotional state would empresses commonly place their immediate family members in?	openly humiliated
What type of occupation did women commonly take part in?	income-earning
Who were women obligated to obey in their old age?	their adult son
Which parental figures often avoided the common familial rules?	mothers
What philosophy was given exclusivity in the court during the rule of Emperor Wu?	Confucianism
Who put an end to all erudites?	Emperor Wu
How many students were in the Imperial University by the second century?	over 30,000
What type of philosophy was available for individuals at the commanderies?	Confucian
Where did teachers make their money from at private schools?	tuition payments
Who had produced biographies of individuals of significant importance?	various gentrymen
What type of poetry had much influence in the Han dynasty?	fu
Who had written the dictionary Fangyan?	Yang Xiong
Which person had authored the Book of Han?	Ban Biao
What was the name of Ban Biao's female offspring?	Ban Zhao
What type of torture was acquired from Qin law?	mutilation
What eventually replaced torturous mutilation as a type of punishment?	progressively less-severe beatings
What could a criminal in this era expect not to happen if he was convicted of a crime?	criminals were never imprisoned
What type of extreme punishment was likely to be laid upon those who committed the harshest of crimes?	death by beheading
What did women commonly have less of?	rights
What type of crop was rice considered to be during this period?	staple crops
What were dogs in this era most likely to be considered?	pets
What type of partridge was commonly consumed?	Chinese bamboo
Where were turtles acquired from?	streams and lakes
What was the color of the bayberries?	red
What could be used to prevent a door from closing in a place of burial?	hollow clay tiles
What type of decoration was often seen in tombs?	hollow clay tiles
What was the afterlife of the immortals called during this period?	xian
What is the commonly held notion regarding the dual nature of the soul called?	two-part soul
What function did the holes in the top and bottom of the tomb tiles enable them to do?	allowing it to pivot
Who made sacrifices to the main deities in this period?	the emperor
What type of geological event was feared could be caused by the morals of the emperor?	earthquakes
What is another term that could be used to label the main deities?	the Five Powers
How many realms were commonly thought of as being linked by a natural cycle?	three realms
What type of swarm was a concern because of the emperor's ethics?	locusts
What was the purpose of breathing exercises to a Daoist?	achieve immortality
What could the prophet Laozi offer in return for the confession of sins?	salvation and good health
What type of religion did the society of the Way of the Five Pecks of Rice practice?	Daoists
What could be earned if an individual had reached the lands of the Queen Mother of the West?	immortality
What literal work were followers of Laozi expected to chant?	Daodejing
During was era did Buddhism first appear in the region?	Eastern Han
When did Emperor Ming of Han's reign end?	75 AD
What philosophical practice did Liu Ying believe in?	Buddhism
What is believed to be the first Buddhist temple in this area?	the White Horse Temple
During which century were important Buddhist notions translated to Chinese?	2nd century AD
Who was responsible for nominations of local administrators in the government?	the emperor
Was the emperor able to reject an opinion that was made by the court conference?	sometimes did reject the majority opinion
What did the emperor risk if he did not accept the decisions of the court conference?	alienating his high ministers
Who often placed pressure on the emperor in regards to local policies?	court conference
Who was considered to be the supreme judge in Han government?	the emperor
Which individual had a duty to maintain the imperial stables?	The Minister Coachman
Which Minister had the responsibility to interpret laws in this period?	The Minister of Justice
Which Minister could an honored guest of the court be expected to see?	The Minister Herald
Who provided  the emperor with sustenance and medical aid?	The Minister Steward
Which individual held the responsibility to oversee the interactions of the empire's nobles with the court?	The Minister of the Imperial Clan
What individual was typically in charge of a commandery?	an Administrator
Around how many households was a Prefect responsible for?	10,000
What individual was responsible for law and maintaining order in the county?	A Magistrate
What Emperor initially created the quota system?	Emperor Wu
Who was in charge of counties that had fewer than 10,000 people in them?	Chiefs
What gender was expected to be conscripted into the military?	male
At what age could a male common expect to be conscripted into the military?	twenty-three
How long could a conscripted soldier expect to be in training for?	one year
What was the lowest age a soldier could be conscripted after the end of Emperor Zhao's tenure?	twenty
Which Minister could a conscripted soldier expect to serve under during his year of service?	Minister of the Guards
How could conscription into military service be avoided?	one paid a commutable tax
What army was based near the capital?	Northern Army
What army was considered to be the volunteer army?	Southern Army
How many regiments were in the Northern Army?	five
Around how many soldiers were in each regiment of the Northern Army?	several thousand soldiers
Where did the Han dynasty receive their coin type from?	the Qin
Who closed the government mint?	Emperor Gaozu
In what year was the decision reversing the closure of the government mint implemented?	186 BC
Who released new lighter coinage that caused significant amounts of inflation because of it's weight?	Lü Zhi
In what year were private manufactures allowed to create coins that were exactly 2.6g in mass?	175 BC
What coin replaced the ban liangs after only a year of distribution?	wuzhu
Who introduced new coinage in the year of 120 BC?	Emperor Wu
During what dynasty did the wuzhu stop being the standard coin?	Tang dynasty
What was the mass of the wuzhu coin?	3.2 g
What interrupted the use of the wuzhu coin during the reign of Wang Mang?	several new currencies
Which group made up the bulk of the Han tax base?	landowner-cultivators
Who made reductions in the taxes that landowner-cultivators were forced to pay?	The Han government
During what period did a large number of peasants incur debt?	Eastern Han
What type of housing did the Han government provide to landless indebted peasants?	temporary
What did the Han government do to help out smaller landowners?	enacted reforms
In which year did Emperor Wu monopolize several industries?	117 BC
Who allowed industrialists to become officials in the newly state sanctioned industries?	Emperor Wu
During what period did the governmental monopolies become privatized once again?	Eastern Han
What did Emperor Wu do to negate the influence of private entrepreneurs?	nationalized the salt and iron industries
During what era could a wealthy iron industrialist be able to rival the treasury in funds?	Western Han
What industry was monopolized by the government in 98 BC?	Liquor
In what year did the liquor industry once again become privatized?	81 BC
What was mostly missing during the Eastern Han?	price control regulations
What did Emperor Wu sell that offended the merchants?	grain
What office did Emperor Ming create?	Office for Price Adjustment and Stabilization
What type of furnace was functional in China in 722 BC?	blast
What element was used in the production of wrought iron?	oxygen
What type of iron could pig iron be converted into?	wrought
What type of process was used to convert various metals into steel?	fining
What can iron ore be converted into in a blast furnace?	pig iron
What was an invention that allowed farmers to place their crops into rows?	The three-legged iron seed drill
How many animals were neccessary to pull an iron plow?	two oxen
How many acres of land could succesfully be sowed with a seed box in a day?	11.3 acres
How many persons were necessary to operate an iron plow?	one man
What methodology allowed the production of new agricultural tools?	improved iron-smelting techniques
What helped insure the safety of crops from wind?	the alternating fields system
What was the name of the system that for growing crops that did not require plows?	pit field system
What were paddy fields used for primarily to grow in smaller areas?	rice
What system did the government recommend the usage of?	alternating fields system
What was the name of the Grain Intendant?	Zhao Guo
What building material was used primarily during the Han dynasty?	Timber
What dynasty can the oldest wooden buildings in China be dated to?	Tang
What is considered to be the last year of the Tang dynasty?	907 AD
What type of object is the only evidence of Han's wooden constructions?	ceramic roof tiles
What was the primary component of a palace hall during the Han dynasty?	Timber
How many stone pillar-gates survive from the Han era?	twenty-nine
What architectural feature contained an imitation of a balustrade?	stone pillar-gates
What building material were tomb chambers constructed with?	brick
What were the walls that encompassed the city of Luoyang comprised of?	rammed-earth
What type of system used ceramic water pipes?	drainage systems
What type of scholars have provided proof that mechanical engineering was prominent during the Han period?	Confucian
Which philosopher described the invention of a belt drive?	Yang Xiong
Which engineer was responsible for first inventing the zoetrope lamp?	Ding Huan
What can be used as a support structure in incense burners?	gimbals
What type of invention was used to provide air conditioning for the palace buildings?	rotary fan
During which period was the odometer cart first created?	Han
What item was used to make very small measurements during this era?	sliding metal calipers
What has allowed us to discover long lost inventions of the Han era?	artwork
What was used to separate parts of grain?	winnowing machines
What use did the odometer cart provide?	measured journey lengths
What was used to power chain pumps to raise water to irrigation ditches?	Waterwheels
What commandery was the creator of the waterwheel-powered reciprocator from?	Nanyang
Who was the author of the essay entitled Balance Discourse?	Wang Chong
During what century is it likely that the watermill made an appearance in China?	about the 5th century
During what era did the waterwheel first appear in recordings?	Han
Who was responsible for the invention of the seismometer?	Zhang Heng
In what year was the seismometer first invented?	132 AD
How many dragons were represented in Zhang Heng's invention of the seismometer?	eight
What invention included an inverted pendulum?	seismometer
What was exchanged from mouth to mouth in the usage of the seismometer?	metal ball
What type of treatise is the Book on Numbers and Computation considered to be?	mathematical
How many mathematical treatises have still managed to survive to this day?	Three
What achievement of the Han era can be used to help solve linear equations?	Gaussian elimination
During what era was the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art from?	Han
What can be used to help find the roots of equations?	continued fractions
In what treatise did negative numbers first appear?	the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art
How were negative numbers first described during the Han period?	as black counting rods
In what century were negative numbers more commonly accepted in Europe?	16th century AD
What Indian manuscript also contains the useage of negative numbers?	Bakhshali
What were positive numbers portayed as in the treatise of the Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art?	red counting rods
In what era was a geocentric view of the universe adopted?	Han
Who was able to describe the process of evaporation?	Wang Chong
What object was assumed to block sunlight during a lunar eclipse?	the Earth
What did astronomers believe the shape of the Sun to be during this era?	spherical
What did astronomers during this area believe to be the center of the universe?	the earth
What textile were some of the early Han maps made from?	silk
In what type of building were silken maps found?	tomb
Which individual created the very first raised relief map?	Ma Yuan
What food stable was the first raised relief map created from?	rice
What type of boat design was first invented during the Han era?	The junk design
In what areas were Han ships able to be sailed in part due to the stern rudder?	high seas
What ship design contained a flat-bottomed hull?	Junks
What type of transport was the steering oar most likely to be used during?	riverine transport
Who believed that the same forces that controlled the universe also controlled the human body?	Han-era medical physicians
What was used during surgery to relieve patients of their pain?	anesthesia
What profession was the individual Zhang Zhongjing involved in?	physician
How did Zhang Zhongjing attempt to cure various illnesses?	prescribed regulated diets
When did Hua Tuo die?	208 AD
Which two seas have been most central to Greek history?	Aegean and Ionian seas
During which prehistoric age was the Greek language invented?	Bronze
Which city in modern Turkey was once a major center of Greek culture?	Constantinople
Which area of North Africa has hosted Greek communities in the past?	Egypt
What eleventh century empire had roughly the same extent as ancient Greece's?	Byzantine Empire
Where are Greek States believed to have been settled ?	Greek colonies and communities have been historically established on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea
Which two bodies of water are believed to be central to the establishment of the Greek society ?	Greek people have always been centered around the Aegean and Ionian seas
When was the emergence of the Greek spoken dialect believed to have started ?	the Greek language has been spoken since the Bronze Age.
What other culture did the Greek states share boarders with ?	these regions coincided to a large extent with the borders of the Byzantine Empire of the late 11th century
Where have the centers of culture been located for the Grecian world historically ?	The cultural centers of the Greeks have included Athens, Thessalonica, Alexandria, Smyrna, and Constantinople at various periods.
What progression coincided with the the early Greek states that makes it difficult to give credit for the language and differences ?	Paleo-Balkan sprachbund that makes it difficult to delineate exact boundaries between individual languages.
What is commonly seen in the Greek language that is not a constant ?	The characteristically Greek representation of word-initial laryngeals by prothetic vowels
What other language has this same trait ?	word-initial laryngeals by prothetic vowels is shared, for one, by the Armenian language
What other things do the two languages seem to have in common ?	phonological and morphological peculiarities of Greek; this has led some linguists to propose a hypothetical closer relationship between Greek and Armenian
How much evidence of the link between the languages is currently available ?	linguists to propose a hypothetical closer relationship between Greek and Armenian, although evidence remains scant.
What group of people came with others who left the geographical and historical region in southeastern Europe, now a mutual  region between Greece and Albania ?	the Dorians
When did these groups make the migration ?	Around 1200 BC
What civilization is the group credited with putting an end to ?	the Mycenaean civilization,
Is it believed that they truly are responsible in full for the collapse ?	it is likely the main attack was made by seafaring raiders (sea peoples)
What areas were being explored by others in  by sea faring vessels and when are they believed to have arrived  ?	seafaring raiders (sea peoples) who sailed into the eastern Mediterranean around 1180 BC
How did the Greeks look upon their forebears ?	Greeks of classical antiquity idealized their Mycenaean ancestors
How did they believe their forebears lived ?	Mycenaean period as a glorious era of heroes, closeness of the gods and material wealth
What literary events were believed to be a fact of truth ?	The Homeric Epics (i.e. Iliad and Odyssey) were especially and generally accepted as part of the Greek past
Who was the author of these tales ?	Homer
What were the names of some of the figures for the established religion that are based on ancestral ties ?	Zeus, Poseidon and Hades
What event is believed to be the ethnic basis of the Greeks society?	The ethnogenesis of the Greek nation is linked to the development of Pan-Hellenism
When did this event occur ?	development of Pan-Hellenism in the 8th century BC.
What national sporting event was held during this time period still goes on in celebration today ?	the foundational event was the Olympic Games in 776 BC,
What was the foundation for spirituality and church ?	The works of Homer (i.e. Iliad and Odyssey) and Hesiod (i.e. Theogony)
What famous spiritual guide and God was a devotional temple made to in the 8th century ?	Oracle of Apollo at Delphi
The time span that is counted as the classical for the Greeks is from eras ?	classical period of Greek civilization covers a time spanning from the early 5th century BC to the death of Alexander the Great, in 323 BC
What is so well known about this period ?	It is so named because it set the standards by which Greek civilization would be judged in later eras
Are there some discrepancies among scholars for the distinction of the period ?	this period into 'Classical', from the end of the Persian wars to the end of the Peloponnesian War, and 'Fourth Century', up to the death of Alexander
What shiny other name is this time also called ?	The Classical period is also described as the "Golden Age" of Greek civilization
What did the Greeks do that made it possible for the expansion and growth of the opposite of the Eastern Civilization ?	civilization, and its art, philosophy, architecture and literature would be instrumental in the formation and development of Western culture.
What Macedonian ruler helped to advance Greek beliefs and ways of life ?	Alexander
How was this achievement of advancing culture undertaken ?	provided an important outlet for Greek culture, via the creation of colonies and trade routes along the way
What types of cities did the expansion of the great ruler inspire ?	Hellenistic cities
Are any relatives of the first people of  the Grecian world still around ?	there are still communities in Pakistan and Afghanistan, like the Kalash, who claim to be descended from Greek settlers.
Name a city that the Greeks nested in ?	cities like Alexandria, Antioch and Seleucia.
With the secession away from the smaller communities in the Grecian world, what living situation became of great importance ?	the Greeks move towards larger cities and a reduction in the importance of the city-state.
The kingdoms of Diadochi was comprised of what ?	larger cities were parts of the still larger Kingdoms of the Diadochi.
How did the cites remind themselves of their beginnings ?	Greeks, however, remained aware of their past, chiefly through the study of the works of Homer and the classical authors.
What did the Greeks wants to be imparted to their descendants ?	the transmission of the Hellenic paideia to the next generation.
What academia was heightened during this time of Hellenism ?	Greek science, technology and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period.
When did the religions of the past begin to dissipate ?	decline beginning in the 3rd century BC
What encouraged the change of faith ?	with the introduction of new religious movements from the East.
What religions form of worship came from the Eastern sects ?	The cults of deities like Isis and Mithra were introduced into the Greek world.
What group was significant in the expansion of the Christian faith ?	Hellenized East were instrumental in the spread of early Christianity
What language are the Apostle's namely believed to have spoken ?	Christianity's early leaders and writers (notably St Paul) were generally Greek-speaking
What alternative name were the Greeks known by ?	the Greeks identified as Romaioi ("Romans")
What did the label of  Hellenes come to stand for during the Common Era of Greece ?	the name ‘Hellenes’ denoted pagans
Did the Roman world consider one ethnocentric lineage to be a great concern ?	secondary to religious considerations
What imperative value was extolled from the Christian community to the Roman world ?	Greco-Roman educational system, although it was from Christianity that the culture's essential values were drawn.
When did the Byzantine Kingdom come under the impact of the Greeks.	influenced by Greek culture after the 7th century,
Who ruled Rome during this time period ?	Emperor Heraclius (AD 575 - 641)
What decision did he make that influenced the culture in an attempt to make things more homogeneous ?	decided to make Greek the empire's official language.
What made the Eastern Empire be known as the Imperium Graecorum ?	Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne, king of the Franks, as the "Roman Emperor"
Who was favored by those who lived in the west and mainly used another form of well know verbal language ?	the Latin West started to favour the Franks
What caused the resurface of the Grecian monotony in politics ?	the fall of Constantinople to the Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade in 1204
When did the nation reestablish itself ?	empire was revived in 1261
What was the specialty of great Pietho and what is famous for ?	philosopher Gemistus Pletho, who abandoned Christianity.
What was bolstered by the the final downward spiral of the Empire of Trebizond ?	interest in the Classical Greek heritage was complemented by a renewed emphasis on Greek Orthodox identity
Which factoring war was on gong in 1828 and shares the of a previous scuttle ? ?	second Russo-Turkish War
When did the emperor Constantine  lose rule over in 1453 ?	Fall of Constantinople on 29 May 1453
What did the populace do in response to the loss ?	many Greeks sought better employment and education opportunities by leaving for the West
What type of position did Greeks come to hold in the Ottoman Empire ?	in part to the fact that the central hub of the empire, politically, culturally, and socially, was based on Western Thrace and Greek Macedonia
Who made up the majority of soldiers in the Ottoman Empire ?	men of Greek origin made up a significant proportion of the Ottoman army, navy
What type of work were must young boys antiquated with in the Ottoman Empire ?	levied as adolescents (along with especially Albanians and Serbs) into Ottoman service through the devshirme.
How were the population factions of the Ottoman Empire classified ?	religion was the defining characteristic of national groups
What did it mean to be classified as a Greek by the millet command ?	was applied by the Ottomans to all members of the Orthodox Church, regardless of their language or ethnic origin.
What moniker did the Greeks grant themselves for distinction ?	The Greek speakers were the only ethnic group to actually call themselves Romioi
What did the literate segment of Greeks consider to be a part of their ethic lines ?	those educated, considered their ethnicity (genos) to be Hellenic
Were Christian prized among the Ottomans ?	second-class status of Christians inherent in the Ottoman millet system
What did the Greeks offer to the Ottoman Empire that was a superb benefit ?	the Greek tradition of education and commerce
Who held much of the wealth in the Greek society ?	the wealth of the extensive merchant class
What three cities were imperative for the scholarly and economic exchanges ?	the three most important centres of Greek learning were situated in Chios, Smyrna and Aivali, all three major centres of Greek commerce
What other area fields were overshadowed by Greek influence ?	Greek domination of the Christian Orthodox church.
When was the Greece that we know today officially formed ?	creation of the Modern Greek state in 1830
Is this identifying factor for official citizens of Greece still in effect today ?	clause removed by 1840
How did the original  Constitution identify its society members ?	a Greek was defined as any Christian resident of the Kingdom of Greece
When was the original Grecian constitution formed ?	first Greek constitution of 1822
What factor was used to expel or include citizens in the  Lausanne Treaty ?	agreed to use religion as the determinant for ethnic identity for the purposes of population exchange
What do Westerners believe it means to belong to the Greek heritage ?	Western standards, the term Greeks has traditionally referred to any native speakers of the Greek language, whether Mycenaean, Byzantine or modern Greek.
What do the Grecian Romioi  descendants of the Constantine rule  believe to be true in regards to the status as beneficiaries ?	considered themselves the political heirs of Rome
What other cultures do the Romioi  clam to be their birthright ?	deemed themselves the heirs of ancient Greece as well
What is an alternative word used by Greeks to mean those who worship and alternative religion to the mainstreams ?	Hellene" still meant pagan
From what era is the Rigas Feraios believed to be a part of ?	Greek Enlightenment
When was the Greek state of modern times birthed into exsistence ?	The modern Greek state was created in 1829,
What did Greeks do that caused  the formation of the new state ?	the Greeks liberated a part of their historic homelands, Peloponnese, from the Ottoman Empire
What foundation was laid that is the demographics of Modern Greek Enlightenment Era ?	instrumental in transmitting the ideas of western romantic nationalism and philhellenism, which together with the conception of Hellenism,
What area is given to be the nesting point of a small group of pagans by a infamous philosopher from Greek ?	Hellenes" (/ˈhɛliːnz/) as a relatively small tribe settled in Thessalic Phthia,
From what mystical lineage does this name benefactor ascend from ?	was son of Pyrrha and Deucalion, who ruled around Phthia, the only survivors after the great deluge.
Who is this small group named for ?	Hellen, the patriarch of Hellenes
Is the name more ancient than other group names in the area ?	The name Hellenes seems to be older and it was probably used by the Greeks with the establishment of the Great Amphictyonic League.
How many orginal founding patrons are there of the Great Amphictyonic League ?	with twelve founders
what does the author of the mortal female focused early example hexameter poetry say of the Hellenic protector ?	Hellen was the son of Deucalion who ruled around Phthia in central Greece.
What caused a name change according to the Chronicles of Parian ?	the previously called Graikoi were named Hellenes.
What  is the origins of the term "old woman " ?	word γραῖα graia "old woman" comes from the PIE root *ǵerh2-/*ǵreh2-, "to grow old" via Proto-Greek *gera-/grau-iu
Where do modern theorist believe the name of Greek originated from ?	A modern theory derives the name Greek (Latin Graeci) from Graikos, "inhabitant of Graia/Graea," a town on the coast of Boeotia.
What interchangeable terms did Homer use in his poems for Greeks ?	Achaeans and Danaans
What is believed to be the derivative of these names ?	pre-Dorian
What was redefined in the 5th century about the people of these names?	redefined as contemporary speakers of Aeolic Greek
Where was this origin of this redefinition ?	spoken mainly in Thessaly, Boeotia and Lesbos
What was the age in 1300 BC named ?	early Iron age
In Homer's poems who were the Greeks at odds with ?	Trojans
From where did the basis of the Argos tales originate ?	Egypt
What did the female descendants of Argos have to accomplish ?	His daughters Danaides, were forced in Tartarus to carry a jug to fill a bathtub without a bottom
What community did the Denyen live in ?	Denyen
What country is spoken of in the inscriptions of a country in Northern Africa from 1390-1352 BC ?	A country Danaja with a city Mukana (propaply: Mycenea) is mentioned in inscriptions from Egypt
What is the easiest connection between the Greeks of old and those of today ?	most obvious link between modern and ancient Greeks is their language
How log did the age of darkness last for the Greeks ?	Greek Dark Ages (lasting from the 11th to the 8th century BC)
Who else has a history as long standing as those of the Greeks ?	continuity of tradition to Chinese alone
When did most of the Eastward sector of the Roman expanse choose to have a rebirth of Greek traditions and appreciations ?	During the later years of the Eastern Roman Empire
What aspects of the Greek culture have remained steadfast throughout the years ?	retained their language and alphabet, certain values and cultural traditions, customs, a sense of religious and cultural difference and exclusion
In the Rupublic of Hellenic who is the ethnic majority and what percentage of the populace do they represent ?	Greeks are the majority ethnic group in the Hellenic Republic, where they constitute 93% of the country's population
What's the estimated populace of Greeks on the isle of Cyprus ?	Republic of Cyprus where they make up 78% of the island's population
Are Greeks in danger of contributing vastly to the problem of population control ?	Greek populations have not traditionally exhibited high rates of growth
Is the Greek populace on a whole increasing or decreasing in numbers ?	Greece has shown regular increase since the country's first census in 1828.
Where there any significances that contributed to the increase or decrease in population numbers ?	influx of 1.5 million Greek refugees after the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey.
Which colonial enterprise for land was the Greek Isles a part of	British Empire
Who was living on with the Greeks in Cyprus s 1974 ?	Turkish
Whee these new inhabitants welcomed ?	Turkish invasion of Cyprus
During the early seventies where did most Cyprus Greeks decide to go ?	the Middle East
What other countries boast of a Greek populace ?	105,000 (disputed, sources claim higher) people, in Albania. The Greek minority of Turkey
What acts have caused the population of Greeks to be numbered so few in the country who name is reminiscent of a big American holiday?	1955 Constantinople Pogrom and other state sponsored violence and discrimination.
How long was there a Greek influence represented in "little" Asia ?	the three-thousand-year-old presence of Hellenism in Asia Minor
Are there any Greek who still live in the area around the dark sea in any majority of numbers?	smaller Greek minorities in the rest of the Balkan countries, the Levant and the Black Sea states,
How many people that are of Greek ascendancy live elsewhere than Greece ?	total number of Greeks living outside Greece and Cyprus today is a contentious issue
Who provided the contradictory  population numbers for Greeks abroad ?	World Council of Hellenes Abroad
How many Greeks do they believe would be an accurate number for census numbers ?	World Council of Hellenes Abroad put the figure at around 7 million worldwide
At what university is this issue of accurate consensus for Greeks living elsewhere being debated an	Sorbonne University
Who has presented the contradictory number to the census groups ?	George Prevelakis of Sorbonne University, the number is closer to just below 5 million
What helped to advance the Greek way of life beyond its boarders ?	the trading and colonizing activities of the Greek tribes and city states spread the Greek culture, religion and language
What other close by countries have been greatly influenced by the Greek way of life ?	Sicily and southern Italy (also known as Magna Grecia), Spain, the south of France and the Black sea coasts.
How were the rulers of social class picked to be representatives in the now traditionally Arabic speaking part of the world and in Northern Africa ?	Under Alexander the Great's empire and successor states, Greek and Hellenizing ruling classes were established in the Middle East, India and in Egypt.
What period marked the expansion of Greek thinking and expression ?	The Hellenistic period
After freedom was won by the Greeks who was of import to forming the rules  ?	Greek War of Independence, Greeks of the diaspora were important in establishing the fledgling state
What did they do that contributed to the Greek's success of establishment?	important in establishing the fledgling state, raising funds and awareness abroad
Who already had contact over a network of countries ready to offer assistance to the Greeks ?	Greek merchant families already had contacts in other countries
What countries did they settle in ?	Marseilles in France, Livorno in Italy, Alexandria in Egypt), Russia (Odessa and Saint Petersburg), and Britain (London and Liverpool)
How were these relationships with the other countries most likely established ?	from where they traded, typically in textiles and grain.
What is considered the start of the Grecian cultural world ?	beginning in the Mycenaean civilization
Which devotion of time was heavily influenced by the religious followers of the  Son of God ?	the Roman and Eastern Roman periods and was profoundly affected by Christianity
In what centennial was the massacre of the Greeks of Ottoman descent ?	genocide in the 20th century
Was there anything good that could be found from the divergence into exchange ?	included cultural exchanges and enriched both cultures.
Who was given the merit for the reemergence of the Greek way of life ?	Diafotismos is credited with revitalizing Greek culture
What other dialects share a thread with the Greek language.	other Balkan languages, such as Albanian, Bulgarian and Eastern Romance languages (see Balkan sprachbund),
What radical political changes occurred during the 19th century ?	the movements of Philhellenism and the Diafotismos in the 19th century
What did these changes highlight ?	emphasized the modern Greeks' ancient heritage
What became the official dialect of Greeks and what was it missing ?	Katharevousa, a somewhat artificial form of Greek purged of all foreign influence and words, as the official language of the Greek state.
What choices in 1976 made a change to the decisions concerning the official dialect ?	In 1976, however, the Hellenic Parliament voted to make the spoken Dimotiki the official language
What is different about the use of Greek language today as opposed to the language of the past ?	Modern Greek has, in addition to Standard Modern Greek or Dimotiki, a wide variety of dialects
What are some of the local jargon used in Greek speaking?	wide variety of dialects of varying levels of mutual intelligibility, including Cypriot, Pontic, Cappadocian, Griko and Tsakonian
What language still survives as the representation of the one of the three religious orders of historic Greece ?	Tsakonian (the only surviving representative of ancient Doric Greek)
What ancient language is still in use today in some of the minuscule societies in the Grecian world ?	Yevanic is the language of the Romaniotes, and survives in small communities in Greece, New York and Israel.
Do the people of Greek ascendancy only speak Grecian languages ?	bilingual in other languages or dialects such as English, Arvanitika/Albanian, Aromanian, Macedonian Slavic, Russian and Turkish.
What is the religion of the Greek majority ?	Christians
What denominational variance do they adhere to for the most part ?	belonging to the Greek Orthodox Church
What language was the second half of the Bible originally written in ?	the New Testament was originally written in Koine Greek
This language is the official dialect of worship for the traditional sect for church worshipers of Greece ?	Koine Greek, which remains the liturgical language of the Greek Orthodox Church
What other varieties of Christianity can be found among the Grecian people ?	Catholics, Greek Evangelicals, Pentecostals, and groups adhering to other religions including Romaniot and Sephardic Jews and Greek Muslims.
What input did the Greeks have on artistry of the world ?	visual, literary and performing arts.
What period in Europe was full of an appreciation for earlier cultures ?	the Renaissance in Europe
What important heritage of art  from Greece was celebrated during this time ?	the humanist aesthetic and the high technical standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists.
What enacted the transactions of customs and ways of life for the people of the Asian continent and the Grecian people ?	In the East, Alexander the Great's conquests initiated several centuries of exchange between Greek, Central Asian and Indian cultures
In the Land of the Rising Sun, what influence was of Greek descent ?	Greco-Buddhist art, whose influence reached as far as Japan.
Who was one of the old masters from the Greeks ?	Greek artists include Renaissance painter Dominikos Theotokopoulos (El Greco), Panagiotis Do
Who sang in a voice that is in the high octave range from the Modern Greek Era ?	soprano Maria Callas
Who was one the most well known modern decorative modelers of the Greeks ?	sculptors such as Leonidas Drosis, Georgios Bonanos, Yannoulis Chalepas and Joannis Avramidis
Name one of the poetic authors who was also nominated for the Nobel Peace Award from the Greeks ?	Nobel laureates Giorgos Seferis and Odysseas Elytis are among the most important poets of the 20th century.
What contribution to the scientific community have the Greeks left the world ?	science and helped lay the foundations of several western scientific traditions, like philosophy, historiography and mathematics
What school practices were kept by the Roman world after the fall of Greece ?	scholarly tradition of the Greek academies was maintained during Roman times with several academic institutions
What has been maintained by the Greeks throughout their extended history ?	Greeks have a long tradition of valuing and investing in paideia (education
What is one the most elevated values among the Grecian society ?	Paideia was one of the highest societal values in the Greek and Hellenistic world
At what location did education begin for the first set of people to be eligible to earn and advanced degree in a particular subject ?	first European institution described as a university was founded in 5th century Constantinople and operated in various incarnations
According to recent research who is enrolled in the Universities in Greece in higher number men or women ?	the percentages for female students being higher than for male
Do those who from Greek descent desire an education from other parts of the world ?	Hundreds of thousands of Greek students attend western universities every year
Are university  educators from he Greek world working as professors and teachers  in other countries ?	the faculty lists of leading Western universities contain a striking number of Greek names
Who made significant addition to a charming little quirky  scientific deviant that lead to the winning of a prestigious award of recognition and gave birth to a model ?	John Iliopoulos (2007 Dirac Prize for his contributions on the physics of the charm quark, a major contribution to the birth of the Standard Model,
What are the representations of the Greek reference freedom or death that are held on a cloth symbol of the nation ?	flag of Greece, which features nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating with white
This reference also holds significance as what the the Grecian people ?	motto of the Greek War of Independence
Is religion also represented on this cloth symbol of the Greek?	bears a white cross, which represents Greek Orthodoxy
Have the people of Turkey held any feeling towards the cloth symbol of the Greeks ?	ethnic tensions with the Turkish Cypriot minority
Have the people of Greece done anything to make the matter more palatable for the people of Turkey ?	Cyprus has officially adopted a neutral flag
What names are used that are typically from  a father and have usually added a suffix or prefix ?	Greek surnames are most commonly patronymics
What letter of the alphabet do most of the last names the men of Greecs end with ?	Greek male surnames end in -s, which is the common ending
What other beginnings of origination do some of the last names of the Greeks share ?	many have Latin, Turkish and Italian origin.
What does it mean to have the letters OU added to the ending of a males last name ?	some end in -ou, indicating the genitive case of this proper noun for patronymic reasons.
What are considered to be the motherland of the Greeks ?	Greek peninsula and the Aegean Sea, the Southern Italy (Magna Graecia), the Black Sea, the Ionian coasts of Asia Minor and the islands of Cyprus and Sicily
What statement of note was given by a great philosopher from Greece written by another great philosopher ?	Plato's Phaidon, Socrates remarks, "we (Greeks) live around a sea like frogs around a pond
What is the name of the ancient map of the Greek world  named  ?	map of the Old Greek Diaspora
When did changes of this ancient map become notable ?	corresponded to the Greek world until the creation of the Greek state in 183
Are there many product available from farm cultivation on the Greek lands ?	Greek peninsula is rocky and does not offer good prospects for agriculture
What else is this particular captain known for doing ?	the explorer of the Northwestern passage Juan de Fuca
Who was the well known sea vessel captain of the Greeks who sailed to Asia  ?	Cosmas Indicopleustes (Cosmas who sailed to India)
What did Greeks do that caused a later deal to be made with the Italians ?	plied the sea-lanes of the Mediterranean and controlled trade
Who proposed that change was needed in the way business with the Greeks was to be conducted  ?	trade until an embargo imposed by the Roman Emperor on trade with the Caliphate
What was brought about by the Ottomans that caused and uplift in the classes of Greek society ?	Greek shipping tradition recovered during Ottoman rule when a substantial merchant middle class developed
Is the seafaring business still of any relevancy to the Greek economy ?	Greek shipping continues to prosper to the extent that Greece has the largest merchant fleet in the world
What did the development of these changes lead to for the Greeks under Ottoman rulers ?	Greek War of Independence
What was the last husband of Jacquelyn Kennedy known for ?	most notable shipping magnate of the 20th century was Aristotle Onassis
What dominant hair color is to believed to be prevalent among Greeks	conclusion the hair colour of young Greeks are mostly brown, ranging from light to dark brown
Which colors lay outside of the nor for those of Greek descent ?	significant minorities having black and blonde hair
What eye color shows the least presence among those of Greek heritage ?	14.6% blue/green
What eye color is believed to be the norm among Greeks ?	57.4% dark brown
What location did many of the Greek people decide to live in other than Greece after the 19th century ?	Asia Minor (now Turkey)
During what period of domination were many Greeks unable to interact with it's central location ?	Ottoman rule of Greece
The anthology of the Greek world is intimately joined with what areas of the world ?	history of the Greek people is closely associated with the history of Greece, Cyprus, Constantinople, Asia Minor and the Black Sea.
What has lead to the current situation of vast dispersion of the Greek people ?	a huge wave of migration to the United States, Australia, Canada and elsewhere created the modern Greek diaspora.
After the 19th century about how much of the Greek population resided in little Asia ?	By the early 20th century, over half of the overall Greek-speaking population was settled in Asia Minor (now Turkey)
Which angel is believed to have communicated the Quran to Muhammad?	Gabriel
On which date did Muhammad begin receiving the Quran?	22 December 609 CE
In which year CE did Muhammad die?	632
What is the Arabic variant of Gabriel?	Jibril
How many times is the word "Quran" used in the Quran?	70
Who first recorded Muhammad revelations?	companions of Muhammad
Who first standardized the earliest versions of the Quran?	Caliph Uthman
By what name is the first standardized version of the Quran known?	Uthman's codex
In which language is the Quran spoken during prayer?	Arabic
The Quran is used in the interpretation of which form of law?	sharia
What accounts are form the basis of much of the accounts in the Quran?	Biblical scriptures
Which religious text calls itself a book of guidance?	Quran
From which Arabic verb might "Quran" be derived?	qaraʼa
What Syriac word might be related to "Quran"?	qeryānā
The words from which the name "Quran" might be described are related to which act?	reciting
Which word do most Muslim scholars point to as the origin of the Quran's name?	qaraʼa
Which term used in the Quran to indicate itself means "book"?	kitāb
Which term does the Quran use to refer to itself as "scripture"?	sūrah
What meaning does the Quran take when it calls itself hikmah?	wisdom
What name does the Quran use for itself that means "revelation"?	waḥy
Which term meaning "the mother book" does the Quran apply to itself?	umm al-kitāb
What term is used in the Quran to indicate previous revelations?	mus'haf
What is the Arabic term commonly used to refer to works like the Torah or the Gospels?	al-kitāb
What is an English translation of huda?	the guide
In which mountain cave did Mohammad experience his first revelation?	Cave of Hira
Where did Mohammad move to found a separate Muslim community?	Medina
Prisoners from which battle are thought to have helped Muslims learn to write?	Badr
Vegetation from which tree served as an early recording medium for the Quran?	date palm
When Muhammad dies, what had not yet been compiled as a book?	Quran
What is the most common interpretation of the word "ummi" that the Quran applies to Muhammad?	illiterate
Because Mohammed was "ummi," what would he not have known about that lent credence to his prophethood?	earlier sacred texts
What term does the Quran use to describe Mohammad's lack of exposure to scripture?	ummi
What skills would have made others more suspicious that Mohammad was not getting his revelations in the way he said?	writing and reading
Which caliph decided to preserve the Quran as a single book after some of Muhammad's companions were killed in battle?	Abu Bakr
Which scribe led the production of the first written Quran?	Zayd ibn Thabit
In which year did Abu Bakr die?	634
Who took possession of the first Quran manuscript after Abu Bakr?	Hafsa bint Umar
Which caliph ordered the Quran manuscript copied and standardized?	Uthman ibn Affan
What is the term for recycled parchments used in ancient manuscripts?	palimpsests
Before which year were the Sana'a manuscripts produced?	671 AD
What version of the Quran was the scriptio superior of the Sana'a manuscripts?	Uthmanic
In which city was evidence of pre-Uthmanic Quranic writing discovered in 1972?	Sana'a, Yemen
What script were the Birmingham Quran fragments written in?	Hijazi
Which modern script descends from the script on the Birmingham Quran fragments?	Arabic
What feature of the Birmingham Quran fragments' text make some doubt that it is older than other known versions of the Quran?	dots and chapter separators
How many years old were the Quran fragments discovered in Birmingham in 2015?	1370
Which section of the Quran inspires some Muslims to ritually wash themselves before touching their copy?	56:79
What is done with the ashes of burned copies of the Quran?	buried or scattered over water
In what state are copies of the Quran sometime wrapped in cloth and buried?	Worn-out
Which are the safest places to inter an older copy of the Quran?	a mosque or a Muslim cemetery
What term indicates that the contents of the Quran cannot be reproduced in speech?	I'jaz
Until what day is the Quran believed to be in effect?	Day of Resurrection
In which year did the Medieval Muslim scholar al-Baqillani die?	1013
Which Muslim scholar studied the Quran's inimitability until his death in 1078?	al-Jurjani
What is a chapter of the Quran called?	sura
How many suras are in the Quran?	114
What two city-related categories divide the Quran's suras?	Meccan or Medinan
Which Arabic phrase opens almost all suras?	Bismillah
What determines the order in which suras are placed in the Quran?	size
What division of the Quran is used for a month-long reading?	juz'
How many ajzā cover the entire Quran?	30
How many ahzab are in a juz'?	two
What is the term for a subdivision of a hizb?	rubʻ al-ahzab
What division is used for a week-long recital of the Quran?	manzil
Quranic verses concerning which phenomena are thought by Muslims to authenticate its contents?	natural
What types of events are related in the Quran in support of its moral teachings?	historical
Historical narratives from whose time period are unique to the Quran among holy books?	Muhammad's
What fraction of the Quran deals with eschatology?	one-third
What general topic is eschatology about?	the final fate of the universe
Which natural disaster features in Sura 22?	earthquake
What topic do suras 44, 56, 75, and 101 have in common?	afterlife
In what form does the Quran say God sends his messages to people?	signs and revelations
Who intermediates between God and prophets?	Angels
Which part of the Quran describes God's use of intermediaries between himself and his prophets?	42:51
Which humans are the messengers of God?	Prophets
How does the Quran describe the similarity of messages God has delivered throughout human history?	identical
What mental state is the foundation of morality as described by the Quran?	Belief
What finance-related acts are forbidden by the Quran?	usury and gambling
What is the name of the formal prayer proscribed by the Quran?	salat
Which month is designated for fasting in the Quran?	Ramadan
The Quran uses a term that also means purification for what social act?	charity
Which astrophysicist has written about the ways the Quran encourages scientific thinking?	Nidhal Guessoum
Verse 2:111 of the Quran supports which aspect of scientific thought and practice?	proof
Whose scholarship on the concept of proof in the Quran does Guessoum cite?	Ghaleb Hasan
Which philosopher believed the Quran had a rational and empirical basis like science?	Muhammad Iqbal
Nature and its phenomena are mentioned in approximately how many of the Quran's verses?	750
Al-Battani is an example of a Muslim scientist who drew inspiration from which text?	Quran
Who recommended science as a way to achieve the goals of the Quran?	Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Who argued that the Quran inspired the first practitioners of the scientific method we use today?	Ziauddin Sardar
Al-Biruni is a example of a scientists of which religion?	Muslim
Which physicist quoted the Quran in his address after receiving the Nobel Prize?	Abdus Salam
Which verse from the Quran did Abdus Salam quote at his Nobel banquet?	67:3-4
Which two Muslim scientists did Salam celebrate as inventors of empirical methods?	Ibn al-Haytham and Al-Biruni
Salam suggests physics and science be kept separate from which topics which are more suited to religion?	metaphysics
What description of the writing in the Quran highlights its poetic aspect?	rhymed prose
Which suras in the Quran are particularly rhythmic?	earlier Meccan suras
What often changes along with the rhyming of Quranic verses?	subject of discussion
Which parts of the Quran are the least poetic?	Later
What is lacking in the arrangement of the Quranic text?	continuity
To which critic does Michael Sells refer on the subject of the Quran's disorganization?	Norman O. Brown
How does Sells describe the Quran's repetitiveness?	a literary device
Which scholar believes the Quran's fragmentary writing style is an effective literary device for a prophetic message?	Michael Sells
What metatextual character does Stefan Wild focus on in his discussion of the Quran?	Self-referentiality
What quality does the Quran claim in the different ways in which it refers to itself?	Divinity
Which term that the Quran uses for itself means "news"?	naba'
The Quran is more self-referential in which of its suras?	early Meccan suras
What is the name of the activity of explaining what Quranic verses mean?	Tafsir
Who was the first practitioner of Tafsir?	Muhammad
What is the Arabic term for Quranic exegesis?	Tafsir
Who were 'Ali ibn Abi Talib and 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas?	Companions of Muhammad
In which language is the Quran recited?	classical Arabic
What is the Arabic term for the cancellation of one part of the Quran by another?	nāsikh
What is the name of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community's published Quran commentary?	Tafseer e Kabir
What is the term for earlier portions of the Quran that may have been superseded by later parts?	mansūkh
In which language is the Tafseer e Kabir written?	Urdu
What is another term for Sufi Quranic interpretation?	Esoteric
What Arabic word describes the aspects of Quranic verses that Sufism tries to push beyond?	zahir
What is an Arabic term for allusions?	isharat
Sands says Sufi interpretations tend to use which literary device rather than direct explanation?	allusions
Beloved is a term for God used by which style of Quranic interpretation?	Sufi
Which Quranic verse describes Moses' encounter with God at the mountain?	7:143
In Sufi thought, what experiences bring one closer to truth?	longing and suffering
Who wrote that Moses had lost the Moses in himself along the way to his encounter with God?	Qushayri
Who was an important esoteric interpreter of the Quran in the 11th century?	Sulami
What is the English name of Sulami's major work?	Truths of Exegesis
In which language did Maybudi write?	Persian
Which Sufi commentator wrote the Spirit of Elucidation?	Ismail Hakki Bursevi
In which year did the poet Rumi die?	1273
What is the Arabic term for the surface-level aspects of a text?	zahir
What Arabic term applies to interpretations aimed at the deeper, esoteric meanings of a text?	ta'wil
Who is the only one who ever knows the full meaning of Quranic verses in the esoteric view?	God
Which two groups are examples of Muslims who advocate a very literal reading of the Quran?	Salafis and Zahiris
In which language was the Quran first translated?	Persian
Which work did scribes from Khorasan translate in the 10th century?	Tafsir al-Tabari
Whose student wrote a Persian tafsir of the Quran in the 11th century?	Abu Mansur Abdullah al-Ansari
Who wrote a Persian translation of the Quran in the 12th century?	Najm al-Din Abu Hafs al-Nasafi
To which dynasty did the king who commissioned the first translation of Quranic texts belong?	Samanid
In which year was the Quran first translated into a Western language?	1143
Which organization offers versions of the Quran in 50 languages?	Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
Whose French translation of the Quran was the model for the first English version?	Andre du Ryer
Who completed the first Latin version of the Quran?	Robert of Ketton
In which language was Alexander Ross' version of the Quran published in 1649?	English
What discipline concerns the way the Quran is correctly recited?	tajwid
Tajwid deals with what aspect of the phonemes in the Quran?	pronunciation
Tajwid describes rules for what noiseless aspect of articulating Quranic verses?	pause in recitation
Rhythm is an example of which features of Quranic recitation covered by tajwid?	musical and melodious
The absence of which language feature made early Quranic recitation more diverse?	Vocalization markers
Which Baghdad scholar identified justified seven different Quranic readings?	Ibn Mujāhid
Which century produced the seven readings selected by Ibn Mujāhid?	8th
Which recitation is the original basis of the Quran of Cairo?	ʻAsim's
Which city corresponds to Asim's recitation of the Quran?	Kufa
Who created Quranic manuscripts before the 19th century?	calligraphers and copyists
What is the name of the thicker-stroked writing used for the Quran beginning in the 9th century?	Kufic scripts
Which was the most widely used script by copyists in the 11th century?	naskh
Where was the Maghribi script most commonly used by Quran copyists?	North Africa and Spain
Which script was only used to copy the Quran by people in northern India?	Bihari
In which century were vocalization marking added to the Quran?	ninth century
Where were Quran copies kept for those who could not afford their own?	mosques
What are the parts of the Quran called that are 30 in total?	juzʼ
Which group of Quran copyists produced the most in-demand manuscripts?	Ottoman
Which Biblical character is the most often mentioned person in the Quran?	Moses
Who has claimed that Christians and Jews had heard and discussed the Quran before it took on its standardized Arabic form?	Sahih al-Bukhari
Which older language is thought to strongly resemble that of the Quran?	Syriac
Which relative of Jesus appears more often in the Quran than the New Testament?	Mary
What do devout Muslims believe is the reason for the overlap of events and characters in the Bible and Quran?	common divine source
What are the two type of ta'wil?	acceptable and unacceptable
Which type of esoteric interpretation involves a transfer by proof of a verse's meaning?	Unacceptable
The implicit meaning of a Quranic verse that is known fully only by God is which type of ta'wil?	Acceptable
Who had begun memorizing Muhammad's revelations in his lifetime?	his companions
What was done to the Quranic text early in its history leaving few markedly different variants?	standardized
Which which university is Fred Donner affiliated?	University of Chicago
The Quran is widely accepted by historians to contain a relatively accurate record of whose words?	Muhammad
What physical symptom accompanied Muhammad's revelations?	seizures
What measure of distance described the nearness of the Angel's approach to Mohammad?	two bows' length
In which work did Welch express his belief that Mohammad's physical reaction to the revelation was historically accurate?	Encyclopaedia of Islam
Which people would Mohammad's critics have compared him to at the time?	a possessed man, a soothsayer or a magician
What was the original meaning of ta'wil?	"to return" or "the returning place"
What can interpretation find that lies the behind the apparent events referred to in a Quranic story?	a spiritual reality
What philosophical term corresponds to the type of interpretation in ta'wil?	hermeneutic
Who do Shia Muslims believe can approach Quranic truths besides God and Muhammad?	imams
According to Shia Muslims, who is the only one who can fully know the a Quranic interpretation?	God
How must God have treated those who are qualified to know Quranic sectets?	purified
What is a nation which can exert its influence on a global scale called?	A great power
What two dominant traits do great powers usually possess?	military and economic strength
China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States serve as what body's five permanent members?	United Nations Security Council
What two lesser traits do great powers usually possess?	diplomatic and soft power influence
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States are part of what international forum?	the G7
What do great powers usually have?	military and economic strength, as well as diplomatic and soft power influence
What are the permanent members of UN Security Council?	China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States
What are the countries in the G7?	Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America
What 3 factors have international relations theorists considered factors for great power status?	power capabilities, spatial aspects, and status dimensions
The term "great power" was first used on which continent?	Europe
Which treaty made the distinction of small powers and great powers a formal affair?	Treaty of Chaumont
What year was this treaty signed?	1814
During which two wars has the balance of power shifted the most dramatically?	World War I and World War II
What is another more modern term used in place of "great power"?	superpower
What was the formalization of the division of small powers and great powers?	Treaty of Chaumont
During the post Napoleonic era where were the first Great Powers concentrated?	Europe
What is another term for Great Power?	superpower
During what 2 wars was the balance of power shift most dramatic?	World War I and World War II
What one criteria was used in early times to judge a great power's status?	strength for war
Besides military, what two other capacities were used to describe great powers in later times?	economic, and political
Who is the founder of the neorealist theory of international relations?	Kenneth Waltz
How many criteria are used to judge a great power in the neorealist theory?	five
Who wrote, "The test of a great power is the test of strength for war."?	A. J. P. Taylor
What 5 criteria did neorealist use to determine great powers?	population and territory; resource endowment; economic capability; political stability and competence; and military strength
Whos was the founder of the neorealist theory of international relations?	Kenneth Waltz
What 3 areas can summarize the great power determination?	power capabilities, spatial aspects, and status
What three things do all states have in their geographic scope?	interests, actions, or projected power
Which societal values had become world-wide by 1914?	Western
What is the scope of a regional power restricted to?	its region
What should a great power possess?	actual influence
What were the great powers of 1914 called?	world-powers
Who stated that "Great power may be defined as a political force exerting an effect co-extensive with the widest range of the society in which it operates. The Great powers of 1914 were 'world-powers"?	Arnold J. Toynbee
What do all states have?	geographic scope of interests, actions, or projected power
What type of powers should have actual influence throughout the scope of the prevailing international system?	great power
What type of power is restricted to its region?	regional power
What discussion should great powers be included on?	political and diplomatic questions of the day
Historically, when would great powers meet?	when major political questions were addressed
What types of decisions would great powers reach?	political resolution of various geographical and nationalist claims following a major conflict, or other contexts
When did Lord Castlereagh first use the term Great Powers?	in a letter sent on February 13, 1814
What position did Lord Castlereagh hold?	British Foreign Secretary
What did Castlereagh determine as the last resort of great power's influence?	if necessary the general arms against the Power that shall first attempt to disturb the Continental peace
What 2 powers named in the 5 orignal great powers of the congress of vienna have maintained that status?	only France and the United Kingdom
What country emerged as the pre-eminent power, due to its navy and the extent of its territories?	British Empire
What country lost Franco-Prussian war?	France
Balance of power of great powers was a major influence on what continents politics?	European
Who stated that "All politics reduces itself to this formula: try to be one of three, as long as the world is governed by the unstable equilibrium of five great powers.?"	Otto von Bismarck
Was the power of the 5 countries constant?	relative power of these five nations fluctuated
What countries found their economic growth in early 20th century?	United Kingdom and Prussia
Which of the 5 powers were beginning to stagnate in early 20th century?	Russia and Austria-Hungary
What agreement replaced the Congress of Vienna?	Eight-Nation Alliance
What conflict was this agreement in opposition of?	Boxer Rebellion in China.
What marked the conclusion of The Great War?	treaties of Versailles, St-Germain, Neuilly, Trianon and Sèvres
Who were  the chief arbiters of the new world order?	United Kingdom, France, Italy, Japan and the United States
Who created the Treaty of Versailles?	Big Three
Who were the big four?	France, Italy, United Kingdom and the United States
Who were the four permanent members of the League of Nations Council?	United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Japan
What organiztion acted as acknowledgement of status of great powers?	League of Nations Council
Why was United Stated excluded from League of Nations Council?	against the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles, thus preventing American participation in the League
When did US Senate vote against treaty of versailles ratification?	19 March 1920
When did World War II start?	1939
How many groups were involved in conflict of World War II?	two alliances
Who were the winners of World War II?	Allies
Who made up the Axis powers?	Germany, Italy and Japan
The winners of World War II along with France were allotted permanent seats for what organization?	United Nations Security Council
What is a superpower?	nations with overwhelming power and influence in the rest of the world
Who first used the term superpower?	William T.R. Fox
Who were the three original superpowers?	British Empire, the United States, and the Soviet Union
Who lost their superpower status in 1950s?	British Empire
What are middle powers?	those nations which exercise a degree of global influence, but are insufficient to be decisive on international affairs
During the cold war, what European powers rebuilt their ecomonies?	United Kingdom, France, and West Germany
By what year was China beginning to lose its hold as sole legitimate government?	1949
When did China lose its permanent seat at UN security council?	1971
Since what time has military conflicts receded?	1960s
What country has risen above other superpowers?	United States
Since what century has there always been parity in powers?	modern era (the 16th century)
Who's primacy has factored into maintaining peace among powers?	American
What formerly effective tool for international disputes is no longer effective among peer powers?	military force
What great powers have maintained peace?	France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States
Where have the powers maintained peace in recent years?	United Nations and other forums
What was the last crisis during cold war to escalate world powers?	Cuban missile crisis (1962
What countries are recognized as Nuclear Weapons States?	China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States
How many countries are permanent seats on the UN Security Council?	five
What other countries are referred to as middle powers?	China, France, Russia and the United Kingdom
What treaty addresses nuclear weapons?	Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
What countries are great powers mostly based on economic reasons?	Japan and Germany
Due to lack of strategic and hard power, countries are excluded from what?	UN Security Council
What is the name for the grouping of countries of China, France, Russia and the United Kingdom; Germany and Japan?	middle powers
Zbigniew Brzezinski and Malik Mohan consider what country to be a great power too?	India
Is there agreement on the status of all powers?	no collective agreement
Many academics debate the status of this country as a power?	India
Milena Sterio includes what former axis powers among great powers?	Germany, Italy and Japan
What emerging power is considered a great power?	India
What G7 members are among great powers?	Germany, Japan and Italy
Which country is debated as intermittent and/or least of great powers?	Italy
What organization is often seen as a great power in addition to member counties?	European Union
What other tools are used as alternative to military force?	trade and diplomacy
How many great powers are members of Europian Union?	three
What summits does EU have membership?	WTO and at G8 and G-20
How many wars occured between 1500s and 1953?	64
For bout how many years was an average of one great power fighting another each year?	450
What country had the most conflicts from 1500s through mid 20th century?	UK
What span was the Pax Britannica?	between 1815 and 1914
During the period from 1989 - 1996, what was the total are of the US in miles?	3,618,780 sq mi
According to the CIA World Factbook, what is the total area of the US in miles?	3,794,100 sq mi
According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, what is the total area of the US in miles?	3,676,486 sq mi
Compared to other countries, how large is the US?	third or fourth largest country
Which country is the worlds fourth largest?	Canada
Who may also be the third largest country?	China
Who does the US share land borders with?	Canada (to the north) and Mexico (to the south),
Who does the US share water borders with in the northwest?	Russia
How many contiguous states are there?	forty-eight
Which ocean does Alaska border to the south?	Pacific Ocean
What is the capital city of the US?	Washington, District of Columbia
Which US state donated Washington, D.C.?	Maryland
What are the US territories overseas located in the Pacific?	Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands
Which US state also donated territory to Washington, D.C., but had it returned?	Virginia
How many Great Lakes form a border with Canada?	four
Which of the Great Lakes is entirely located in US territory?	Lake Michigan
Which major river is located west of the Appalachian mountains?	Mississippi River
What type of land makes up the Ohio and Tennessee valleys?	rolling hills and productive farmland
Which section of the US contains subtropical forests and mangrove wetlands?	southeast United States
What area is located in between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains?	The Great Plains
In which area are a large number of the country's agricultural products grown?	the Great Plains
How high does elevation rise in the Great Plains?	a mile high
What is the only major mountain ranged located between the Appalachian Mountains and the Rocky Mountains?	Interior Highlands
Which northern country do the Rocky Mountains begin at?	Canada
Which northern country do the Rocky Mountains terminate at?	Mexico
In the US, which region is the highest by elevation?	The Rocky Mountain
In which state are the highest peaks of the Rocky Mountains found?	Colorado
What is the name of the plateau that lies west of the Rocky Mountains?	Intermontane Plateaus
What is the name of the large southern portion of the Intermontane Plateaus?	the Great Basin
What type of flats compose the Great Basin?	salt flats
What region is centered around the Four Corners?	Colorado Plateau
What is the name of the range where the Intermontane plateaus end?	Cascade Range
Which mountain range contains Mount Whitney?	Sierra Nevada
What type of mountains compose the Cascades?	volcanic mountains
What is the largest point in the Sierra Nevadas?	Mount Whitney
How tall is Mount Whitney?	14,505 ft
What are two national parks located in the mountainous regions?	Yosemite and Mount Rainier
What is the name of the famous valley located in California?	Central Valley
What is the name of the famous valley located in Oregon?	Willamette Valley
What are the low mountain ranges that are located along the pacific coast called?	Pacific Coast Ranges
What are the tallest trees in the world?	Redwoods
Why does the Appalachian Highland have the terrain it does?	crustal deformations
During what geological period did the Appalachian mountains reach their highest formation point?	Permian time
What is the name of the mountaneous region along the Atlantic cost.	The Appalachian Highland
What originally covered the east coast of the Appalachians?	forest
What are the two branches of the Cordilleran system?	Rocky Mountain System and the Pacific Mountain System
Which two major rivers are located in the Cordilleran system?	Columbia River and Colorado River
Which region of the Appalachians is the most arid?	southwest
What is one of the two major highlands that stretch from the gulf of mexico to the Arctic ocean?	Laurentian Highlands
How far north do the Interior Highlands reach?	Arctic Ocean
Which two nations are the central plains divided in?	Canadian and a United States
Where does the Mississippi discharge?	Gulf of Mexico
What is the climate like in the Southern United States?	subtropical
Hawaii has what type of climate?	tropical
Which state is known for its Mediterranean climate?	California
What contributed to the rise of the US as a world power?	agricultural climate
What is the climate like in most areas of the US?	temperate
Which areas have arid regions?	The Great Basin and Columbia Plateau
What is the precipitation average in the Intermontane plateaus?	15 inches
In the southwest, how high do temperatures get?	100 °F (37.8 °C)
During which months are portions of the US affected by the monsoon from the Gulf of California?	July to September
What type of weather do monsoons bring?	severe thunderstorms
What is the most prevalent type of climate nCalifornia?	Mediterranean
During what time of the year does California receive the most rainfall?	October–April
Which region of the US experiences rain year round?	Pacific Northwest
Which region in the US is also one of the most snowiest places in the world?	The Cascades
How many inches of snow do regions of the Cascades receive?	600 inches
Which mountainous region receives the highest snowfall on Earth?	mountains of the western states
Which mountain in Washington receives the most amount of snowfall?	Mount Rainier
What is the record amount of snowfall at Mount Rainer?	1,122 inches
In what year did Mount Rainer receive a record amount of snowfall?	1998-99
The Sierra Nevadas are located near which lake?	Lake Tahoe
Which region of the US receives the most amount of rainfall?	northwestern Pacific coast
What is the average amount of rainfall that the Quinault rainforest in Washington receives?	137 inches
Which regions in the East receives the most amount of snowfall?	Great Lakes and the mountains of the Northeast
Which state receives an average of 460 inches of rainfall per year?	Hawaii
What is the name of the desert that is located in the driest region in the US?	Mojave Desert
Where are tornadoes most common on Earth?	central portions of the U.S.
During which seasons are tornados most common?	spring and summer
Which regions experience the worst flooding in the US?	Appalachian region and the Midwest
Which region experiences the worst droughts in the US?	Southwest
What type of disasters affects the western US every year?	wildfires
The Great Mississippi occurred during what year?	1927
What fuels wildfires and causes them to spread in the west?	desert shrub
What type of storms can cause most activity to stop?	Nor'Easter snowstorms
What is the name of the event that caused major flooding in the western US?	El Niño
What is the area in the pacific known for heavy volcanic activity?	Pacific Ring of Fire
Which Hawaiin volcano has been erupting since 1983?	Kilauea
The Pacific Ring of Fire contains what percentage of the earthquakes on Earth?	90%
When was the last time that the Hawaiin islands experienced a life threatening volcanic eruption?	17th century
What year did Mt St. Helens erupt causing devastating damage?	1980
When did Audio CDs become available for purchase?	1982
What does CD stand for?	Compact Disc
What does SVCD stand for?	Super Video Compact Disc
What were CD's originally created to store?	sound recordings
What does SVCD stand for?	Super Video Compact Disc
In what year were compact discs realesed for purchase?	1982
What was the original intended format for CDs?	data storage
In what year were digital and physical music sales the same?	2014
How many CDs had been distrubuted worldwide by 2007?	200 billion
In 2004 how many CDs had been sold around the world?	2004
What percent decrease did audio CD sales experience?	50%
What has caused a decrease in CD sales?	other forms of digital storage and distribution
In 2004 how many CDs had been sold around the world?	30 billion
How many CDs had been distrubuted around the world by 2007?	200 billion
What has caused a decrease in CD sales?	other forms of digital storage
Who created Compact Disc prototypes in the 1970s?	Philips and Sony
How lond did the creation of Red Book CD-DA standard take?	a year
To what does the compact disc owe its prosperity?	the cooperation between Philips and Sony
How many CD players were sold in the United States in their first year?	400,000
What did the CD evolve from?	LaserDisc
What made it possible for CDs to be played on any companies CD player?	unified design
What year did CD players become available for purchase?	1982
To what does the compact disc owe its prosperity?	cooperation between Philips and Sony
In what year did Philips institute a laboratory to create a digital audio disc?	1977
What was the proposed diameter for the original compact disc?	11.5 cm
What year did Philips propse the idea of a digital audio format?	1974
Who was the director of the Philips audio division in 1974?	L. Ottens
Where was the 62nd AES Convention held?	Brussels
Who was the general manger of Sony's audio department in 1971?	Heitaro Nakajima
What year did Sony first exhibit the use of an optical digital audio disc?	1976
What did Nakajima's team use to create a digital PCM adaptor audio tape recorder?	a Betamax video recorder
Where was the Philips Introduce Compact disc conference held?	Eindhoven, Netherlands
What did Nakajima's team use to create a digital PCM adaptor audio tape recorder?	Betamax video recorder
When did Sony release it's AES technical paper?	1 March 1979
In what year did Sony and Philips band together to design a new digital audio disc?	1979
What year was the Red Book CD-DA standard released?	1980
When did the IEC isntigate the Red Book CD-DA as an international standard?	1987
Who headed the 1979 Sony and Philips digital audio disc task force?	Kees Schouhamer Immink and Toshitada Doi
Who first sold a million copies on CD?	Dire Straits
Which artist was the first to have their full catalogue converted to CD?	David Bowie
What year was the Dire Straits album Brothers in Arms released?	1985
How many studio albums did David Bowie release in February 1985?	15
How many CDs were mass produced in 1988?	400 million
How many studio albums did David Bowie release in February 1985?	15
What does ROM stand for?	read-only memory
What year did Sony and Philips release CD-Recordable?	1990
What was the original intended format for CDs?	musical format
What year was the 73rd AES Convention?	1983
What was the CDs predecessor?	the gramophone record
What was the CDs predecessor?	gramophone record
When did CD sales experience their original decline?	the 2000s
What portion of music sales did CDs and DVDs account for in the United States as of 2012?	34 percent
Which country attributes over 80 percent of its music sales to physical formats?	Japan
How are MP3s compressed?	lossily-compressed
When did CD sales experience their original decline?	2000s
What has caused a decrease in CD sales?	Internet-based distribution of files
How are CDs mass produced?	hydraulic press
What type of material is used to make CDs?	raw polycarbonate plastic
What size is the diameter of the center hole in a CD?	15 mm
How long does it take to stamp out one CD?	two to three seconds
What is the term for the center hole in a CD?	stacking ring
What materials can be used to make the reflective layer on a CD?	usually aluminium, but sometimes gold or other metal
What type of light is used to cure CDs?	UV
What is a glass master?	positive image of the desired CD surface
How are glass masters created?	high-powered laser
What is the term for a negative image of the glass master?	die
How is the positive image on a CD protected?	lacquer
How is lacquer distrubted on a CD?	rapid spinning
What is the priciest component of a CD?	jewel case
Why did the cost of audio music increase when the production costs decreased?	value increased
What did CDs retail for in 1995?	$16.98
Who received the most profit from the sale of CDs?	the store
How much did a jewel case cost in 1995?	30 cents
How long are CDs expected to last?	20 to 100 years
What can cause sudden disc degradation?	disc rot
Are CDs meant for permanent or temporary use?	permanent
What does SCMS stand for?	Serial Copy Management System
What does DRM stand for?	digital rights management
What does AHRA stand for?	Audio Home Recording Act
What type of CD is intended to be used in a Consumer audio CD Recorder?	ReWritable Audio CD
Which is less expensive, the ReWritable Audio CD or a CD-RW?	CD-RW
How fast could the first ReWritable CD be written?	4x speed
Which CD has writing speeds betwen 4x and 12x?	High Speed ReWritable CD
How fast can Ultra Speed+ CDs write?	32x
How fast can Ultra Speed CDs write?	16x to 24x
Where is the semiconductor laser found in a CD player?	on a swing arm
What wavelenght is used to pull data from a CD?	780 nm
What is used to discern the change of intensity in light on a CD?	photodiode
In what pattern is data stored on a CD?	spiral
What createds the change in light reflected off of a CD?	change in height between pits and lands
What type of result from a CD will return a one?	change from pit to land or land to pit
Where can one find the encoding techniques for CDs?	Red Book
What type of encoding do CDs implement?	non-return-to-zero
What type of modulation is implemented when a disc is mastered?	eight-to-fourteen
Where can one expect to find damage on a disc?	label side of the disc
How are scratches on a CD fixed?	refilling them with similar refractive plastic or by careful polishing
What eats at the plastic and aluminum found in CDs?	fungus Geotrichum candidum
Where does the fungus Geotrichum candidum originate from?	Belize
Where is the start of data on a CD?	the center
What size CD is most frequently used?	120 millimetres (4.7 in)
What is the size of a Mini CD?	Eighty-millimeter
What is the size of a Maxi Single?	120 mm
Who was the Sony Executive in 1980?	Norio Ohga
Where does the Red Book get it's name from?	the colour of its cover
What is the formal name for a CD?	Compact Disc Digital Audio
Do CDs have a two or four channel format?	two-channel
What format has never been implemented on CDs?	Four-channel sound
How is graphics information read from a CD+ Graphics?	television set or a computer monitor
What is the primary use of Compact Disc + Graphics?	to display lyrics on a television set for karaoke
Which channels does the CD+G use to hold graphics data?	channels R through W
How much video can a CD-R contain?	60 minutes
Which has better resolution, a VCD or SVCD?	SVCD
How are lengthy videos fit onto SVCDs?	lower the video bit rate
What is the maximum amount of video a SVCD can properly hold?	100 minutes
How many images could Photo CDs initially contain?	100
When were Photo CDs initially released?	1992
Who created Photo CDs?	Kodak
What type of paper can Photo CD images be produced on?	photographic paper
In what book are Photo CD standards defined?	Beige Book
When did record companies first attempt to protect their CDs from copying?	2001
Who said that protected CDs are not allowed to carry the CDDA logo?	Philips
Where does the Red Book mention copy protection?	in the subcode
What is the use of a transistor?	to amplify or switch electronic signals and electrical power
What is a transistor made of?	semiconductor material
Why does a transistor increase a signal?	the controlled (output) power can be higher than the controlling (input) power
What is the minimum amount of external connection terminals to call an item a transistor?	three
Where are most transistors found?	embedded in integrated circuits
When was the first transistor created?	1926
Who invented the first transistor?	Julius Lilienfeld
When was the first transistor implemented for practical use?	1947
When did the implementers receive a Nobel Prize for making the transistor?	1956
What list is the transistor on?	list of IEEE milestones in electronics
When was the thermionic triode invented?	1907
What was the purpose of the thermionic triode?	amplified radio technology and long-distance telephony
Who filed a patent for the field-effect transistor?	Physicist Julius Edgar Lilienfeld
Where did Lilienfeld file his patent?	Canada
What year did Lilienfeld file his patent?	1925
At what time did Bardeen and Brattain experiment on increasing signal output?	November 17, 1947 to December 23, 1947
What were gold contacts attached to to increase signal output?	germanium
Who was the Solid State Physics Group Leader?	William Shockley
Who came up with the term transistor?	John R. Pierce
Why was the term transistor used?	a contraction of the term transresistance
In what year was the point-contact transistor invented?	1948
Where were Matare and Welker working when inventing the point-contact transistor?	Compagnie des Freins et Signaux
Who invented the point-contact transistor?	Herbert Mataré and Heinrich Welker
What was the name of Matare and Welker's transistor?	transistron
What was the transistron used for?	amplified use in France's telephone network
How many transistors make up a logic gate?	up to about twenty transistors
How many transistors make up a microprocessor?	as many as 3 billion transistors
How many transistors were made in 2002?	60 million transistors were built in 2002… for [each] man, woman, and child
How many individually packaged transistors are produced each year?	over a billion
What are some abbreviations for integrated circuits?	IC, microchips or simply chips
Why is a transistor so useful?	gain
What is gain?	it can act as an amplifier
What is an additional use of the transistor?	turn current on or off in a circuit
What determines the amount of current in an electrically controlled switch?	other circuit elements
How many types of transistors are there?	two
What controls the large current between the collector and emitter?	A small current at the base terminal
What are the components of a field-effect transistor?	gate, source, and drain
In a field-effect transistor, what controls the current between the source and drain?	a voltage at the gate
What are the components of a bipolar transistor?	base, collector, and emitter
Why does the collector voltage drop in grounded-emitter transistor circuits?	reduced resistance from collector to emitter
What would happen if the voltage difference from collector and emitter were zero?	the collector current would be limited only by the load resistance (light bulb) and the supply voltage
What is the term for a zero difference between collector and emitter?	saturation
Why is the term saturation named as such?	current is flowing from collector to emitter freely
What position is the switch in when saturated?	on
What is a major problem with using bipolar transistors as switches?	Providing sufficient base drive current
What does the transistor provide?	current gain
What determines the current ratio in transistors?	the type of transistor
If the type of transistor is the same what determines the current ratio?	collector current
How are parameters chosen in a switching circuit?	the "off" output is limited to leakage currents too small to affect connected circuitry
What is a switching circuit trying to simulate when on?	short circuit
What is a switching circuit trying to simulate when off?	open circuit
How quickly does the change from open circuit to short circuit happen?	instantaneous
What gives bipolar transistors their name?	they conduct by using both majority and minority carriers
What was the first mass-produced transistor?	bipolar junction transistor
What is the bipolar junction transistor a combination of?	two junction diodes
What is the name for a layer of p-type semiconductor set between two n-type semiconductors?	n–p–n transistor
What is the name for a layer of n-type semiconductor set between two p-type semiconductors?	p–n–p transistor
How many terminals do BJTs have?	three
How many layers of semiconductor do BJTs have?	three
What are the layers of semiconductor in a BJT?	an emitter, a base, and a collector
How can one find the amount of collector current?	β (common-emitter current gain) times the base current
What is the usual collector current for small-signal transistors?	greater than 100
What determines the conductivity in a FET?	electric field that is produced when a voltage is applied between the gate and source terminals
What controls the current between the drain and source?	the voltage applied between the gate and source
At what rate is the drain-source current increased when the gate-source current is increased?	a roughly quadratic rate
Where is a quadratic behavior not observed?	in modern devices
How many groups are FETs split into?	two
How is a JFET different from an IGFET?	the JFET gate forms a p–n diode with the channel
What are the names of the groups of FETs	junction FET (JFET) and insulated gate FET (IGFET)
What mode do both JFET and IGFET operate in?	depletion mode
What is the common term for an IFGET?	a metal–oxide–semiconductor FET (MOSFET)
How are FET's separated?	depletion-mode and enhancement-mode types
At what point is a channel off in enhancement-mode?	at zero bias
At what point is a channel on in depletion-mode?	at zero bias
What channel corresponds with high current?	n-channel devices
What channel corresponds with low current?	p-channel devices
What was the most frequently used transistor in the 1960s and 70s?	bipolar junction transistor
Why were BJTs so popular?	their greater linearity and ease of manufacture
What are some applications of discrete MOSFETs?	transistor applications, including analog circuits, voltage regulators, amplifiers, power transmitters and motor drivers
What were the most popular digital circuits of the time?	MOSFETs
What is the Pro Electron standard?	European Electronic Component Manufacturers Association part numbering scheme
How many letters does the part numbering scheme begin with?	two letters
What is the first letter in the part numbering scheme?	the semiconductor type
What is the second letter in the part numbering scheme?	the intended use
What follows the 2 letters in the part numbering scheme?	A 3-digit sequence number
What does the JEDEC EIA370 transistor number start with?	2N
what does the 2N is the JEDEC EIA370 mean?	a three-terminal device
What follows the 2N in a JEDEC EIA370?	a 2, 3 or 4-digit sequential number with no significance as to device properties
What does a letter at the end of a device number mean?	a newer variant
What does the number 2N1301 indicate?	a p–n–p germanium switching transistor
What was once an indicator of the devices creator?	a manufacturer's prefix
What makes a manufacturer's prefix less reliable?	devices are second-sourced
What is the marking for a 2N2222A in a plastic case?	PN2222A
What is a plastic version of a BC108?	PN108
What is the junction forward voltage?	the voltage applied to the emitter–base junction of a BJT
What is the purpose of a junction forward voltage?	to make the base conduct a specified current
What is the ideal junction forward voltage?	lower
Why is the ideal junction forward voltage lower?	less power is required to "drive" the transistor
When happens to the junction forward voltage when temperature is raised?	decreases
What semiconductor has the highest electron mobility?	GaAs
What is quicker, a bipolar n-p-n transistor or a p-n-p transistor?	a given bipolar n–p–n transistor
What is the common application of GaAs?	high-frequency applications
What does HEMT stand for?	high-electron-mobility transistor
What are common applications of HEMT?	satellite receivers
What is a discrete transistor?	individually packaged transistors
What are the two most common types of transistor?	through-hole (or leaded), and surface-mount
What is the newest surface-mount transistor?	ball grid array (BGA)
What is another name for the surface-mount transistor?	surface-mount device (SMD)
What is a ball grid array composed of?	solder "balls" on the underside in place of leads
What did many people in the Pre-Modern era express their faith through?	via a faith in some form of deity
What were Religious officials perceived as in the Pre-Modern era?	spiritual intermediaries
Through whom did the general masses have access to the divine?	Religious officials
What belief did ancient cultures consider sacred?	Tradition
How were the moral standards of ancient cultures enforced?	strictly
Who were spiritual intermediates?	Religious officials
Peoples sense of worth was expressed through what in the Pre-modern era?	via a faith in some form of deity
Through who did the masses have access to the divine?	spiritual intermediaries
What did social order mandate be strictly enforced?	ceremony and morals
What belief was considered sacred by ancient civilizations?	Tradition
What term was coined in the 16th century to indicate present time?	modern
The term "modern" was derived from what Latin adverb?	modo
What caused the transition between the middle ages and early modern times?	The European Renaissance
In what country did The European Renaissance start?	Italy
What two instruments were invented during The European Renaissance?	telescope and microscope
The phrase modern originated form what?	Latin adverb modo
What did The European renaissance mark?	transition between the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern times
What phrase was coined in the 16th century to reference recent times?	modern
Through what time period did The European renaissance last?	1420–1630)
In what country did The European renaissance begin?	Italy
What term was created in the 1930's to separate the middle ages form the 1800's?	Early Modern
The 1800"s are referred to as?	time of the late Enlightenment
What do the terms "Early Modern" and  'Modern Ages" originate from?	European history
What are the terms "Early Modern" and "Modern Ages" used for i other countries?	in the context with their contact with European culture in the Age of Discovery.
What does the term "Early Modern" mean?	to distinguish the time between what we call Middle Ages and time of the late Enlightenment
When was the term "Early Modern" implemented into the English language?	1930s
What time period is referred to as The Late Enlightenment?	1800
Where do the terms "Middle Ages" and "Modern Ages" originate from?	European history
What are the terms "Middle Ages" and "Modern Ages" used for in other countries?	in the context with their contact with European culture in the Age of Discovery.
In what era were there many socio-technological trends?	Contemporary era
The 21st century is refereed to as what?	the Information age
What device was used most during the The Information age?	computers
What was a major concern for Western civilization during the 21 century?	terrorist acts
In what time were there many socio-technological trends?	Contemporary era
What is the 21st century also known as?	the Information age
What device was used most during 21st century?	computers
What was considered a threat to Western civilization?	terrorist acts
Who controlled the Asian Sphere during the period between 1600-1868?	Chinese dynasties and Japanese shogunates
What is the period between 1600-1868 referred to as?	the Edo period
What is the Edo period also known as?	the early modern period
What is time is considered the "Modern Period" in Korea?	from the rising of Joseon Dynasty to the enthronement of King Gojong
Name one of the tribes Native Americans established in the Americas.	Aztec Empire
What two groups controlled the Asian Sphere?	Chinese dynasties and Japanese shogunates
What time is referred to as the Edo period?	1600 to 1868
What is the 'Early Modern period" known as in Japan?	the rising of Joseon Dynasty to the enthronement of King Gojong
Name one of the tribes Native Americans formed in the Americas?	Aztec Empire
Name one of the reasons urbanization grew in China.	population grew
What did Nanjing and Beijing contribute to?	growth of private industry
What are Nanjing and Beijing?	Large urban centers
Under what rule was China not isolated?	the early Ming dynasty
During The Early MIng Dynasty Chinese merchants explored all of what?	Indian Ocean
What caused urbanization to increase in China?	the population grew
Where did Chinese merchants explore?	all of the Indian Ocean
What was founded after the fall of the Ming?	The Qing dynasty
The Qing dynasty lasted through what time period?	1644–1911
What were the Manchus originally known as?	the Jurchens
Why did the last Ming Emperor commit suicide?	Beijing was captured by Li Zicheng's peasant rebels
Who became allies with the Manchus to seize control over Beijing?	former Ming general Wu Sangui
The Qing dynasty formed after what event?	after the fall of the Ming
During what time period did the Qing dynasty rule?	1644–1911
What were the Manchus originally named?	Jurchens
Who was Beijing captured by in 1644?	Li Zicheng's peasant rebels
Who did the Manchus make an Ally with to seize control of Beijing?	former Ming general Wu Sangui
What was society based on during the Tukugawa period?	strict class hierarchy
Strict class hierarchy was established by who?	Toyotomi Hideyoshi
What group were considered to be at the top of the Strict Class Hierarchy?	The daimyo, or lords
How were taxes charged during the Tukugawa period?	set at fixed amounts
What effect did  having taxes charged at a fixed amount have on it's revenue?	tax revenues collected by the samurai landowners were worth less and less over time.
What is the Tokugawa period also known as?	Edo society
What was society in  the Tokugawa period based in?	strict class hierarchy
What group was considered at the top of the Strict Class Society?	The daimyo, or lords,
What effect did the way the taxes were charged have on it's revenue.	revenues collected by the samurai landowners were worth less and less over time.
How were taxes charged in the Tokugawa period?	set at fixed amounts
Who ruled most of India in the early 18th century?	Mughal Empire
How did the "Classic Period" end?	the death and defeat of Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707
Who was behind the death off Emperor Aurangzeb?	Hindu Maratha Empire
Where was the The Maratha Empire centralized?	south west of present-day India
What happened when the  Maratha Army lost the third battle of Panipat?	the empire was then divided into a confederacy of Maratha states.
Who ruled most of India in the 18 century?	Mughal Empire
What event ended the "classic period"?	the death and defeat of Emperor Aurangzeb
What caused the death of Emperor Auranzeb?	the rising Hindu Maratha Empire,
Where was the Maratha Empire centralized?	south west of present-day India
What caused the Maratha Empire to split in 1761?	the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat
What did the development of new imperialism cause?	the conquest of nearly all eastern hemisphere territories by colonial powers.
When did the commercial colonization of India begin?	1757
What happened n the battle of Plassey?	Nawab of Bengal surrendered his dominions to the British East India Company
When was the British East Company given the right to collect revenue?	1765
What is the term used to describe the "Right to collect revenue"?	diwani
In what year did the Maratha states lose to the British East Company?	1818
What was the name of the war lost by the Maratha states in 1818?	the Third Anglo-Maratha War
How long did the British east Indian Company rule last after the war?	1858
What caused the British east Indian Company rule to end?	the Indian rebellion of 1857 and consequent of the Government of India Act 1858
What did Britain establish in 1824?	Singapore as a key trading post
What dispatched of The Dutch East India Company and the British East India Company?	their respective governments
What country did not have to succumb to forign rule?	Thailand
Who also profited from Southeast Asia resources?	colonial powers
In what year did the fall of Constantinople happen?	1453
When is the modern period dated in England?	Battle of Bosworth in 1485
Who was defeated by Henry Vll at the battle of Bosworth?	Richard III
When did Russia experience territorial growth?	the 17th century
The 17th century is also known as?	age of Cossacks.
Who joined the Cossacks in 1648?	peasants of Ukraine
Who are Cossacks?	warriors organized into military communities
Why dd the Peasants of Ukraine join the Cossacks?	in rebellion against Poland-Lithuania
What bridged the middle ages to the modern era?	European intellectual transformation
What is regarded as the start of modern philosophy?	The Age of Reason
What does the Age of Rationalism succeed?	Renaissance philosophy
What is 17th century philosophy also referred to as?	the Age of Rationalism
What did the beginning of the 18th century mark the beginning of in Europe?	secularization
From where does the phrase humanist originate?	the 15th century
What is the basic training of a humanist?	speak well and write
Where did Enlightenment gain momentum?	Europe and America
What was the age of Enlightenment centered on?	the 18th century in which reason was advocated as the primary source and legitimacy for authority.
What were the studia humanitatis competing against?	quadrivium and scholastic logic.
What did renaissance humanism reference?	Latin and Greek classical texts
renaissance humanism was antagonistic to what?	scholasticism
What did renaissance humanism place an emphasis on?	accumulated commentaries
What was the basis of the quarrel between the Ancients and the moderns?	literary and artistic
In what time period did the quarrel between the Ancients and the Moderns peak?	early 1690s
Moderns support the merits of whom?	authors of the century of Louis XIV. Fontenelle
What did Louis XIV believe about the modern man?	modern scholarship allowed modern man to surpass the ancients in knowledge.
What did the Scientific Revolution cause?	a transition to modern science
What s the Scientific Revolution?	a period when European ideas in classical physics, astronomy, biology, human anatomy, chemistry, and other classical sciences were rejected
What did Scientific Revolution form?	several modern scientific fields.
What did the Scientific Revolution force people to do?	question all manners of things
What happened to the king after the trial?	execution of the king
Who else was involved in the warfare?	every other major European power.
name an event that can be contributed to the revolution.	the Napoleonic Wars
What characterized the Napoleonic Era?	The campaigns of French Emperor and General Napoleon Bonaparte
Where was Napoleon Bonaparte born?	Corsica
Where was Napoleon Bonaparte die?	St. Helena
Why were Europe's Empires and Kingdoms dispatched?	surge of Republicanism
From where did the French empire rule a large portion of Europe?	Paris
What is Italian Unification?	social movement that annexed different states of the Italian peninsula into the single state of Italy
When did the Italian Unification occur?	in the 19th century
In what year do most  Scholars agree the Italian Unification ended?	1871
In what year do most  Scholars agree the Italian Unification began?	1815
After what event did the last citta irredente join Italy?	World War I.
What event did the American revolution cause?	British monarchy itself to become the sovereign United States of America.
How did the Thirteen Colonies become The United States Of America?	overthrow the governance of the Parliament of Great Britain, and then reject the British monarchy
Why did the United States form independent states?	the colonies first rejected the authority of the Parliament to govern them without representation
Who did the Second Continental Congress join together against?	the British
What is the armed conflict form 1775 to 1783 is known as?	American Revolutionary War
Where did the American Revolution start?	Lexington and Concord
What was issued on July 4, 1776?	Declaration of Independence
What did the Declaration Of Independence proclaim?	independence from Great Britain and their formation of a cooperative union.
What position was Ben Franklin appointed in 1776?	member of the Committee of Five that drafted the Declaration of Independence.
What was Ben Franklin disabled by?	gout
What is the decolonization of the Americas?	the process by which the countries in the Americas gained their independence from European rule.
When did the decolonization of the Americas begin?	18th and early-to-mid-19th centuries.
What were the Spanish wars directly linked to?	Napoleonic French invasion of Spain.
When did the wars against Spanish rule occur?	1808 until 1829
How did the Spanish conflict begin?	short-lived governing juntas established in Chuquisaca and Quito opposing the composition of the Supreme Central Junta of Seville.
Who did the central Junta fall to?	the French
What king died in 1833?	king Ferdinand VII
After King Ferdinand died, who remained under Spanish rule?	Cuba and Puerto Rico
When did the Spanish-American war occur?	in 1898
Where were the Portuguese capacities centralized?	Salvador
When did the first industrial revolution merge into the second?	around 1850
The 19th century was also known as?	the internal combustion engine and electric power generation.
What was the second industrial revolution was labeled?	separate Technical Revolution
What caused technological and economical progress?	development of steam-powered ships and railways
What is industrialization?	social and economic change
industrialization is a subdivision of what general process?	technological innovation
During industrialization a human group is turned into what?	from a pre-industrial society into an industrial one.
When did the modern petroleum industry start?	1846
What started the modern petroleum industry ?	the discovery of the process of refining kerosene from coal
Who discovered the process of refining kerosene from coal?	Nova Scotian Abraham Pineo Gesner
Who improved Gesner's  of refining kerosene from coal?	Ignacy Łukasiewicz
Where was the first Rock Oil mine built?	Bóbrka
In what fields did achievements occur during the revolution?	electrification to developments in materials science.
What did the advancements during the revolution improve for people?	quality of life
What did Lewis Paul invent?	roller spinning, the basis of the water frame for spinning cotton in a cotton mill.
In what period did James Lewis invent the 'Roller Spinning"?	the first revolution
Who improved the steam engine?	Matthew Boulton and James Watt
Thomas Edison is credited with?	the creation of the first industrial research laboratory
How many volts did Thomas Edison's electrical supply provide?	110 volts
What Did Thomas Edison switch to in 1882?	the world's first large-scale electrical supply network
How many customers were supplied by Thomas Edison's electrical supply network?	fifty-nine
Where was Thomas Edison's electrical supply network located?	lower Manhattan
When did the European revolutions occur?	1848
How many people were estimated to be killed in the revolutions?	tens of thousands
What are European revolutions known as in other countries?	Spring of Nations or the Year of Revolution
In what country did the revolutions begin?	France
What did the reformers look to to solve social problems?	Scientific Revolution and industrial progress
What is Newton Natural philosophy?	a coherent system of verifiable predictions
What did Newton's Nataural philosophy replace?	reliance on revelation and inspired truth.
What did Newton's philosophy do when applied to life,	yielded several successful campaigns for changes in social policy.
Under whom was Russia declared an empire?	Peter I
In what year was Russia declared an empire?	1721
Through what period did Peter I rule?	1682 to 1725
Who did Peter I defeat in the Great Northern War?	Sweden
What did Peter I found on the Baltic Sea?	a new capital called Saint Petersburg
What was the Victorian era of the United Kingdom?	the period of Queen Victoria's reign
Through what Period did Queen Victoria reign?	1837 to January 1901
What did the people consider Queen Victoria reign to be?	a long period of prosperity for the British people
How far back would some scholars extend Victoria's reign?	five years to the passage of the Reform Act 1832.
What did defeating Napoleon leave Britain without?	any serious international rival
Why did Britain adopt the role of Global Policemen?	Unchallenged at sea
Britain adopting the role as global policeman is known as	Pax Britannica
What was Britain's foreign policy called?	splendid isolation
Britain's dominant position in the world trade allowed them to do what?	effectively controlled the economies of many nominally independent countries, such as China, Argentina and Siam
What was British imperial strength replace by?	steamship and the telegraph
What was the British Empire linked by in 1982?	a network of telegraph cables
When were the steamship and the telegraph invented?	the second half of the 19th century
How many people were added to the British Empire by 1922?	458 million
When did the British establish colonies in Australia?	1788
The Bourbon Restoration followed what event?	Napoleon I of France
What is the Bourbon Restoration?	Allies restored the Bourbon Dynasty to the French throne.
What is the July Monarchy?	a period of liberal constitutional monarchy in France under King Louis-Philippe
What is the second empires?	the Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III
Through what period did the second empire last?	1852 to 1870
What countries were involved in the Franco-Russian war?	France and Prussia
What did the Prussian and German victory mark?	final unification of Germany under King Wilhelm I of Prussia.
Name one of the groups who backed Prussia in the Franco-Russian war?	North German Confederation
Prussia claimed almost all of what territory?	Alsace-Lorraine
Prussia retained most of Alsace-Lorraine up until what event?	World War I.
Why did European powers lay claim to areas Africa?	exhibit a sphere of influence over the area
What did the European powers need to make their claim over these areas legitimate?	These claims did not have to have any substantial land holdings or treaties to be legitimate.
What do European powers that exibit their control ovet an area accept?	mandate to rule that region as a national colony.
What was the colonial experience for Africans described as?	hell on earth.
How did the claims on the areas in Africa benefit the European powers?	colony’s commercial interests without having to fear rival European competition.
What percent of the worlds population did Africa posses at the Berlin Conference?	one-fifth
What was Europe's perspective o Africa containing one-fifth of the worlds population?	they were dividing an unknown continent.
When did European countries establish colonies in Africa?	the mid-nineteenth century,
Europe did not feel the need to posses territory in Africa until?	1880s
How did maps show Africa Before 1880?	generally showing blank spaces for the continent’s interior.
Through what period did European powers expand control in Africa?	1880s to 1914
What was Europe competing for?	Africa’s land and resources.
What did Great Britain control?	various colonial holdings in East Africa
Where in Africa did the French have control?	West Africa
Where in Africa did Portuguese have control?	southern Africa
What was the Meija era marked by?	the reign of the Meiji Emperor
How did Japan rise to be a world power during the Meja era?	modernization
When did the Meija restoration begin?	1860s
What does "Meija era"	Enlightened Rule
What did Irokawa Daikichi act out against?	bureaucratic superstate
Laws mandated that every able bodies Japanese citizen do what?	serve a mandatory term of three years with the first reserves and two additional years with the second reserves.
Who initially rejected the Japanese laws mandating military service?	peasant and warrior alike.
Who did the Japanese form their military  forces after?	French military
What did the peasant class name the mandatory military service law?	ketsu-eki
Where was the military academy located?	Kyoto
What is the antebellum age?	a period of increasing division in the country based on the growth of slavery
When did the civil was begin?	1861
When was the Antebellum age considered to have begun?	with the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854
What did The Antebellum age mark?	the transition of American manufacturing to the industrial revolution.
What did northern leaders agree on about slavery?	all forms of slavery or quasi-slavery had to be eliminated.
What did Lincoln do well in the war?	mobilizing support for the war goals
Why couldn't the confederacy defend their ports?	The Confederacy had a larger area than it could defend
General Robert E. Lee controlled what sect of the confederacy?	the East
The south could barely do what for their souldiers?	feed and clothe
What happened in the Glided Age/	extravagant displays of wealth and excess of America's upper-class
In what time period did the Glided Age occur?	late 19th century
Where did the wealth of the Glided Age come form?	industrial and population expansion.
What did Financiers refer to rich industrialist as?	robber barons
What type of practices did John D. Rockefeller exhibit in the oil industry?	effective tactics and aggressive practices
What creations brought in the modern industrial economy?	transportation and communication infrastructure
What became the dominant form of business organization?	the corporation
What transformed business organization in 1890?	managerial revolution
The Sherman Antitrust Act is the source of what?	all American anti-monopoly laws.
What was he Standard Oil Group determined to be by the courts?	an "unreasonable" monopoly
When did modern physics arise?	early 20th century
What is the old Quantum  theory?	a collection of results which predate modern quantum mechanics, but were never complete or self-consistent.
The "fifth element" was disproved by what?	Michelson-Morley experiment
What is the Michelson-Morley experiment?	an attempt to detect the motion of earth through the aether
What does Darwinism promote?	the theory of natural selection.
Why did Chinese philosophy begin to mix with western concepts?	as steps toward modernization
When did the Xinhai Revolution begin?	1911
What is the May Forth Movement?	to completely abolish the old imperial institutions and practices of China
What did Marxist-Leninst add to Chinese philosophy?	Marxist-Leninist thought
During what event was Legalism abolished?	the Cultural Revolution
When was the enlightenment of spiritual philosophy challenged?	in various quarters around the 1900s.
What were Humanist ethical philosophy's developed from?	earlier secular traditions
Why did Kari Marx criticize Humanist Philosophy's?	it to be symptomatic of the very dehumanization it was supposed to oppose
What did Friedrinch Netzsche consider Humanism to be?	a secular version of theism
Why does Friedrinch Netzsche believe human rights exist?	as a means for the weak to collectively constrain the strong.
What is Albert Einstein known for?	his theories of special relativity and general relativity
What did Einstein add to the Brownman Motion?	mathematical treatment
What did Einstein discover a resolution to?	the paradox of specific heats
What theory  did Einstein have reservations about?	quantum field theory
What is the federation of Australia?	six separate British self-governing colonies of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia formed one nation.
What was the federal Government responsible for?	matters concerning the whole nation.
When did the colonies collectively become a part of the Commonwealth  of Australia?	When the Constitution of Australia came into force
What were the last days of the Qing dynasty marked by?	civil unrest and foreign invasions.
What did the Qing dynasty attempt to do n the face of civil unrest?	attempt to reform the government in various
What happened to The reformers in the Qing dynasty?	either imprisoned or executed outright.
What caused the revolution against the Qing dynasty?	failures of the Imperial Court to enact such reforming measures of political liberalization and modernization
When was the Republic of China established?	1912
What did China agree to avoid the undermining of the Republic?	agreed to Army's demand that China be united under a Beijing government.
Who had control of the Beiyang army?	Yuan Shikai
Who was Inaugurated in Nanjing as the first provisional president?	Sun Yat-sen
Who was sworn in as the second provisional president of the republic of China?	Beijing, Shikai
What happened to China after the 20th century revolutions?	shifting alliances of China's regional warlords waged war for control of the Beijing government.
Who ultimately gained control of the Beijing government?	various warlords
Why was there not a new era of governance in Beijing?	because other warlords did not acknowledge the transitory governments in this period and were a law unto themselves.
What were the military dominated governments known as?	the Beiyang government
When did the warlord era end?	around 1927
When dd the Russo-Japanese war take place?	Four years into the 20th century
What did the battle of Port Arthur establish?	the Empire of Japan as a world power.
What were the Russians hoping to find in the pacific ocean?	warm water port
Why did the Manchurian Campaign fight the Russians.	over Manchuria and Korea.
How were the Japanese victories over the Russians views around the world?	unexpected
What is the Edwardian era?	the period spanning the reign of King Edward VII up to the end of the First World War,
What event split the United Kingdom into two groups?	Second Boer War
In what year did the Liberals win huge in the general election?	1906
What led to a reduction in the power of the peers?	Conflict between the two Houses of Parliament over the People's Budget
Who held the balance of power in the 1910 election?	Labour and Irish Nationalist members.
What is The Triple Entente?	the name given to the loose alignment between the United Kingdom, France, and Russia after the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente in 1907.
When was the Anglo -Russia Entente signed?	1907.
What was the origin of the war?	the decisions taken by statesmen and generals during the July Crisis of 1914
Who was murdered in Austria?	Archduke Franz Ferdinand
The Triple Entente served as a counter to what agreement?	Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy,
Where was the Baghdad Railway Suppose to connect?	Ottoman Empire cities of Konya and Baghdad with a line through modern-day Turkey, Syria and Iraq
What fundamental cause started the war in 1914?	tensions over territory in the Balkans.
Who did Austria-Hungary war with over territory?	Serbia and Russia
Where did the Balkan wars take place?	South-eastern Europe
Why did Albania fall out with Thessaly, Macedonia and Epirus?	over the division of the spoils
When did the first World War begin?	1914
Who led the Allied powers?	British Empire, France, Russia
Who defeated the Central Powers led by the German Empire Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire??	Japan and the United States
What were the Allied powers referred to before 1917?	Triple Entente
How many Empires did the war cause destruction to?	four empires
Where did most of the fighting in World War I take place?	along the Western Front
What is the Western Front?	a system of opposing manned trenches and fortifications (separated by a "No man's land") running from the North Sea to the border of Switzerland.
What prevented a trench warfare stalemate?	On the Eastern Front, the vast eastern plains and limited rail network
How many soldiers died? in World War I?	More than 9 million
Where did hostiles appear for the first time during the war?	from the air.
In what century did the Nationalistic revolutions occur?	mid-19th century's
How many years after world war I did world war II start?	20 years later.
What withdrew the political boundaries of West Asia?	partitioning of the Ottoman Empire
Who did The League of Nations grant  France mandates over?	Syria and Lebanon
What did the partitioning of the Otto Empire bring about?	the modern Arab world and the Republic of Turkey.
What event happened in October of 1917?	a red faction revolution
What happened when Nicholas II was removed from power?	the Russian Provisional Government was established.
What happened during the red faction revolution?	armed groups of workers and deserting soldiers directed by the Bolshevik Party, seized control of Saint Petersburg
What is the Russian Revolution?	the series of revolutions in Russia in 1917, which destroyed the Tsarist autocracy and led to the creation of the Soviet Union.
When was the armistice signed between Russia and Central powers?	1917
What did Central powers concede in exchange for peace?	huge portions of the former Russian Empire to Imperial Germany and the Ottoman Empire
Who did the Bolsheviks make peace with?	the German Empire
What were Vladimir Lenin's decisions caused by?	his sponsorship by the foreign office of Wilhelm II
Who did the German sponsorship of Lenin's Petrograd upset?	Western Allies
Where did Soviets under the rule of the  Bolshevik first assume power during the Russian Civil War?	Petrograd (St. Petersburg)
In the wake of the October resolution, what happened to the Russian Imperial Army?	demobilized
What was Bolshevik's main military force?	volunteer-based Red Guard
How did the Red red Army overcome their foes?	by taking hostages and shooting them when necessary in order to force compliance.
How were former Tsarist Officers utilized?	as "military specialists"
Who was the principal fighting between?	Bolshevik Red Army and the forces of the White Army.
In what time period did the most brutal battles occur?	1918 to 1920
What general was defeated in 1920?	General Pyotr Wrangel
When did the major military operation end?	25 October 1922
Where did the last Resistance from the White movement occur?	Far East
What did the May Fourth movement help do?	rekindle the then-fading cause of republican revolution.
Sun Yat-Sen became the leader of what military group.	a rival military government in Guangzhou
What did Sun Yat-Sen hope to get from western democracies?	aid
Who did Sun Yet-Sen turn in 1930 for help?	the Soviet Union
How did the Soviets try to befriend  the Chinese Revolutionist?	by offering scathing attacks on Western imperialism.
What is the "Roaring Twenties" ?	social and societal upheaval
What is the "Roaring Twenties" also known as?	The Jazz Age
Where did the "Roaring Twenties" begin?	North America
Where did the "Roaring Twenties"  spread to after the war?	Europe
what did the "Jazz Age" usher in?	an exposition of social, artistic, and cultural dynamism.
When did the hyperinflation of  1923 occur?	1923
Who invested in European debts?	Wall Street
Europe has a large market for what?	American mass-produced goods
What changed worldwide property drasrically?	the onset of the Great Depression
In what year did The wall Street crash occur?	1929
When did the great Depression end?	1930s or early 1940s
What is the Great Depression?	a worldwide economic downturn
The great depression is the worst economic downturn of what century?	20th century
Where did the depression cause negative effects?	virtually every country
How much did international trade fall?	by half to two-thirds,
What happened to construction during the Depression?	virtually halted in many countries
How far did crop prices fall?	60 percent
When did Americas Great Depression end?	1941
Who was the most notable Nationalist Demagogue the people turned to?	Adolf Hitler
In some world states who did the people turn to?	nationalist demagogues
What did the Convulsion caused by the global depression resul in?	the rise of Nazism
When was The League of Nations created?	after the First World War
What was the Interwar period marked by?	radical change in the international order
What institution was meant to bring stability?	the League of Nations
What effect did the  undermining of The league of Nations have on the people?	leading many to question its effectiveness and legitimacy.
Who undermined  The League Of Nations?	bellicosity of Nazi Germany, Imperial Japan, the Soviet Union, and Mussolini's Italy, and by the non-participation of the United States
Who was first to invade Manchuria?	Japan
What is the Abyssinian crisis?	Italy invaded Abyssinia
What is Abyssinia?	one of the only free African nations at that time
When did the Abyssinian crisis occur?	1935/36
Who did The League try to force economic sanctions on?	Italy
When did the seizure of Manchuria occur?	September 1931
Who was named the head of the puppet state after the seizure of Manchuria?	ex-Qing emperor Puyi
What dealt a blow to the Kuomintang economy?	loss of Manchuria, and its vast potential for industrial development and war industries,
In what year did conflict between the Kuomintang and Communist intensify?	1940
What was Kuomintang's main goal pertaining to Communist?	neutralize the spread of Communist influence.
What did the United States place on Japans war efforts?	embargoes
What war saw tensions arise between between Imperial Japan and the United States?	The Second Sino-Japanese War
Who did Imperial Japan sign a Tripartite pact with?	Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
What did the American Embargoes prevent Japan from aquiring?	strategic materials such as scrap metal and oil
Where did Japan attack the United States?	Pearl Harbor
What countries were referred to as "The Trusteeship Of The Powerful"?	The United Kingdom, the United States, the Soviet Union and China
When did the attack on Pearl Harbor occur?	December 7, 1941
What did The United Nations name "The Trusteeship Of The Powerful"	"Four Policemen"
Who were the victors of World War II?	The United Kingdom, the United States, the Soviet Union and China
What Was estimated amount of deaths during the war?	62 million
What percent of the deaths during the war were civilians?	About 60%
What countries suffered the most casualties in the war?	The former Soviet Union and China
What percentage of it's population did Poland lose in the war?	16%,
How many deaths did the Soviet Union suffer in the war?	23 million
What is the Holocaust?	was the deliberate and systematic murder of millions of Jews and other "unwanted"
During what word event did the Holocaust happen?	during World War II
Who is responsible for the Holocaust?	Nazi regime in Germany.
How did the Nazis conjure up anti-Semitic feelings in civilians?	propaganda
When did the suffering of the Jews begin?	before the war even started
What was Europe split into after World War II?	Western and Soviet spheres of influence.
Who battled in the cold war?	United States and the Soviet Union.
What does the term NATO represent?	North Atlantic Treaty Organization
What did the defeat of Japan mean for Asia?	led to its democratization.
What did China name themselves after the war?	the People's Republic of China.
By what percentage did the world's per-capita gross domestic product grow by during the 20th century?	a factor of five
What has Modern medicine increased the average life expectancy by?	two decades
What happened to the income gap between the rich and the poor?	the gulf between the world's rich and poor grew wider
What did the media industry make possible in the middle of the century?	brutal dictatorships
What did the brutal dictatorships caused by the media lead to?	wars
What did increased communications lead contribute to?	democratization
What time period did technological advances lead to?	the Information Age
what did the Soviet Union annex some of it's territory as?	Soviet Socialist Republics
What did the territory the Soviet Union maintained as satellite states, later became known as?	the Warsaw Pact
The United States and many Western countries began what policy to fight communism?	"containment"
What did the soviets opposed rebuilding?	rebuilding of western Europe
What actions of the Soviet Union did The United States oppose?	the Soviet Union fostered communist revolutionary movements,
Through what time period did the Berlin Blockade  last?	1948–1949
What types of periods did the cold war see?	heightened tension and relative calm.
Through what time period did the Korean War last?	1950–1953)
Through what time period did the Vietnam war last?	1959–1975
When did the Cuban Missile crisis happen?	1962
During what time was the cold war close to happening?	1980s and the early 1990s
What did  the Reagan administration increase on the Soviet Union?	diplomatic, military, and economic pressure
What was  the Soviet Union suffering from in the 1980's?	severe economic stagnation
What did Mikhail Gorbachev introduce?	introduced the perestroika and glasnost reforms.
In what year did the Soviet Union collapse?	1991
What caused Latin America's right-wing authorities to support coup o'etats?	in the 1970s, leftists acquired a significant political influence
Why did the Latin Americas Upper class support coup o'etats?	to avoid what they perceived as a communist threat.
The regimes in the southern cone collaborated in killing of who?	leftist dissidents
What did all countries restore in the 1990's	their democracies.
Where did the United States support dictatorships in the 1970"s?	South American countries
What is the space age?	a period encompassing the activities related to the Space Race, space exploration, space technology, and the cultural developments influenced by these events.
Who launched  Sputnik 1?	the Soviet Union.
How long does did it take for the Sputnik 1 to orbit the earth?	98.1 minutes
What did Sputnik 1 usher in?	The Space Age
How many people watched the Apollo 11 landing?	500 million
What types of control are considered when labeling a country with the perjorative "51st state" label?	excessive American cultural or military influence or control
Sometimes, when a country refers to themselves as the 51st state, what has happened to their culture?	their local or national culture has become too Americanized
What reasoning would cause a country to be referred to as the "51st state" in a positive way?	a region or territory is so aligned, supportive, and conducive with the United States, that it is like a U.S. state
What is a positive connotation of the label "51st state"?	a region or territory is so aligned, supportive, and conducive with the United States
What is a reason for one negative connotation of the term?	an area or region is perceived to be under excessive American cultural or military influence or control
If a country refers to themselves as the "51st state" after cultural changes, what can we assume has changed?	their local or national culture has become too Americanized
What does Article IV, Section three of the US Constitution outline?	the relationship among the states
Article IV, Section Three of th United States Constitution gives Congress the power to do what?	the power to admit new states to the union
What does the states' requirement to give "full faith and credit" help recognize?	legal contracts, marriages, and criminal judgments
What are all states guaranteed by the federal government?	military and civil defense
What does Article 4, Section 4 guarantee?	guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government
What part of the US Constitution outlines the relationship among the states?	Article IV, Section Three
What does the concept of "full faith and credit" protect?	the recognition of legal contracts, marriages, and criminal judgments
Article IV, Section Three allows Congress to do what?	admit new states to the union
What is guaranteed to the states by the federal government?	military and civil defense
What country has been regarded as a potential new addition to the United States?	Puerto Rico has been discussed as a potential 51st state of the United States
What percentage of voters expressed dissatisfaction with their current political relationship?	54%
What percentage of voters supported statehood?	61%
When did Puerto Rico resolve to request that the United States act on these results?	December 11, 2012
What would be an ideal reaction from the United States, according to Puerto Rico?	end the current form of territorial status and begin the process of admitting Puerto Rico to the Union as a state
What territory has been suggested as a new addition to the United States?	Puerto Rico
What percentages of voters expressed unhappiness with the current political relationship between the U.S. and Puerto Rico?	54%
When did the legislature of Puerto Rico request that they be considered for statehood?	December 11, 2012
How long has Puerto Rico had representation in Congress?	Since 1898
Who represents Puerto Rico in Congress?	a Resident Commissioner
Which Congress gave the commissioner the power to vote?	The 110th Congress
What is the commissioner not allowed to vote on?	on matters where the vote would represent a decisive participation
What types of taxes do Puerto Ricans pay?	U.S. federal taxes
What makes up the federal taxes Puerto Rican citizens pay?	import/export taxes, federal commodity taxes, social security taxes
How else can they serve the U.S.?	Puerto Ricans may enlist in the U.S. military.
How many Puerto Ricans have died in the Iraq War and War in Afghanistan?	52
In the aftermath of which war was the U.S. granted Puerto Rico?	Spanish–American War
What country handed over Puerto Rico to the US?	Spain
How long have Puerto Ricans been U.S. citizens?	since 1917
What form of government do the Puerto Ricans have?	republican
How was the Puerto Rican constitution brought about?	the U.S. Congress directed local government to organize a constitutional convention to write the Puerto Rico Constitution
When was the Puerto Rican constitution written?	1951
When was the constitution accepted by the electorate, U.S. Congress, and U.S. President?	1952
What clause gives Puerto Rican citizens the same rights as US citizens?	Privileges and Immunities Clause
How is Puerto Rico designated in its constitution?	Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
What title does the country have?	Estado Libre Asociado (literally translated as "Free Associated State")
What act was approved on April 29th, 2010?	The Puerto Rico Democracy Act (H.R. 2499)
What is the island under jurisdiction of?	Territorial Clause of the U.S. Constitution
What percentage of voters rejected the status of territory?	54 percent
What percentage of voters preferred statehood?	61 percent
What percentage of voters abstained from voting on a preferred alternative status?	one in four voters
What argument do those opposing statehood use?	the statehood option garnered only 45 percent of the votes if abstentions are included
What newspaper suggested that Congress would ignore Puerto Rico's referendum?	The Hill
What newspapers have published opinion pieces expressing support for Puerto Rico's statehood?	The Washington Post, The New York Times and the Boston Herald
When was that article published?	November 8, 2012
What Congress members agreed with the Hill's assesment?	U.S. Congressman Luis Gutiérrez U.S. Congresswoman Nydia Velázquez
What politicians pushed for statehood for Puerto Rico?	Resident Commissioner Pedro Pierluisi, Governor Luis Fortuño
What politician fought against statehood for Puerto Rico?	Governor-elect Alejandro García Padilla
How did these politicians voice their concerns?	wrote separate letters to the President of the United States Barack Obama
What was the White House stance?	the results were clear, the people of Puerto Rico want the issue of status resolved
When was H.R. 2000 introduced?	On May 15, 2013
What did Senator Heinrich's bill require?	a binding referendum to be held in Puerto Rico asking whether the territory wants to be admitted as a state.
What would happen in the event of a yes vote in this referendum?	the president would be asked to submit legislation to Congress to admit Puerto Rico as a state
What would H.R. 2000 do?	set forth the process for Puerto Rico to be admitted as a state of the Union
Who considered the implications of the definition of the seat of government in the Constitution?	James Madison
Where are these ideas located in the Federalist Papers?	Federalist No. 43
What limits does the constitution have for the size of Washington, D.C.?	the Constitution does not set a minimum size for the District
What caused the size of Washington, D.C. to change?	Virginia reclaimed the portion of the District south of the Potomac
What Revolutionary War motto have Washington, D.C. statehood supporters modified and used?	"No taxation without representation", omitting the initial "No"
What does the phrase protest?	their lack of Congressional representation
In what way has the phrase been spread wide?	the phrase is now printed on newly issued Washington, D.C. license plates
When did  Obama have the protest plates put on his Presidential limousine?	at the beginning of his second term
What party carried the position of D.C. Statehood?	D.C. Statehood Party
What party did the D.C. Statehood Party merge when?	the local Green Party affiliate
When did the movement get closest to success?	1978
What would be the new name of the D.C. State?	New Columbia
When did the drive for statehood falter?	1985
What is another likely country for statehood?	Guam
What is another likely country for statehood?	United States Virgin Islands
What entity reported on Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands becoming one again?	Radio Australia
What country had small grassroots movement for US Statehood?	The Philippines
What party used to be known as the Federalista Party?	Federalista Party
What was the most recent year of the Phillipines pushing for statehood?	2004
What is another connotation for the 51st state label?	if a certain political course is taken, Canada's destiny will be as little more than a part of the United States
When was the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement enacted?	1988
When was the Charlottetown Accord signed?	1992
When did the Clarity Act go into effect?	1999
Who suggested that the Free Trade Agreement amounted to an American takeover of Canada?	Liberals
When was this campaign ran?	In the 1988 federal election
Who erased the border in the ad?	Progressive Conservative (PC) strategists
What was the slogan of this ad?	"Here's where we draw the line."
When did Quebec land in British hands?	1763
When did Ontario land in British hands?	1763
During which the US invade Canada?	the War of 1812
What did several US politicians suggest doing in the 19th century?	annexing Canada
When were the last days of the Dominion of Newfoundland?	In the late 1940s
What did the Economic Union Party support?	an independent "responsible government"
What was the result of the 1948 referendum?	The movement ultimately failed
What does Canada being referred to as the 51st state in a positive way mean in the US, generally?	can serve to highlight the similarities and close relationship between the United States and Canada
What is a negative connotation of the term?	to deride Canada as an unimportant neighbor
How man votes did Parti 51 attract in 1989?	just 3,846 votes
What did the other parties receive that year?	40.16% (PQ) and 1.22% (NPDQ)
When did Panama have the US-ruled Canal Zone Territory?	from 1903 to 1979
When did El Salvador adopt the US Dollar as its currency?	2001
When did the British Honduras become Belize?	since 1981
What country was Cuba a territory of?	Spain
What battleship sunk in the Havana Harbor?	Maine
When did Fidel Castro overthrow the Cuban government?	1959
What government did Castro install?	Marxist–Leninist government
Why is Israel referred to as the 51st state?	the annual funding and defense support it receives from the United States
What book did Martine Rothblatt publish?	Two Stars for Peace
When was Two Stars for Peace published?	2003
Who wrote the book The American State of Canaan?	Alfred de Grazia
When did Artcle 3 of the Treaty of San Francisco come into effect?	April 1952
How many people lived on the island of Okinawa?	over 1 million
When was Okinawa finally returned?	May 15, 1972
Why did the US have troops on Okinawa?	as a defense for Japan.
When did the 51st State Party attempt to register in New Zealand?	2010
Who is the secretary of the 51st State Party?	Paulus Telfer
What does the 51st State Party advocate?	The party advocates New Zealand becoming the 51st state of the United States of America
Can people in New Zealand vote for the 51st State Party?	the party remains unregistered and cannot appear on a ballot.
Who is the mayor of Tirana?	Edi Rama,
Who said that Albania is the most pro-American country in Europe?	Edi Rama
When did James Baker visit Albania as Secretary of State?	1992
What is the name of the largest US military base outside of US territory?	Camp Bondsteel
When did the US control Greenland?	when Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany
How much did the US offer to pay for Greenland?	$100 million
What university is professor Gudmundur Alfredssson from?	University of Akureyri
What is one reason the US would be interested in Greenland?	the vast expected hydrocarbons off the Greenlandic coast.
What had been Poland's stance towards the US, historically?	staunchly pro-American
What led to the creation of an independent Poland?	favorable American intervention in World War I
What did Poland contribute to the "Coalition of the Willing"?	a large force
How many members did the Party of Reconstruction in Sicily have in 1944?	40,000 members
What did the Party of Reconstruction in Sicily campaign for?	for Sicily to be admitted as a U.S. state
When did the annexation of Sicily by Italy happen?	1861
When did the Allied invasion of Sicily occur?	July–August 1943
What are the four categories of terra nullius?	the small unclaimed territory of Bir Tawil between Egypt and Sudan, Antarctica, the oceans, and celestial bodies
What three treaties exist for unclaimed lands?	the Antarctic Treaty, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and the Outer Space Treaty
What do the treaties defend against?	prevent colonization and potential statehood of any of these uninhabited (and, given current technology, not permanently inhabitable) territories.
Where is Bir Tawil located?	between Egypt and Sudan
What device is able to change electric powerinto radio waves and also do the reverse?	An antenna
What device is often used in conjuntion with the antenna?	radio transmitter or radio receiver
What process associated with antennas produces a high frequency alternating current?	transmission
What else can radio waves be called?	electromagnetic waves
When does an antenna catch electromagnetic waves?	reception
What is frequently used to connect elements to the receiver?	transmission line
During transmission does the electric field wave move closer to the antenna?	radiate away
What particles are pushed through the antenna by a transmitter?	electrons
During what process would electrons be vacillating in the antenna?	reception
What is an acceptable synonym for antenna?	aerial
What can sometimes be meant by the term aerial specifically?	wire antenna
What is one way of referring to more than one antenna?	antennae
What is the most widely accepted term for an electrical device that converts electric power into radio waves?	antenna
Who is most associated with the emergence of the word antenna?	Guglielmo Marconi
When did experimentation with electromagnetic waves begin?	1895
What is a way to increase the strength of a radio transmission?	raising the "aerial" wire
How far was Marconi able to get his signal to go using this technique?	1.5 mi
What is essential for the mating of the elements that create radio waves?	Antennas
How fast are signals produced by antenna transmitted?	speed of light
What is one system that uses electromagnetic waves?	mobile telephones
What mobile locator and direction finder technology takes advantage of radio waves?	GPS
What often inconspicuous part of a laptop computer allows for internet usage?	antennas
What is the main element of an omnidirectional antenna?	metal rod
What type of antenna would most likely be a half a wavelength long?	dipole
In which direction would you expect to find a dipole?	horizontally
What is meant by the area where signals cannot be accepted well along the conductor?	null
Are basic antennas expensive?	relatively inexpensive
What is the foundation most often used when creating new antenna models?	dipole antenna
What category do vertical antennas fall under?	monopole antenna
What is used to close the circuit of a dipole antenna?	large conductive surface
What are different designs aimed at increasing?	gain of the antenna
What is different from a monopole antenna with most other antenna types?	balanced line
Gain when referring to an antenna refers to what about radiated power?	concentration
Where is the power that is distributed originating from?	the transmitter
How many antenna would make up a phased array?	two or more
What determines if the antenna creates a broadside array or an end fire array?	relative phase
What are the two standard antenna types?	omnidirectional or weakly directional
How are antennas oriented when arranged with specific spacing?	parallel
What type of antenna formation is made up of multiple dipole elements of varying lengths?	log-periodic dipole array
What is the benefit of this formation type?	extremely wide bandwidth
What is a variation of this antenna type?	Yagi-Uda Antenna
What is the main application of these set ups?	television reception
For radio broadcast that one would hear in their car what type of towers are used?	vertical
If one wished to take an antenna to different locations, which type would be best?	short vertical antenna
Why is this specific antenna type used?	achieve directionality
What is a problem one might encounter when using a portable antenna?	impedance matching
What is mainly responsible for the connection of the antenna to its end destinations?	antenna lead-in
What is the group of elements used to join the elements of an antenna?	antenna feed
What are the type of antennas used with satellite television called?	aperture antenna
What can be used in place of  a standard transmission line?	microwave antenna
Monopole antennas consist of what element?	metal rod
What are small monopoles used as?	nondirectional antennas
What the most common form?	quarter-wave monopole
What has vertical polarization?	Monopoles
What is the most widley used antenna class?	dipole antenna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 What radiates two lobes perpendicular to the antennas axis?	horizontal dipole
Besides low gain antennas, what is also used as driven elements in complicated higher gain types of antennas?	dipoles
How much gain does a half-wave dipole have?	2.15 dBi
What must be true of the antenna and transmission medium for the repiprocity rule to apply ?	linear and reciprocal
What is one material that does not have this quality?	ferrite
How can the lack of this quality be used in an everyday way?	radar
What is called when the direction of the elctrical current does not make a difference to the current?	Reciprocal
How could one deide what type of antenna is nedded for a project?	performance measures
What would most likely be the main concern in making this decision?	directional characteristics
How would you distribute power to allow for a greater gain?	horizontal directions
What is often the most imprtant crediting factor of antennas?	efficiency
Which antenna type would be best for a project requiring a specific frequency?	Resonant antennas
How could an antenna be made to coordinate with the needed frequency?	built or ordered
What factor would result in a desired feedback independence?	particular antenna design
If you were unable to choose the antenna you wanted how could you still achieve this result?	matching network
What is the essential difference in radio waves transmitted by an antenna?	polarization
How can this be adjusted more easily than changing antenna types?	tilting the axis
When might the size of an antenna cause an issue?	at lower frequencies
What size antenna would not be good when the antenna needs to be directional?	small
There is a relationship between the size of the antenna and the size of the wavelength with what antenna type?	Highly directional
What particle's migration does the resonance principle rely on?	electrons
What is the basis for the way most antennas are developed?	resonance principle
What type of surface is formed by the tip of a conductor?	reflective
How would you place the conductor in relation to the signal you wished to obtain?	perpendicular
What part of the radio signal creates voltage?	electrical component
What would the electric current always gravitate to?	instantaneous field
What is the outcome when a curren is reflected>	180 degree change in phase
What amount of phase change would return a signal to its originial state?	360 degree
What is the most popular antenna type?	half-wave dipole
What is the current usually beng put into it or pulled out of?	transmission line
Elements in a half wave dipole and on an identical axis are said to be what?	collinear
What antenna type is a portion of the half wave dipole?	Monopoles
What popular type combines more that one antenna?	folded dipole
What frequency are antennas normally designed to be?	f0
What can be added to f0 to create a standing wave pattern?	3f0
What multiple is essential for wavelengths?	1⁄4
How are waves which are used in the ways discussed controlled?	harmonically
How do quarter wave elements act in relation to a series relevant electrical element?	imitate
What frequency develops a current peak?	resonant frequency
How would you describe a current that has maximum efficiency?	minimum reactance
What could be the best possible output versus input ratio?	lossless
For use with more than one channel changes are made to increase what property?	impedance matching
What could be coupled with an antenna to form pure resistance?	inductance
What element would this pure resistance be coupled with?	transmission line
What phrase describes the process of purposely using a lower standing antenna at a less than peak frequency?	electrical lengthening
 If your were unable to match the source frequency with the design frequency of the antenna what could you use?	resonant multiples
What is the most common application of resonant antennas?	single target signal
What antenna setup type is generally used for TV viewing?	resonant
For use with more than one channel changes are made to increase what property?	bandwidth
What accounts for the geometry involved in the use of an antenna?	inverse square law
 How is the compactness of the signal measured?	Watts per square metre
What type of project would call for more than one element used together?	higher performance
What is a half wave dipole need to be coupled with in most instances?	feed point
What part of the current is usually strongest?	center
What does this result in?	standing wave pattern
Element used to provide support to the original signal are called?	passive elements
What can take advantage of these elements to add more gain?	Yagi-Uda array
Does this device improve the operation of the antenna?	does not contribute
What is the name for passive elements nearer to the source of the signal?	directors
Adding more elements to a Yagi-Uda would have what effect?	increasingly directional
What can be paired with transmission lines to create phases that would support output?	active elements
What is the most common element used to create a single in phase signal?	half-wave dipoles
What must be precise in order to create this signal at output?	phase lengths
What is a more complicated occurrence of the single in-phase producing antenna?	log-periodic
If you wanted to somehow clone the original signal you could use?	extended conductive surface
What effect would the use of a reflector have on a signal?	increase
What allowance can be made for gaps without loss of performance?	less than 1⁄10
What is the most recognized type of an antenna that has its basis in reflection?	parabolic reflector
What magnifies the small radiation resistance of a loop?	a capacitor at the frequency of operation
What is resonated by a capacitor along with the receiver tuning that maintains resonance over the AM broadcast band?	small ferrite loop antenna
What is used in most AM broadcaster receivers?	loop
When using a small loop antenna at a low frequency, what may occur?	impedance matching
What is left after antenna tuning?	resistive impedance
Where does cancellation of any reactance seen?	antenna terminals
What can be used to cancel a inductibe reactance or residual capacitative?	parallel capacitance
What is an antenna designed to have?	purely resistive feedpoint
What type of antenna has impedance at a specific frequency?	resonant
What term can be used to refer to the usable spectrum of an antennas frequency?	bandwidth
What causes the frequencies outside of the bandwidth to be unusable?	impedance match
What is lessened by the Yagi-Uda design?	directivity
What characteristic of the conductor changes the amount of reactance?	diameter
What characteristic would be better if it were steady?	reactance
What would be used to create a half wave or quarter wave dipole?	A long thin wire
What type of tubes are generally used for sturdier always of antennas?	thick tubes
What effect do cages have on the spectrum of usable frequencies?	widens
What type of tubes are generally used for sturdier always of antennas?	cages
How could one achieve the task of creating an antenna that can be Used over various bands?	connecting resonant elements
What is an essential for dealing with directing the flow of power?	trap's
What is an acknowledgement of the range of possible direction for and antenna?	gain
What is another way to refer to an antennas gain?	power gain
What is the meaning of intensity?	power per unit surface area
What type of an antenna would offer the same level of power to each possible destination?	isotropic
Antennas with higher gain have what positive feature?	longer range
What is a measure of how much efficient is improved by adding a device designed to make something stronger?	amplifier gain
Dish network Tv takes example of what type of antenna?	parabolic dish
What type of antenna would be best if placement was tricky?	Low-gain
What must the relationship of an antenna and the receiving area be due to reciprocity?	proportional
what could an antenna with complete electrical efficiency be said to have?	no loss
Another term for the effective area is?	Aeff
hat could an antenna with complete electrical efficiency be said to have?	1
A plot of the radiation behaviors of an antenna would show what?	relative field strength
What type of pictoral aid is often used to show this?	three-dimensional graph
 A sphere shows what type of antennas radiation?	isotropic
Dipoles are considered to be what antenna type?	nondirectional
What would an omnidirectional antenna look like if plotted?	donut
What is the term that refers to areas where an antennas radiation is zero?	nulls
What do radio waves do that account for maxima or nulls in an antenna pattern?	interfere
If you desired to project radio waves to the south, what part of the antenna would you build larger in that direction?	lobe
What is the main distinction of side lobes?	represent unwanted radiation
What is one piece that makes up an antenna system?	radio
What is created by a portion of a radio waves energy reversing?	standing wave
A term that refers to the highs and lows of power in electro magnetic waves is?	standing wave ratio
Impedance matching makes an important difference in what antenna function?	power transfer
A measure of the power that is useable and the power absorbed by the terminals?	Efficiency
What happens to the power that is not absorbed by the antenna?	heat
What can cause that reaction?	magnetic core losses
What can cause that reaction?	transmitter
What would need to be placed into the transmitter to create ten W oh warmth?	100 W
What would need to be investigated to determine how much power was radiated?	electrical measurements
What factor may play a hand in lessened power from a transmitter?	impedance matching
What can increase the feedpoint impedance of a component?	loss resistance
The addition of Rr and Rloss equals what?	resistance
What equation an determine an antennas effectiveness?	Rr / (Rr + Rloss)
What is the single factor that can be precisely measured?	total resistance
What is the median level for measuring atmospheric noise?	thermal noise floor
In what type of programs would low efficiency antennas not make a difference in effectiveness?	receiving
At lesser frequencies what can account for incorrect assumptions about efficiency?	man-made noise
What is SNR?	signal to noise ratio
What else is also known as power gain?	antenna gain
What is used to signal toward a reciever?	transmitter
Which gain does not iclude the effect of an antenna?	directive gain
Wats divided by the antennas efficiency?	published gain
Small and minimal frequency antennas are know to be what?	inefficient
What is added to to increase ability for reception?	small loop antenna
How would this antenna rate in the greater scheme of things?	little effect
When talking about much larger network what effect can reduced antenna effectiveness have?	substantial cost
How many polarizations will a antenna have when mounted vertically?	one
What is another name for electric-field?	E-plane
When is a magnetic fields right angles to a electrical field?	transverse wave
Whats understood in reference of direction of an E-plane?	polarization
What mostly affects polarization?	Reflections
What reflector can change the waves polarization?	ionosphere
What will you be matching with the  receiving antenna's polarization?	transmitter
What stays the same regarding polarization state at the recieving location?	polarized transmissions
What is the name used for signals recieved following reflection by the ionosphere?	a skywave
Whats predictable about an antenna's geometry?	Polarization
The polarization of what antenna is essential specification?	commercial antenna
Most rooftop antenna's are polarized in which direction?	horizontal
What is a more complicated type of polarization from an antenna's geometry?	quad antenna
What are electrical fields projected on to?	imaginary plane
What is the imagenary plane perpindicular to?	radio wave
What is the name to describe polarization of radio waves varies over times?	elliptical
How many directions does the E-plane of the radio waves oscillates back and forth?	one direction
What is the best for an recieving antenna for optimum reception?	match the polarization
What loses signal strength?	Intermediate matchings
What is used to match vertical and horizontal linear polarizations?	circularly polarized
A transmission can cause reduction in what?	signal-to-noise ratio
What requires matching of the empedance to an antenna system?	Maximum power transfer
Why would a transmitter have additional adjustments?	"tweak" the match
What is SWR?	standing wave ratio
What is the desired design value for transmmiting circuitry?	50 ohms
What can be shorter than 1/4 wavelength long?	whip antenna
What is the opposite of inductive reactance?	capacitative reactance
What is at the base of the antenna?	loading coil
Where is the resistance seen on the loading foil?	feedpoint
What is not adjustable when it comes to a transformer?	turns ratio
How many ohms are in are in a standard coax?	50 or 75
A general matching network needs a minimum of how many adjustments to correct all components of impedance?	two adjustments
What is included between the transmission line and the antenna element?	balun
A balun should be integrated into what?	matching network
What antenna's are nonresonant?	traveling wave antennas
How long are the wire antenna's that the voltage and current waves travel in the same direction?	one direction
What are undirectional traveling wave directions terminated by?	resistor
What antenna does not have linear polarization?	helical antenna
What is the resistor equal to?	antenna's characteristic resistance
What is the radiation patter influenced by?	dielectric constant
The ground is important for what antenna?	terrestrial antenna
Whats another name for the ground?	artificial ground plane
What does the artificial ground plane do for the antenna current?	return connection
What is the net quality of the ground dependent of?	topography
What is the reason for the receiver seeing both the ral antenna and image of the antenna?	reflection
What frequencies is associated with shorter wavelengths?	higher frequencies
When will reflections not be coherent?	ground has irregularities
What is the refractive index of the ground?	n=2
When is polarized radiation reversed?	reflection
What is the refractive index of air?	n=1
Besides a ground, what has these phases apply well to?	electrical conductor
Who proposed this theory?	Fresnel coefficients
Is the ground has a great conductor, how much of the wave will be reflected?	180° out of phase
what is reflected and transmitted into the ground when a plane surface is struck?	electromagnetic wave
What depends on the polarization and waves angle?	power remaining
What is the portion of something that is reached by the radio transmission called?	aperture
What effects the function of signals received by an antenna?	direction
What is a measure of the power of an antenna?	microvolts
How much power will be delivered to the reciever if the antenna has an effective area of 12 m/2?	12 pW of RF power
The properties of a usable radio frequency can be called its?	Q
What is a measure of the comparison between reactance and resistance?	Q
What is the largest Q that could be achieved with a slimmer band antenna?	15
What type of element would be used to encounter less reactance?	thick
What can be added to allow for an antenna shorter than the needed height to produce desired results?	loading coil
How would the resistive impedance from this scenario compare to if the antenna was the proper height?	lower
The coil has lengthed the antenna to reach how much length electrically?	2.5 meters
What is the major thing that sets the size of antennas at lower frequencies?	reactance
How big would an antenna be used to with with one m wavelengths?	50 cm
How could the rection of output be adressed by?	changing the matching system
 What unit is used to measure current?	ampere
What effect occurs when the signal is reflected back into the antenna?	reducing output
What sort of changes in material would a current reflect?	electrical
 What must match between the transmission line and elements?	impedance
What technique is used to prevent unintentional decrease in signal?	Impedance matching
How is this process usually used for transmission lines and antennas?	balun
What is used to allow one to control the function of wave fronts moving through an antenna?	selectively delay
What changes the structuak traits of a wave on either side?	refractor
What is the main purpose of a refractor?	spatial characteristics
A refractor can be compared to what type of viewing?	optical lens
What can receive a stron signal by transmitting an original wave?	actual antenna
Where will the additional current be induced?	antenna element
What is altered because of the proximity to the ground?	antenna's impedance
what happens to the reflected wave which allows the antenna to reach its asympotic feedpoint impedance?	reduced power
What is between recieving and transmitting antenna's?	horizontal propagation
When is the emission at maximized recieved signal?	polarized vertically
Where is the radiation patterns in the vertical plane shown?	image at right
What is also increased along with the antenna's height?	lobes
What is another name for classical television transmissions?	analog
Buildings can create ghost images because of what?	multipath propagation
When is ghosting reduced?	horizontal polarization
What cause less problems in digital terrestrial television?	Vertically polarized analog television
Where are the indiviual array elements known?	antenna arrays
What induces a feedpoint to antennas nearby?	Current circulating
What are the mathmatic useful towards?	electrical behaviour
What cause mutual interactions between the elements electric and magnetic fields?	proximity
a antenna element not connected to anything is circuited how?	open circuited
When is the element not allowed voltage?	short circuited
What element absorbs and reradiate RF-energy?	Parasitic
What antenna can the solid rod be viewed as a dipole antenna?	Yagi-Uda
Where can this solid rod be viewed?	feedpoint
What type of programmin relies on vertical polarization?	broadcasting
If you were to position your receiver closer to the ground what might be a negative of this placement?	cancellation
What is one use that would require an antenna to receive signals in various ways at once?	mobile phones
If you were to develop a signal to be used with mobile phones what would be an effective antenna type?	circular polarization.
What would the antenna you are using take advantage of to allow it to work in multiple locations?	mixed polarization
What type of antenna can be formed by a circular segment of wire?	Loop antennas
What is a loop antenna compared with to determine its beahvior?	circumference of a wavelength
If you needed to place an antenna somewhere with a large amount of interference, which type would be best?	loops small
Why would this type be good for receiving but not transmtting?	low radiation resistance
What else would be an effective application of this antenna type?	direction finding
Are essential properties of an antenna changed based on what fungtion they are performing	the same
What proposition explains the equivalency of the recieving pattern of an antenna?	reciprocity theorem of electromagnetics
Can the antenna serve more than one fungtion at a time?	either transmitting or receiving
What is one electrical trait of an antenna?	radiation pattern
What are the most diverse group of land plants?	angiosperms
How many species of flowering plants are there about?	350,000
What does an angiosperm produce its seeds within?	an enclosure
What do angiosperms have in common with gymnosperms?	seed-producing plants
What is the Greek word for "case" or "casing"?	angeion
How long have higher plants lived on land?	at least 475 million years
How did early plants reproduce sexually?	with flagellated, swimming sperm
Upright meisporangia allowed what to be dispersed to new habitats?	spores
What are the nearest algal relatives existing today?	Charophycean green algae
What is the common name for Selaginella?	the spike-moss
What did Charles Darwin call the sudden appearance of nearly modern flowers in the fossil record?	abominable mystery
What type of fossil is the recently discovered Archaefructus?	angiosperm
What fossil evidence is lacking when it comes to flowers?	evidence showing exactly how flowers evolved
From what period does fossilized pollen suggest an older date for angiosperm origin?	Middle Triassic
What relationship proposed on the basis of morphological evidence has recently been disputed?	relationship between angiosperms and gnetophytes
How many distinct rounds of genome duplication events are suspected in the evolution of seed plants?	two
When did the first whole genome duplication event occur?	319 million years ago
What type of event perhaps created the line which led to modern flowering plants?	whole genome duplication
How are duplication events studied?	by sequencing the genome of an ancient flowering plant
Who coined the term "abominable mystery"?	Darwin
When is the earliest known macrofossil identified as an angiosperm dated?	about 125 million years BP
What is the earliest known angiosperm?	Archaefructus liaoningensis
What pushes the age of angiosperm 5 million years further back?	pollen
How long ago has circumstantial evidence has been found for the existence of angiosperms?	250 million years ago
What group of now extinct seed plants had many of the traits of what are now flowering plants?	Gigantopterids
When does a great diversity of angiosperms appear in the fossil record?	approximately 100 million years ago
What is the appearance of a large amount of angiosperms in the fossil record known as?	great angiosperm radiation,
When did the division of the eight main groups of angiosperms occur?	40 million years ago
What were the angiosperms up to by the late Cretaceous?	dominated environments
Beech and maple had already appeared by what period?	Cretaceous
What is one proposed explanation for the instant appearance of flowering plants?	Island genetics
What is island genetics thought to be a default source of?	speciation
What did radical adaptations seem to have required?	inferior transitional forms
How did an isolated setting like an island help flowering plants evolve?	highly specialized relationship with some specific animal
What are bees descended from?	wasps
What are animals also a part of?	distribution of seeds
What did the enlargement of flower parts evolve to form?	Fruit
What does a plant get out of forming fruit?	seed-dispersal
What are many mutualistic relationships, thus failing to survive competition?	fragile
What turned out to be unusually effective for plants to reproduce?	flowering
What uses a combination of genes to form new shoots?	Flower ontogeny
What were plant parts like in their primitive days?	separate from (but in contact with) each other
How did flowers become bixsexual?	grow in a spiral pattern
What did some plant parts do as they evolved?	fused together
What is a term for a plant with a specific sex per flower?	"ovary-inferior"
How long has flower evolution occurred?	present day
What heritage do many modern domesticated flower species have?	formerly simple weeds
Humans have effected some flowers so much they can no longer do what in nature?	pollinated
Why did weeds grow with human crops?	symbiotic companion plant relationships
What feature helped flowers not get plucked?	prettiest
What three groups were the first to diverge from angiosperm?	Amborellales, Nymphaeales, and Austrobaileyales
What term refers to the first three groups to diverge from angiosperm?	basal
How clear is the relationship between the broadest of the three non-basal angiosperm groups?	unclear
What group do some analyses seem to indicate diverged first?	magnoliids
What term did Paul Hermann come up with in 1690?	Angiosperm
What did Hermann use the term angiosperm a primary division of in the plant kingdom?	primary
Who restricted the application of the angiosperm term?	Carl Linnaeus
What did Robert Brown establish the existence of in Cycadeae and Coniferae?	naked ovules
What is the group-name angiosperm has been used for by botanical writers?	other dicotyledonous plants
In taxonomies, what type of group are flowering plants treated?	coherent
What does anthophyta mean?	flowering plants
What do the Wettstein and Engler systems use at the assigned rank of subdivision?	Angiospermae
How does the APG system of 1998, with its 2003 and 2009 revisions, treat flowering plants?	a clade called angiosperms
What formal subclass classification were flowering plants given in 2009?	Magnoliidae
What consensus is the AGP trying to reach?	how the flowering plants should be arranged
What internal component has undergone considerable revision?	classification
What system did Arthur Cronquist put forth in 1968, but not publish in full form until 1981?	The Cronquist system
Who published an influential reclassification of the angiosperms in 1998?	APG
What type of groups do monocots form, based on a recent APG studies?	monophyletic
Eudicots or tricolpates are part of a monophyletic group formed by what species?	dicot
What third major clade can many dicot species be found in?	magnoliids
How many species dicot species are magnoliids?	about 9,000
Basal angiosperms are what type of grouping of primitive species?	paraphyletic
What is the estimated range for the number of flowering plants?	250,000 to 400,000
How many species of moss is there?	12,000
What does the large number of flowering plant species indicate is true of them in general?	diverse
What are the minimum number of families in the APG system?	402
How many families are in AGP III?	415
What shape are the bundles in the young stem of dicotyledons arranged in?	an open ring
What does the cambium separate?	xylem and phloem
What is a layer of meristem or formative tissue known as?	cambium
What results from the development of xylem on the inside and phloem on the outside?	increase in thickness
What's another name for the concentric rings in trees?	annual rings
What is the defining feature of angiosperms?	flower
What characteristic flowers show variation in?	form and elaboration
What do flowers provide the best external feature for doing?	establishing relationships among angiosperm species
What is it the function of the flower to ensure fertilization of?	the ovule
What is the name of a branch system?	inflorescence
What is a willow's flower comprised of?	only a few stamens or two carpels
What have some structures evolved to protect?	the sporophylls
What appearance are calyx of sepals typically?	green and leaf-like
Individual members of enveloping structures are known by what terms?	sepals and petals
The features of flowers which attract pollinators also attract what other creature?	humans
What sexual feature do a majority of flowers demonstrate?	hermaphrodite
Why did flowering plants develop numerous morphological and physiological mechanisms?	reduce or prevent self-fertilization
Why are a heteromorphic flower's carpels and stamens different lengths?	so animal pollinators cannot easily transfer pollen to the pistil
What type of mechanism might homomorphic flowers use to tell the difference between foreign and self pollen grains?	biochemical
How are some male and female parts separated for some species?	different flowers
What process does double fertilization refer to?	two sperm cells fertilize cells in the ovary
What does a pollen grain adhere to, to start the process of double fertilization?	the stigma of the pistil
What type of cell travels down the pollen tube while it's growing?	haploid generative
Where does the pollen tube release its sperm cells?	one of the synergids
What serves as the embryo's food supply?	endosperm
The appearance of the seed coat bears a definite relation to that of what?	the fruit
What does the seed coat protect?	embryo
What does the fruit of the flower secure?	dissemination
How developed is the seed coat when it's used for dissemination?	slightly
On what is agriculture almost completely dependent?	angiosperms
What family of plants is most important for human sustenance?	Poaceae
What is the more common name of the Fabaceae?	legume
What family do potatoes, tomatoes and peppers belong to?	Solanaceae
What family would you find cherries in?	Rosaceae
Which city is the capital of Telangana?	Hyderabad (i/ˈhaɪdərəˌbæd/ HY-dər-ə-bad; often /ˈhaɪdrəˌbæd/) is the capital of the southern Indian state of Telangana
How many square miles does Hyderabad cover?	250 sq mi
What river is Hyderabad next to?	the Musi River
What is the population of Hyderabad?	about 6.7 million
At what altitude is Hyderabad, in meters?	an average altitude of 542 metres
In what year was Hyderabad established?	Established in 1591
Who is the person that established Hyderabad?	Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah
What dynasty controlled Hyderabad until the early 18th century?	the Qutb Shahi dynasty
Which Mughal viceroy created a dynasty in early 18th century Hyderabad?	Mughal viceroy Asif Jah I declared his sovereignty and created his own dynasty
Which dynasty did Asif Jah I create?	Nizams of Hyderabad
Which individual commissioned Chaminar?	Muhammad Quli Qutb
When did Hyderabad become important culturally in India?	the mid-19th century
Which two groups had an influence in making Hyderabad a cultural center?	The Qutb Shahis and Nizams
What culture is most represented in the food of Hyderabad?	Mughlai culture
Hyderabad has India's second biggest film production industry, what is it called?	Telugu film industry
What items had been historically traded in Hyderabad?	pearl and diamond
What is a nickname for Hyderabad?	City of Pearls
What are three historic bazaars in Hyderabad?	Laad Bazaar, Begum Bazaar and Sultan Bazaar
What is the economic output of Hyderabad?	US$74 billion
What is the rank of Hyderabad among cities contributing to India's GDP?	fifth-largest
What does the Oxford Concise Dictionary of World Place Names say Hyderabad means?	"Haydar's city" or "lion city"
Hyderabad was named in honor of someone, who was it?	Caliph Ali Ibn Abi Talib
What does Andrew Petersen say that Hyderabad was originally known as?	Baghnagar (city of gardens).
Who founded what came to be known Hyderabad?	Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah
What person is Hyderabad said to have been renamed for?	"Bhagyanagar" or "Bhāgnagar" after Bhagmati, a local nautch (dancing) girl
There may be Iron Age findings near Hyderabad, what age are they thought to be from?	500 BCE
What time period did the Chalukya dynasty rule the Hyderabad region?	624 CE to 1075 CE
When did the Calukya empire split into four?	the 11th century
What was the capital of Golkonda in the mid 12th century?	Warangal
What was the Hyderabad region known as under the Chalukya dynasty?	Golkonda (Golla Konda-"shepherd's hill")
Who defeated the Kakatiya dynasty in 1310?	Sultan Alauddin Khilji
Which entity subsumed the Kakatiya dynasty?	Khilji dynasty
What did the Malik Kafur do to the Kakatiya dynasty in 1321?	the Kakatiya dynasty was annexed
When was the Behmani Sultanate established?	1347
In what year did Muhammad bin Tughluq succeed the Delhi sultanate?	1325
What position did Sultan Quli hold?	governor of Golkonda
When was Hyderabad founded?	1591
In what year did the establishment of the Qutb dynasty occur?	1518
In the late 17th century the capital of Deccan Suba was moved, to where?	Aurangabad
Whom did Sultan Quli rebel against?	the Bahmani Sultanate
What position did Farrukhsiyar hold?	emperor
What official title did the Viceroy of Deccan hold?	Nizam-ul-Mulk (Administrator of the Realm)
Who was the Viceroy of the Deccan under Farrukhsiyar?	Asif Jah I
In what year was Mubariz Khan defeated by Asif Jah I?	1724
What did Asif Jah I rename Deccan Suba to?	Hyderabad Deccan
Whom did the Nizam ally with in the late 18th century?	East India Company
What was the title of Baji Rao I?	Peshwa of the Maratha Empire
What was the title of Hyder Ali?	Dalwai of Mysore
Which military occupied Hyderabad city in a protection role?	British Indian Army
In what year did Hyderabad become the capital of Nizams?	1769
On what date did the Indian Army take control of Hyderabad?	1948. On 17 September
Which uprising occurred from 1946 to 1951?	the Telangana uprising
What was the code name for the Indian Army invasion of Hyderabad?	Operation Polo
Which Nizam defeated by the Indian Army?	Nizam VII
On what date did the constitution of India become active?	26 January 1950
On what date was Hyderabad state divided into three?	1 November 1956
Which three states was Hyderabad state divided into?	Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh
Hyderabad city became the capital of what state in the mid 20th century?	Andhra Pradesh
When was Telangana state announced?	30 July 2013
What date was the official formation of Telangana state?	June 2014
How far south of Delhi, in miles, is Hyderabad?	973 mi
In what region of the Deccan Plateau is Hyderabad?	northern part
How large in square kilometers is Greater Hyderabad?	650 km2
What are the highest hills in Hyderabad?	Banjara Hills
When was Hussain Sagar lake built?	1562
What is the mean yearly temperature in Hyderabad in Celsius?	26.6 °C
Köppen Aw refers to what kind of climate?	tropical wet and dry climate
During what months does summer occur in Hyderabad?	March–June
What is the typical lowest temperature in Celsius during winter in Hyderabad?	10 °C
What is generally the hottest month in Hyderabad?	May
What is the name of the largest zoo in Hyderabad?	Nehru Zoological Park
Hyderabad's largest zoo is known as India's first to have what two kinds of animals in a safari park setting?	lion and tiger
How many national parks does Hyderabad have?	three
Two of the national parks in Hyderabad are Mrugavani National Park, Mahavir Harina Vanasthali National Park, what is the third?	Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park
Which environmental preserve in Hyderabad is known to be a home for migratory birds?	Patancheru Lake
What is the entity that controls the infrastructure of Hyderabad?	The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC)
How many municipal wards are within Hyderabad?	150
In what year did the GHMC form?	2007
How much area, in square miles, does the GHMC oversee?	250 sq mi
Which board oversees military areas within Hyderabad?	The Secunderabad Cantonment Board
Which Hyderabad agency is responsible for the largest area?	Hyderabad Police
What is the HMDA mainly responsible for?	urban planning
What does the acronym HMDA stand for?	Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority
What does the acronym HMWSSB represent?	Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board
Hyderabad city can be referred to as something else as administrative agencies are concerned, what?	GHMC area
What dam began to provide water to Hyderabad in 2005?	Nagarjuna Sagar Dam
Along with dealing with sewerage and the water supply, what is one other thing the HMWSSB regulates?	rainwater harvesting
How long is the pipeline from the Nagarjuna Sagar Dam which the HMWSSB operates?	116-kilometre-long (72 mi)
Which company is responsible for electricity in Hyderabad?	Telangana Southern Power Distribution Company Limited
Which entity is responsible for the fire stations in Hyderabad?	Telangana State Disaster and Fire Response Department
Where is the site where Hyderabad's solid waste is dumped?	Jawaharnagar
Which entity is responsible for disposing Hyderabad's solid waste?	Integrated Solid Waste Management project
What percentage of the air pollution in Hyderabad comes solely from vehicles?	20–50%
How many deaths are believed to be caused in Hyderabad due to air pollution each year?	1,700–3,000
What is the rating for the hardness of Hyderabad's water?	1000 ppm
How many government hospitals did Hyderabad have in 2010?	50
How many beds are available in all of Hyderabad's hospitals and nursing homes combined?	12,000
How many nurses per 10,000 persons are there in Hyderabad?	14 nurses
Which agency is in charge of health and wellness services in Hyderabad?	Commissionerate of Health and Family Welfare
People choose to use what type of facility due to long distances and poor care at Government hospitals?	Private clinics
What percentage of the children in Hyderabad city had basic vaccinations in 2005?	61%
What is the only city that had a lower vaccination rate for children than Hyderabad in the 2005 National Family Health Survey?	Meerut
What was the fertility rate of Hyderabad according to a 2005 survey?	1.8
What was the child vaccination rate according to a 2005 survey of Hyderabad?	61%
Only one city, according to a 2005 survey, had a lower child vaccination rate than Hyderabad, what was it?	Meerut
According to a 2005 survey what was in Hyderabad?	35 per 1,000 live births
What percentage of children in a 2005 survey of people in Hyderabad were underweight?	20%
What was the area of Hyderabad before the GHMC?	175 km2 (68 sq mi)
What was the population of Hyderabad in the 2011 census?	6,809,970
How many females were in Hyderabad for the 2011 census?	3,309,168
What is the literacy rate of Hyderabad?	82.96%
What was the population density in Hyderabad in 2011?	18,480/km2 (47,900/sq mi)
What are the people who live in Hyderabad called?	Hyderabadi
There are two main languages spoken by the people of Hyderabad, what are they?	Telugu and Urdu
What is the main language of most Muslims from Hyderabad?	Hyderabadi Urdu
Which is the largest ethnic community in Hyderabad?	Hadhrami
Hyderabadi is a type of what langauge?	Dakhini
Which percentage of Hyderabad's population is below the poverty line?	13%
What population of Hyderabad lived in slums in 2012?	1.7 million
What is the literacy rate in the slums of Hyderabad?	60–80%
In the slums of Hyderabad how many private schools are there?	175
What percentage of children in Hyderabad are working hazardous jobs?	35%
In what region of Hyderabad is Mecca Masjid?	south central Hyderabad
South central Hyderabad is generally the home to what attractions?	historic and tourist sites
On what side of the river is Begum Bazaar?	North
Where in Hyderabad is the Secunderabad Railway Station?	North of central Hyderabad
In what region of Hyderabad city is Jubilee Hills located?	the northwest part
Where in Hyderabad would one find defence centres?	the eastern part
What area in Hyderabad contains the Hyderabad Airport?	Cyberabad
Cyberabad contains a national park, what is it?	Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park
After a flood in what year did Hyderabad expand?	1908
Which river flooded in 1908, preceding the expansion of Hyderabad?	Musi River
The Mir Osman Ali Khan had a title, what was it?	the VIIth Nizam
What did India declare Hyderabad om 2012?	Best heritage city of India
What type of heritage architecture is mainly displayed in Hyderabad?	Indo-Islamic architecture
What influence did Qutb Shahi architecture borrow from?	classical Persian architecture
What is the oldest piece of Qutb Shahi architecture in Hyderabad?	the ruins of Golconda fort
What iconic historic structure is in the center of old Hyderabad?	the Charminar
The government of India proposed that The Charminar become a UNESCO World Heritage site, what other two monuments were suggested for the same status?	Qutb Shahi tombs and Golconda fort
How high are the minarets on the Charminar?	56 m (184 ft)
The Chowmahalla Palace represents what type of architecture?	Nizam architecture
The royal court of Chowmahalla palace is an example what style of architecture?	Neoclassical
What century was Bella Vista Palace built?	19th century
Which family constructed the Basheer Bagh Palace?	Paigah family
Which palace in Hyderabad did the work of Andrea Palladio influence?	Falaknuma Palace
Where was Hyderabad ranked in 2012 as a producer of GDP in Talangana?	the largest
Where was Hyderabad ranked in India in 2012 in terms of deposits?	sixth largest
What was the GDP of Hyderabad in US dollars in 2011-2012?	$74 billion
How many people were employed by the Andhra Pradesh government in 2006?	113,098
What percentage of females in Hyderabad were employed in 2005?	19%
In the 18th century there was one global trading hub for large diamonds, what was it?	Hyderabad
When did railway expansion in Hyderabad occur?	the late 19th century
What did the Hyderabad Stock Exchange come to be known as?	Hyderabad Securities
During what era was The Defence Research and Development Organisation founded?	From the 1950s to the 1970s
At the end of 2014 what entity would handle the the transaction services for BSE-Mumbai?	Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)
In what year was Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited established?	1961
In 2010 what percentage of India's bulk pharmaceuticals were produced in Hyderabad?	one third
What percentage of Andhra Pradesh's IT infrastructure exports originated from Cyberabad in 2013?	98%
How many ITES and IT companies are located in HITEC city?	more than 1300
What rank within India was HITEC City given by the World Bank Group in 2009?	second best
What percentage of Hyderabad's employed are employed informally?	30%
In 2007 how many street vendors did Hyderabad have?	40–50,000
What percentage of the street vendors in Hyderabad were male in 2007?	84%
Of the street vendors in Hyderabad what percentage owned their own stall in 2007?	four fifths
In 2007 what percentage of street vendors in Hyderabad borrowed money to finance their operations?	8%
What event pushed Hyderabad to the top of India's cultural centres?	the decline of the Mughal Empire
What major event in India in 1857 caused migration of peformance artists into Hyderabad?	the fall of Delhi
What are the official languages of Telangana?	Telugu and Urdu
Which religious group holds the Eid ul-Fitr festival in Hyderabad?	Muslims
The festival of Diwali is a tradition of what faith?	Hindu
What are mushairas?	poetic symposia
Which dynasty supported the Deccani Urdu literature movement?	The Qutb Shahi dynasty
When was Lazzat Un Nisa completed?	the 15th century
At what location did Lazzat Un Nisa get compiled?	Qutb Shahi courts
Who wrote Gulzar-e-Mahlaqa?	Mah Laqa Bai
In what year did the Hyderabad Literary Festival start?	2010
What is the name of the largest public library in Hyderabad?	State Central Library
What is one of the activities Telugu Academy is credited with encouraging?	the advancement of literature
In what year was the biggest public library in Hyderabad created?	1891
What is the Deccan region known for culturally?	music and dances such as the Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam
What is a tawaif?	courtesans
What kind of music is dholak ke geet?	songs based on local Folklore
What entity is responsible for the Taramati Music Festival?	The state government
During the rule of what two groups did dance and music from North India become popular?	the Mughals and Nizams
What type of art might one encounter at Lalithakala Thoranam?	theatre and drama
What is Numaish?	annual exhibition of local and national consumer products
What is a popular name for the Telugu film industry?	Tollywood
Where was the Telugu film industry ranked in 2012 in India in comparison to Bollywood?	second largest
What did Guinness World Records say of Ramoji Film City was in 20015?	world's largest film studio
Golconda is a type of what kind of painting?	Deccani painting
In what century did Golconda painting develop?	16th century
What type of colors would one generally find in Golconda painting?	luminous gold and white
In what century did Hyderabad style painting develop?	17th century
What types of scenes does Hyderabad style painting generally contain?	regional landscape, culture, costumes and jewellery
In which century did metalwork become popular in Hyderabad?	the 18th century
Under which act is the Geographical Indication tag granted?	the WTO act
What is Zardozi an example of?	embroidery works on textile
What is Kalamkari?	a hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile
In what style is Kalamkari made?	a Hindu style, known as Srikalahasti
What type of foods are generally thought of as a part of Hyderabadi cuisine?	rice, wheat and meat dishes
What is a large influence on Hyderabadi food?	Mughlai
What is kaddu ki kheer?	a sweet porridge made with sweet gourd
What types of cuisine are noted within Hyderabadi haleem?	Mughlai and Arab
When was The Deccan Times founded?	the 1780s
What is The Deccan Chronicle?	major English papers
What type of paper is The Siasat Daily?	major Urdu papers
What year was the first radio station in Hyderabad formed?	around 1919
On what date did the first public radio station in Hyderabad begin broadcasting?	starting on 3 February 1935
When did Doordarshan begin broadcasting in Hyderabad?	1974
What satellite network began broadcasting to Hyderabad in July 1992?	Star TV
In what year did the general public first get access to the internet in Hyderabad?	1995
The first private company to offer Hyderabad internet service began offering it in what year?	1998
What is Doordarshan?	the Government of India's public service broadcaster
What entity controls the schools in Hyderabad?	Central Board of Secondary Education
What percentage of students are in private schools in Hyderabad?	two-thirds
Which languages are used for teaching in the schools of Hyderabad?	English, Hindi, Telugu and Urdu
What type of educational plan does the Central Board of Secondary Education use in Hyderabad?	a "10+2+3" plan
Students in Hyderabad may be required to acquire one of two different certificates, one is  the Secondary School Certificate, what is the other?	Indian Certificate of Secondary Education
How many universities are in Hyderabad?	13
Of the universities in Hyderabad how many are state run?	six
Maulana Azad National Urdu University is a type of university that represents what type of university?	central universities
In 1982 the first long distance university was opened in India, what is it's name?	The Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Open University
What year was Osmania University formed?	1918
How many medical schools are in Hyderabad?	five
What type of medicine is taught at The Government Nizamia Tibbi College?	Unani medicine
What non-profit cardiovascular educational association is headquartered in Hyderabad?	Indian Heart Association
What type of school is Raffles Millennium International?	fashion design
What type of is Wigan and Leigh College?	fashion design
What is the school otherwise known as IIT-H?	Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
There is a research institute in Hyderabad known as ICRISAT, what does the acronym represent?	International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
Two of the most popular sports played in Hyderabad include association football, what is the other?	cricket
What two world championships were held in Hyderabad in 2009?	the 2009 World Badminton Championships and the 2009 IBSF World Snooker Championship
What sport is played at the Swarnandhra Pradesh Sports Complex?	field hockey
Where is the G.M.C. Balayohi Stadium located?	Gachibowli
What is the home stadium of the Hyderabad cricket association?	Rajiv Gandhi International Cricket Stadium
At what time was Secunderabad an important sport center?	During British rule
What type of racing is the Hyderabad Race Club popular for?	horse racing
What organization holds the TSD Rally?	Andhra Pradesh Motor Sports Club
Under whom did the Secunderabad Club and the Nizam Club form?	the Nizams and the British
Which annual derby is held at the Hyderabad Race Club?	Deccan derby
Ghulam Ahmed and Shivlal Yadav are what kind of sportsmen?	cricketers
What sport does Sania Mirza play?	tennis
Who is a notable bodybuilder from Hyderabad?	Mir Mohtesham Ali Khan
Gagan Narang does what sporting activity?	rifle shooters
Pullela Gopichand and Saina Nehwal are known in Hyderabad for being what?	badminton players
What type of transport that is not government owned is commonly used in Hyderabad?	taxis and auto rickshaws
How many people are carried each day by the bus service network in Hyderabad?	130 million
What is the light rail system in Hyderabad known as?	Multi-Modal Transport System (MMTS)
How many passengers use the Hyderabad light rail system each day?	160,000
What is Setwin otherwise known as?	Society for Employment Promotion & Training in Twin Cities
In 2012 how many vehicles were driving in Hyderabad?	3.5 million
What percentage of the vehicles in Hyderabad were cars in 2012?	15%
What percentage of Hyderabad city was covered by roads in 2012?	9.5%
In 2012 what percentage of Hyderabad freight was moved by road?	60%
What is the maximum speed for buses in Hyderabad?	40 km/h (25 mph)
How many national highways form a junction in Hyderabad?	three
How many states are linked to from highways in Hyderabad?	six
How many miles long is NH-7?	1,472 mi
How many state highways pass through or begin in Hyderabad?	Five
What road connects Hyderabad to Bhopalpatnam?	NH-163
What type of city is Santa Monica?	beachfront
What part of Los Angeles County is it located in?	western
What is Santa Monica named after?	Christian saint, Monica
Approximately how many residents of Santa Monica rent their property?	two-thirds
What was the population in 2010 according to the Census Bureau?	89,736
What did indigenous people that lived in Santa Monica call it previously?	Kecheek
What was the local population called indigenous to the Santa Monica Area?	Tongva
What was the first explorers name that came in contact with the natives?	Gaspar de Portolà
What date did the explorer reach Santa Monica?	August 3, 1769
What day is the Santa Monica Feast held on?	May 4
What ethic group grew in the 20th century?	Asian
What other ethic minority did white american's treat poorly?	Chinese
What type of Village was located on the Long Wharf?	Japanese fishing
How many ethnic minorities were looked at differently in Santa Monica?	two
What role did the fishing village play in Santa Monica?	economic part
Who built a plant in Clover field?	Donald Wills Douglas, Sr
What company was the structure at Clover Field for?	Douglas Aircraft
What did Clover Field built airplanes attempt the first of?	aerial circumnavigation of the world
The Douglas Company had facilities in Santa Monica through what decade?	1960s
How Many Planes returned from the circumnavigation in 1924?	Two
What brought on the Douglas business's company growth?	World War II
How many people did the company employ in 1943?	44,000
The company used camouflage from what designers?	Warner Brothers Studios
What company started as a project in 1945?	RAND
What was the camouflage designed to do?	defend against air attack
What year was the Sanat Monica Pier buildt?	1909
What historic landmark is located on the Pier?	Looff Hippodrome
La Monica Ballroom used to be what type of ballroom in the United States?	largest
Where were the Academy Awards held in the 1960's?	Santa Monica Civic Auditorium
What place is still considered a prominent acoustic performance area?	McCabe's Guitar Shop
The Third Street Promenade is located in what part of Santa Monica?	Downtown District
How large is the Third Street Promenade?	three blocks
What is Third Street access shut off from?	vehicles
What two major department stores are located at the Third Street Promenade?	Bloomingdale's and Nordstrom
What year did the mall reopen?	2010
What event does the Chamber of commerce host in the fall?	The Taste of Santa Monica
What can visitors do at the Taste of Santa Monica?	sample food and drinks
Where is the Taste of Santa Monica held each year?	Santa Monica Pier
Who provides the guests with these samples at the event?	Santa Monica restaurants
What hotel offers a trip to the famer's market to influence dinner?	The swanky Shutters
Roughly how many days of sunshine does Santa Monica get annually?	310
What USDA hardiness zone is Santa Monica located in?	11a
What commonly occurs on the mornings in May?	fog
What have locals coined the morning time in May?	"May Gray"
What is the beach temperature in Fahrenheit during the summer ?	5 to 10 degrees
In what two years were the first Sustainable City Plan's introduced?	1992 and in 1994
What percent of the city's public work's vehicles use alternate fuels?	Eighty-two
Water conservation policies have been adopted by what two sectors?	public and private
What percent of the bus systems use alternate fuels?	100%
What company provides the city with natural gas?	Redeem
What is the name of the urban runoff facility?	(SMURFF)
How many gallons of water does (SMURFF) treat every week?	3.5 million
How much money do residents get back for participating in water conservation per square foot?	$1.50
Santa Monica plans on water independence by what year?	2020
If (SMURFF) did not collect water where would it go?	into the bay
What year does the city plan on having a bicycle infrastructure?	2030
The city has two bike Action Plans of how many years?	5-year and 20
The city's bus system is being over hauled to work with what other program?	Expo Line
What percentages does the city Bike transportation mode's target?	14 to 35%
What type of business certification do they plan on expanding?	green
What was the total average family size?	2.79
What percent of households were made of one person?	48.4%
What percent of households had someone over 65 living in it?	11.8%
Roughly how many same-sex couples were there?	416
What percent of household have children under 18?	16.7%
How many citizen's were in the year 2000 census?	84,084
How many urban families were there?	16,775
What is the population density per square mile?	10,178.7
From 2000 what was the average family size?	2.80
What percent in the 2000 census had persons under the age of 18?	15.8%
What year was the Santa Monica junior college founded?	1929
How many acres of land is the Santa Monica Junior College?	35
By what area is the Art institute in Santa Monica?	Airport
There are a plethora of colleges and universities within what radius of Santa Monica?	22-mile
How many students enroll to the SMC annually?	30,000
What plan launched a Bicycle sharing system?	bike action
When was Santa Monica's Bicycle sharing system launched?	November 2015
What is the name of the bike trail that goes through Santa Monica?	Marvin Braude
When was the most recent Bicycle Friendly Community Award given to Santa Monica?	2013
What other year did Santa Monica receive the Bicycle Friendly Community award?	2009
What is the name of the Santa Monica Freeway?	Interstate 10
What road does state route 2 begin on?	Santa Monica Boulevard
How many more states aside from California does the interstate 10 run through?	seven more
What city and state does the interstate 10 end at?	Jacksonville, Florida
Where does the Santa Monica Freeway begin around?	Pacific Ocean
Beginning in what decade did the Santa Monica  Expo Air Line host freight and passenger services?	1920s
What year did the Santa Monica freight and passenger service stop running?	1953
Diesel powered freight deliveries continued through what date?	March 11, 1988
What was the result from the discontinuation of using the line for deliveries?	was purchased
Who bought the Expo line from Southern Pacific?	Southern Pacific by Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority
In 2006 what percent of the population was impacted by crime?	4.41%
What percent of crime was strictly property in 2006?	3.74%
In 2006 what was crime mostly comprised of?	property
How are the Santa Monica per-capita crime rates calculated?	computed based
The Santa Monica Police Department suggests that the per-capita crime rate sways in what way?	much lower
In what year was there a double homicide?	1999
Where was this homicide perpetrated?	Westside Clothing store
What gang is mentioned in connection with this crime?	Culver City
What two people were killed inside the store?	Anthony and Michael Juarez
Where is the getaway driver of the Culver city gang murder?	in custody
What is one of the oldest exterior shots in Santa Monica?	Buster Keaton's Spite Marriage
What does this iconic exterior shot display?	much of 2nd Street
What 1982 movie includes Sylvester Stallone running on the Santa Monica Beach?	Rocky III
What 1996 movie was set completely in Santa Monica?	The Truth About Cats & Dogs
What movie was shot at Samohi?	17 Again
What type of games is Santa Monica featured in?	video
In what year did Tony hawk's American Wasteland release?	2005
What video game features Santa Monica in 2003?	True Crime: Streets of LA
Grand theft Auto V was released in what year?	2013
What video game featured Santa Monica in 2015?	Need for Speed
When was Washington University founded?	1853
How many Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Washington University?	Twenty-five
Where is Washington University ranked among Academic Ranking of World Universities?	32nd
For whom is Washington University named?	George Washington
How many different countries comprise the makeup of faculty and students of Washington University?	120
Who was the first chancellor of Washington University?	Joseph Gibson Hoyt.
When did Washington University secure its charter?	1853
What makes Washington University unique among other American universities?	not having had a prior financial endowment
Who was the first president of Washington University?	Eliot
What local businessman help provide support for the Washington University?	John O'Fallon
What was one of the names that was initially considered for Washington University in St. Louis?	Eliot Seminary
What name was selected by the Board of Trustees in 1854 for Washington University?	Washington Institute
Why did the Board of Trustees choose to name Washing University after George Washington?	The Board of Trustees believed that the university should be a force of unity in a strongly divided Missouri
When was the name Washington University amended?	1856
When was the suffix "in St. Louis" added to Washington University?	1976
Where was Washington University located?	17th Street and Washington Avenue
When did classes first begin at Washington University?	October 22, 1854
What building was first used for classes at Washington University?	Benton School building.
What three departments were Washington University divided?	the Manual Training School, Smith Academy, and the Mary Institute
What type of school did Washington University first function?	a night school
When was did Washington University open its law school?	1867
Who was Robert Somers Brookings?	the president of the Board of Trustees
When did Washington University establish its medical school?	1891
When did St. Louis Medical college affiliate itself with Washington University?	1891
Where was Washington University located during the first half of the 1800's.	downtown St. Louis
When did Washington University begin to expand west?	the 1890s
What architecture firm was hired by the Board of Directors at Washington University?	Olmsted, Olmsted & Eliot of Boston
Who was on the committee that found a new site for Washington University?	Robert S. Brookings, Henry Ware Eliot, and William Huse
What nickname was given to the new campus site?	"Hilltop" campus
When did Washington University hold a national design contest for the new campus?	1899
What firm won the Washington University national design contest?	Cope & Stewardson
When was the cornerstone laid for Busch Hall?	October 20, 1900
What were the names of the three buildings constructed after Busch Hall?	Brookings Hall, Ridgley, and Cupples
Why did Washington University delay occupying of the new campus buildings until 1905?	to accommodate the 1904 World's Fair and Olympics
What role did Arthur Holly Compton serve at Washington University?	chancellor
What helped lead to the increase of enrollment at Washington University during Arthur Holly Compton's term as chancellor?	World War II veterans' use of their GI Bill benefits
What declaration did Arthur Holly Compton make about athletics at Washington University?	athletics were to be henceforth played on a "strictly amateur" basis with no athletic scholarships.
Where did Arthur Holly Compton work before returning to Washington University?	the University of Chicago
Who reestablished Washington University's football team?	Arthur Holly Compton
When did Washington University begin desegregation?	1947
What were the first schools to become integrated at Washington University?	the School of Medicine and the School of Social Work
What student group campaigned for full integration at Washington University in 1949?	the Student Committee for the Admission of Negroes (SCAN)
What organization sought to strip Washington University of its tax-exempt status in the 1940's?	the NAACP
When did the Board of Trustees pass a resolution to desegregate the Washington University undergraduate division?	May 1952
When did Washington University begin construction of a complex of residential halls?	1957
What name was given to the new residential complex constructed at Washington University?	South 40
How did the construction of the new residential complex at Washington University affect the student population?	began to attract a more national pool of applicants
What proportion of students at Washington University came from outside the St. Louis area by 1964?	over two-thirds
When did Washington University transition to a national research institution?	During the latter half of the 20th century,
What years were presidential debates held at Washington University?	1992, 2000, 2004, and 2016
What building at Washington University was used to host the presidential debates?	Washington University Athletic Complex
Why was the presidential debate canceled in 1996 at Washington University?	scheduling difficulties between the candidates
When was the only vice presidential debate held at Washington University?	October 2, 2008
Who were the candidates in the vice presidential debate at Washington University?	Republican Sarah Palin and Democrat Joe Biden
What was Chancellor Wrighton's initial sentiment to hosting another presidential debate at Washington University after 2004?	it would be "improbable" that the university will host another debate and was not eager to commit to the possibility
What did  Chancellor Wrighton state as one of the reasons for hosting another debate at Washington University?	These one-of-a-kind events are great experiences for our students, they contribute to a national understanding of important issues
What year did Chancellor Wrighton submit another bid for a presidential debate at Washington University after 2004?	2008
How many freshman class applications did Washington University receive in 2013?	30,117
What percentage of incoming freshman at Washington University were in the top %10 of their class in 2013?	More than 90% of incoming freshmen
Where did Washington University rank among private universities for National Merit Scholar freshman in 2006?	second among private universities
When was Washington University ranked #1 for quality of life?	In 2008
What percent of applicants were admitted to Olin Business School in 2007?	14%
What is the current national rank of the School of Medicine at Washington University?	sixth in the nation
What is the current national rank of Brown School of Social Work?	currently ranked first
What program at Washington University ranks first in the 2016 in the U.S. News & World Reports rankings?	The program in occupational therapy
Where did the School of Law rank in  2015 by the U.S. News & World Reports?	18th
What year did the Graduate School of Architecture and Urban Design rank ninth by Designintellence?	2013
Where is Washington University's north campus located?	St. Louis City near the Delmar Loop
When was the building and property for the north campus of Washington University acquired?	2004
What previously occupied the building used at the north campus of Washington University?	Angelica Uniform Factory
Who is Washington University's food provider on campus?	Bon Appétit Management Company
For what department does the north campus location of Washington University provide off-site storage?	Performing Arts Department
Where is the West Campus of Washington University located?	Clayton, Missouri
When did the university acquire the property for the West Campus?	1990
What was previously located at the West Campus of Washington University?	the Clayton branch of the Famous-Barr department store
What is located in the basement level of the West Campus?	the West Campus Library, the University Archives, the Modern Graphic History Library, and conference space
What department located at the West Campus provides IT services?	Center for the Application of Information Technologies (CAIT)
Where is Tyson Research Center located?	west of St. Louis on the Meramec River
When did Washington University acquire the property for Tyson Research Center?	1963
What is the function of Tyson Research Center?	a biological field station and research/education center.
When was the Living Learning Center accredited as a "living building"?	2010
Who previously owned the property where Tyson Research Center is located?	the federal government
How many divisions make up Arts & Sciences at Washington University?	three divisions
Who is the Dean of Faculty of Arts & Sciences at Washington University?	Barbara Schaal
When did James Mcleod pass away?	September 6, 2011
What positions did James Mcleod hold at Washington University?	Vice Chancellor for Students and Dean of the College of Arts & Sciences
What position does Richard J. Smith hold at Washington University?	Dean of the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences.
When was Olin Business School founded?	1917
What was the original name of Olin Business School?	the School of Commerce and Finance
When was Olin Business School named?	1988
After whom is Olin Business School named?	John M. Olin
Where was an Executive MBA program established by Washington University in 2002?	Shanghai
How many alumni does Olin Business School have worldwide?	more than 16,000 alumni
When was Simon Hall opened?	1986
What is the amount of Olin Business School's endowment as of 2004?	$213 million
Who provided the donation that enabled the opening  Simon Hall?	John E. Simon
When were Knight and Bauer Halls dedicated?	May 2, 2014
How many majors are available to students in the business school at Washington University?	eight
What options are available for graduate students in pursuing an MBA at Washington University?	full-time or part-time
Who is the Dean of the Olin Business School?	Mahendra R. Gupta
What percent of coursework is done at the business school by undergraduate students at Washington University?	40–60%
With what schools does the Washington University School of Law offer joint-degree programs?	Olin Business School, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Medicine, and the School of Social Work
How many semesters of courses are offered by Washington University School of Law?	3 semesters
What LLM degree programs are offered by the Washington University School of Law?	LLM in Intellectual Property and Technology Law, an LLM in Taxation, an LLM in US Law for Foreign Lawyers
How many hours of coursework are required to obtain a JD at the Washington University School of Law?	85 hours
During what seasons are courses offered at the Washington University School of Law?	Spring, Summer, and Fall
Where do students in the Washington University School of Law place among test takers on average?	96th percentile
Where is the Washington University School of Law ranked in the 2015 US News & World Report America's Best Graduate Schools?	18th
When does full-time coursework J.D. begin at the  Washington University School of Law begin?	August
Where does the Washington University School of Law rank among "25 Most Wired Law Schools"?	4th
What building provides the location of the Washington University School of Law?	Anheuser-Busch Hall
When was the Washington University School of Medicine founded?	1891
Where does the Washington University School of Medicine rank in student selectivity?	first
Who is the director of the Genome Center at Washington University?	Richard K. Wilson
How much of a contribution did the Genome Center at Washington University make in sequencing the Human Genome Project?	25%
What hospitals partner with the Washington University School of Medicine?	St. Louis Children's Hospital and Barnes-Jewish Hospital
When was the George Warren Brown School of Social Work founded?	1925
By what other names is the George Warren Brown School of Social Work known?	Brown School or Brown
What degree programs are offered by the George Warren Brown School of Social Work?	Master of Social Work (MSW), a Master of Public Health (MPH), a PhD in Social Work, and a PhD in Public Health Sciences
What roles was George Warren Brown known?	St. Louis philanthropist and co-founder of the Brown Shoe Company
What facilities house the  George Warren Brown School of Social Work?	Brown and Goldfarb Halls
Who is the Brown School's current Dean?	Edward F. Lawlor
How many research centers are housed by the Brown School?	12 research centers.
What topics of emphasis are contained in the Brown School Library collection?	children, youth, and families; gerontology; health; mental health; social and economic development; family therapy; and management.
What areas does the Brown School Library have represented scholars?	social security, health care, health disparities, communication, social and health policy, and individual and family development
To how many academic journals does the Brown School Library subscribe?	over 450 academic journals
When was the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum established?	1881
From what centuries does  the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum have collections?	19th, 20th, and 21st century
When did the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum changed locations?	2006
Who designed the new location of  the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum?	Fumihiko Maki
What facility was Fumihiko Maki's first commission?	Steinberg Hall
How many schools does Washington University have?	seven
What percent of undergraduate students are involved in faculty research?	60%
How does the Center for Measuring University performance rank Washington University?	one of the top 10 private research universities in the nation
Where is the Office of Undergraduate Research located?	the Danforth Campus
How much money in financial support did Washington University receive in 2007?	$537.5 million
How many inventions does Washington University have funded by the National Institute of health?	150
What percentage of NH grants in Missouri went to Washington University?	80%
What percentage of the sequencing did the Washington University Medical School contribute to the Human Genome Project?	25%
What  are some organisms for which  the Genome Sequencing Center at  Washington University Medical provided genome decoding?	platypus, chimpanzee, cat, and corn
How many student organizations does Washington University have on campus?	300
How are most student organizations at Washington University funded?	by the Washington University Student Union
What is the amount of the Washington University Student Union annual budget?	$2 million
What percentage of students are involved in Greek life at Washington University?	35%
How many fraternities are located at Washington University?	11
How many a cappella groups does Washington University have?	12
What is the name of the oldest a cappella group at Washington University?	The Pikers
What is the oldest female a cappella group at Washington University?	The Greenleafs
When was the oldest co-ed  a cappella group at Washington University founded?	1991
When did the group After Dark perform MSNBC?	2008
What percent of undergraduate students live on campus at Washington University?	Over 50%
Where are most residence halls located at Washington University?	the South 40,
How did the South 40 get its name?	because of its adjacent location on the south side of the Danforth Campus and its size of 40 acres
Where are all freshman residence buildings at Washington University located?	the South 40
What is the gender make-up of the residence halls at Washington University?	co-ed
Where is the Village located at Washington University?	the northwest corner of Danforth Campus
What students are allowed in the North Side residences at Washington University?	upperclassmen and January Scholars
How many students are composed in Blocs?	groups of 4 to 24
What residences comprise the North Side of Washington University?	Millbrook Apartments, The Village, Village East on-campus apartments
How are students grouped in BLOCS at  the Village residences?	students who have similar interests or academic goals
How many media outlets does Washington University support?	four
What is the official student radio station at Washington University?	KWUR (90.3 FM)
What is the name of Washington University's political publication?	Washington University Political Review
What is Washington University's closed circuit television network?	WUTV
What are the names of the art journals published by Washington University?	The Eliot Review and Spires Intercollegiate Arts and Literary Magazine
What is the name of the Washington University sports teams?	the Bears
At what division level does the Washington University sports teams compete?	Division III
How many NCAA division championships have the Washington University sports teams won?	19
In what years did the Washington University men's basketball teams win division championships?	2008, 2009
Who is the head of the Washington University Athletic Department?	John Schael
What is the CIA's main focus?	overseas intelligence gathering
What does FBI stand for?	Federal Bureau of Investigation
What is the only agency that is authorized to carry out action on behalf of the president?	CIA
What is the title of the person who manages the relationship between the CIA and the Unified Combatant Commands?	The Associate Director of military affairs
What three ways does the Executive office support the U.S. military?	providing it with information it gathers, receiving information from military intelligence organizations, and cooperating on field activities
Who is in charge of the day to day operation of the CIA?	The Executive Director
How many regional analytic groups does the Directorate of Analysis have?	four
Who produces all source intelligence investigations?	The Directorate of Analysis
How many groups of the Directorate of Analysis focus on policy, collection and staff support?	three
How many groups does the Directorate of Analysis have for transnational issues?	six
The Directorate of Analysis has an office dedicated to what country?	Iraq
What office is in charge of collecting foreign intelligence?	The Directorate of Operations
What is the main reason the Directorate of Operations was created?	to end years of rivalry
What intelligence service did the Department of Defense recently create?	the Defense Clandestine Service
What does DIA stand for?	Defense Intelligence Agency
What is DOD short for?	Department of Defense
In what year did the CIA establish its first training facility?	1950
What was the name of the first training facility that was established by the CIA?	the Office of Training and Education
What event decreased the CIA's training budget?	the Cold War
How many annual courses does the CIA University have?	between 200 and 300
Who was the Director of Central Intelligence in 2002?	George Tenet
What year was the Central Intelligence Agency Act created?	1949
How much money was spent on non-military intelligence in 2013?	$52.6 billion
Who is the only federal employee that can spend un-vouched for money?	the Director of Central Intelligence
What was the 2013 annual budget for the CIA's HUMINT?	$2.3 billion
What two major things does the CIA's "Covert action programs" include?	drone fleet and anti-Iranian nuclear program activities
What was the first year the CIA's budget was disclosed?	1963
Who disclosed the CIA's budget for 2005?	Mary Margaret Graham
What group accidentally published the non CIA budget in 1994?	Congress
What plan appropriated $13.7 billion over five years?	the Marshall Plan
What percent of the $13.7 billion did the CIA receive?	5%
What is the UK's equivalent to the CIA?	Secret Intelligence Service
What does ASIS stand for?	Australian Secret Intelligence Service
What is the name of Israel's intelligence agency?	Mossad
What is the acronym for India's Research and Analysis Wing?	RAW
What is the acronym for French's intelligence service?	DGSE
Which four countries can share communications with the U.S. IC?	Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom
What does NOFORN stand for?	No Foreign Nationals
What is the special marking that shows messages can be shared with these other five countries?	USA/AUS/CAN/GBR/NZL Five Eyes
What president authorized the creation of the intelligence service?	Franklin D. Roosevelt
Who's secret intelligence service was the US's modeled after?	British
What does OSS stand for?	Office of Strategic Services
Who signed the order to get rid of the OSS?	Harry S. Truman
In what year was the OSS dissolved?	1945
Which act got rid of the NIA and the CIG?	National Security Act
What program handled "essential aliens" that did not fall under normal immigration policies?	PL-110
Lawrence Houston helped to draft what act in 1949?	Central Intelligence Agency Act
Who was appointed to be the new Director of the CIA in 1950?	Walter Bedell Smith
What president announced the new CIA director?	Truman
Where was most of the CIA's intelligence coming from before 1950?	the Office of Reports and Estimates
Who wanted the CIA to have a central group that organized information for him?	Truman
What did the Department of defense want from the CIA?	military intelligence and covert action
What was the State Department hoping for the CIA to do?	create global political change favorable to the US
What was one of the main targets of intelligence gathering?	the Soviet Union
Who created the Office of Special Operations?	Hoyt Vandenberg
What does ORE stand for?	Office of Reports and Estimates
What was the Office of Special Operations initial budget?	$15 million
Who was the OSO trying to track and gain intelligence on?	the Soviet forces
In what year was directive 10/2 issued?	1948
Who was the head of the OPC?	Frank Wisner
Most CIA stations had how many chiefs?	two
Directive 10/2 called for actions against who?	the USSR
How many troops did the Chinese enter into the Korean War?	300,000
Who compromised hundreds of airdrops?	Kim Philby
Who was a Russian translator and Soviet Spy?	Bill Weisband
What type of stimuli causes pain?	intense or damaging
What type of feeling is pain?	distressing
Why has defining pain been a challenge?	complex, subjective phenomenon
What organization's definition is widely used?	The International Association for the Study of Pain
In medical diagnosis, what is pain considered?	a symptom
What is the most common reason people go to the doctor in first world countries?	Pain
How can pain effect a person's quality of life and general functioning?	interfere
Excitement and distraction are what type of factors which affect pain's intensity?	Psychological
What has pain sometimes been used as an argument to allow terminally ill patients the right to do?	end their lives
What year did the IASP respond to the need to create a more useful system for describing pain?	1994
How many classes of pain does the IASP system note?	5
Who has criticized the IASP's system?	Clifford J. Woolf and others
What do some people feel the IASP's system is inadequate for?	guiding research and treatment
How many classes of research does Woolf encourage?	three
What is usually temporary?	Pain
How long does pain tend to last?	only until the noxious stimulus is removed
What is pain which resolves quickly called?	acute
What has the distinction between acute and chronic pain been arbitrarily measured by?	interval of time from onset
What might chronic pain sometimes be referred to as?	cancer pain
Stimulating nociceptors will induce which type of pain?	Nociceptive
How is nociceptive pain classified?	according to the mode of noxious stimulation
The thermal category of pain deals with which two temperature ranges?	heat or cold
Crushing, tearing and shearing are examples of which type of pain?	mechanical
What is the term for nociceptors which respond to more than one type of stimuli?	polymodal
What type of of pain is visceral a division of?	Nociceptive
What type of structures are sensitive to being stretched but not very sensitive to burning?	Visceral
Which type of pain is dull, aching and hard to pin-point?	Deep somatic
What can visceral pain be accompanied by?	nausea and vomiting
What type of pain are first degree burns classified as causing?	Superficial
What percentage of people who've had upper limbs amputated feel phantom pain?	nearly 82%
What is the percentage of of phantom pain felt by lower limb amputees?	54%
What may accompany urination for amputees?	phantom limb pain
What may happen with intact body parts if there is continuous pain for a long period?	become sensitized
After six months, what percentage of people who had limbs amputated still felt pain in those limbs?	65 percent
What happens when an anesthetic injection is directed into the nerves a limb stump?	may relieve pain
How long can an anesthetic, at max, relieve pain for, despite wearing off in only hours?	permanently
What is injected in small amounts into the soft tissue between vertebrae to produce local pain?	hypertonic saline
Vibrating the stump of an amputee's limb can produce what in some patients?	relief
What is paraplegia?	loss of sensation and voluntary motor control
What is the initial phantom body pain sensation experienced by people with spinal cord damage?	burning or tingling
What can cause paraplegia?	serious spinal cord damage,
What is an inefficient treatment for chronic pain which rarely provides any sort of true relief?	Surgical
The sensation of a knife twisting in the flesh is an example of what type of pain?	phantom body
What triad are the inventory scales of hysteria, depression and hypochondriasis classified as?	neurotic
When people have long-term pain, what do they frequently display?	psychological disturbance
Clinical evidence indicates that neuroticism is caused by what?	chronic pain
If long-term pain can be relieved by therapy, what does a person's neurotic triad score do?	fall
What shows improvement in many patients once their pain has been resolved?	Self-esteem
What is the term for pain which is acute and note alleviated by normal pain management?	Breakthrough
How do cancer patients usually control their background pain?	medications
Who is breakthrough pain common among?	cancer patients
What class of medication is fentanyl an example of?	opioids
What activity in relation to breakthrough pain requires heavy use of opiods?	Management
Which type of injection has caused patients to report they have pain but aren't bothered by it?	morphine
How much do some patients going through psychosurgery suffer from the sensation of pain?	little, or not at all
IASP's definition of pain includes what aspect as an essential part?	unpleasantness
What is it possible to induce which is, contrary to expectations, devoid of unpleasantness?	a state described as intense pain
What perspective towards pain are some people with perfectly normal nerves born with?	Indifference
An abnormality of the nervous system can render a small number of people insensitive to what?	pain
What is it known as when someone is born without being able to feel pain because of their nervous system?	congenital insensitivity to pain
What happens to children with congenital insensitivity to pain?	repeated damage to their tongues, eyes, joints, skin, and muscles
What is the life expectancy for people who can't feel pain?	reduced
What gene is responsible for coding for a sodium channel necessary for conducting pain nerve stimuli?	SCN9A
When was Descartes pontificating about his theories regarding pain?	1644
What did Descartes think pain was?	a disturbance
What state does the intensive theory conceive pain as being?	emotional
What theory perceives pain as being a specific sensation?	Specificity
Who migrated to the theory of specificity en mass?	psychologists
What year was peripheral pattern theory developed?	1955
Whose suggestion prompted the development of peripheral pattern theory?	John Paul Nafe
What does the gate control theory specify the diameter of which is responsible for the amount of pain sensation?	nerve fibers
What did DC Sinclair and G Weddell propose a property of all skin fiber endings is?	identical
Why were peripheral pattern theory and gate control theory left behind?	superseded by more modern theories of pain
How many dimensions did Melzack and Casey describe pain in terms of?	three
The affective-motivational dimension of pain is characterized by what urge?	urge to escape the unpleasantness
What did Melzack and Casey theorize could influence the perception of the magnitude of pain?	cognitive activities
War game excitement appears to block what aspect of pain?	dimensions
What did Melack's and Casey's paper end with a call towards?	action
What type of signal can be generated by intense enough stimulation of any sensory receptor?	pain
What types of stimuli can't some sensory fibers differentiate between?	noxious and non-noxious
What type of stimuli do nociceptors response to?	noxious, high intensity
How many different types of ion channels have so far been identified?	Dozens
What does stimuli generate to send signals along a nerve fiber?	currents
How does the pain signal travel from the periphery to the spinal cord?	along an A-delta or C fiber
Which fiber is thicker?	A-delta
What is the electrically insulting material that sheaths a-delta fiber?	myelin
How do first order neurons enter the spinal cord?	via Lissauer's tract
What is pain evoked by a-delta fibers described as?	sharp and is felt first
What are some spinal cord fibers exclusive to?	A-delta
Pain signals travel first to what region of the brain?	thalamus
What are dynamic range neurons?	spinal cord fibers
Where does pain-related activity in the thalamus spread to?	the insular cortex
Pain which is distinctly located also activates what cortices?	somatosensory
Who wrote "The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution"?	Richard Dawkins
What does Dawkins explain must compete with each other in living begins?	drives
What would be the most fit creature?	one whose pains are well balanced
What type of designer is natural selection?	poor
What might the relative intensities of pain resemble?	risk
Along with with ethnicity and genetics, what is the other factor associated with differences in pain perception?	sex
What might some people of Mediterranean origin report as painful that people of this origin wouldn't?	Europeans
What nationality can tolerate the least amount of electric shock?	Italian
What do some individuals in all cultures have significantly higher than normal?	pain perception
Patients who have painless heart attacks have higher what?	pain thresholds
What is the most reliable measure of pain?	person's self-report
What do health-care professionals tend to underestimate?	severity
What did Margo McCaffery introduce in 1968?	definition of pain
What scale might a patient be asked to locate their pain on?	0 to 10
What are patients asked to use the McGill Pain Questionnaire to indicate?	which words best describe their pain
What is MPI an abbreviation for?	Multidimensional Pain Inventory
How many classes of chronic pain patients are there?	three
What do interpersonally distressed people feel their significant others aren't supportive of?	their pain problems
What do dysfunctional people perceive the severity of their pain to be?	high
What should MPI characterization of a person be combined with for deriving the most useful case descriptions?	their IASP five-category pain profile
What become critical when a person is non-verbal?	observation
What can be monitored as pain indicators?	specific behaviors
What type of social behavior might patients experiencing pain exhibit?	withdrawn
How can patients with dementia indicate discomfort exists?	signal
Facial grimacing and guarding indicate what?	pain
Why may older adults quit doing activities the love?	because it hurts too much
What does the experience of pain have throughout cultures?	dimensions
What might an aging adult not respond to the same way as a younger person would?	pain
An older adult may also not report pain because they're scared they may be put on what?	a drug
Aging adult's ability to recognize pain may be blunted by what?	illness
What kind of barriers can prevent a person from telling someone they're in pain?	Cultural
How can religious beliefs contribute to a person remaining in pain?	prevent the individual from seeking help
Some people may not report pain because they think it's a sign what is near?	death
What do many people fear pain treatment will lead to?	potentially addicting drugs
What is an issue of reporting pain specific to Asians?	do not want to lose respect in society by admitting they are in pain
What does the IASP advocate that the relief of pain should be recognized as?	a human right
What should chronic pain be considered in its own right?	a disease
What two countries is treating pain a specialty in?	China and Australia
What is pain medicine often under disciplines like physiatry, neurology, etc?	subspecialty
As of 2011, how many people worldwide are still denied access to inexpensive medications for severe pain?	tens of millions
What, when taken orally, can reduce total crying time of newsborns undergoing a painful procedure?	Sugar
What doesn't sugar change the effect of pain on?	heart rate
Sugar also doesn't measurably change what type of electrical activity in the brains of newborns a second after the heel lance procedure?	pain-related
A sweet oral liquid does moderately reduce the incidence and duration of what?	crying
Clinical hypnosis may be effective in doing what with pain associated with surgical procedures in adults and children?	controlling
How many studies in 2007 found evidence for the efficacy of hypnosis in the reduction of chronic pain?	13
What did the studies regarding the effectiveness of hypnosis lack?	credible controls for placebo and/or expectation
What is considerable more research needed to determine for different chronic pain conditions?	effects of hypnosis
What is the most common reason people seek out alternative medicine?	Pain
What did an analysis of the 13 studies of pain treatment conclude about the effect of real treament versus sham treatments?	little difference in the effect
What medicine is there tentative evidence for the efficacy of?	herbal
Some contradictory reviews of 13 high quality studies found actual what?	benefit
Other than in osteomalacia, what is there no evidence of a relationship between pain and?	vitamin D
What type of topic is physical pain important in relation to many issues?	political
Corporal punishment is a form of what type of pain?	deliberate infliction
How does pain inform attitudes deemed unacceptable?	deter
What kind of practices do some cultures highly regard?	extreme
What is corporal punishment used as retribution for?	an offence
What is the most reliable method of learning about pain in a human?	asking a question
What can't animals answer?	whether they feel pain
What did Descartes argue animals lack?	consciousness
What university is Bernard Rollin associated with?	Colorado State University
Can invertebrate species of animals like insects feel pain and suffering?	unclear
What about pain in an animal isn't able to be known with certainty?	presence
An animals physical and behavioral reactions may be inferred to indicate the presence of what?	pain
Who do specialists believe can feel pain?	vertebrates
No mechanism is known by which what organisms would be able to have a feeling such as pain?	plants
What do fungi and fruit flies seem to lack?	nociceptors
What does DBMS stand for?	database management system
What is the purpose of a DBMS?	to allow the definition, creation, querying, update, and administration of databases
What is the most popular DBMS?	SQL language
How are DBMSs classified?	according to the database model that they support
How is data accessed?	by a "database management system" (DBMS)
How much data can a DBMS store?	large quantities
A DBMS consists of what?	an integrated set of computer software
What do most database applications contain?	DBMSs
What is used to recover data if disks suffer a failure?	RAID
How can large quantities of data be accessed?	Hardware database accelerators
What is required for a modern DBMS to function?	standard operating system
How long can it take to create a DBMS?	thousands of human years
Name three DBMSs that have been used since the 1970s.	Adabas, Oracle and DB2
How is the cost to create a DBMS distributed?	spread over a large number of users
Name an example of a general-purpose DBMS.	an email system
How are many databases accessed?	application software
How do administrators work with the DBMS?	through dedicated interfaces
What is a way for programmers to use the DBMS?	wire protocol
Who created the relational model of DBMS?	Edgar F. Codd
Instead of using links, how was information found in a relational model?	by content
In what decade did computer hardware become able to handle a relational system?	1980s
What type of system in still prominent to this day?	relational systems
What database language is the most prominent?	SQL
Why was COBOL created?	Interest in a standard
When were DBMSs first used commercially?	mid-1960s
When was the standard protocol completed?	1971
What group discovered COBOL?	Database Task Group
What was the standard protocol called?	CODASYL approach
What was the DBMS created by IBM called?	Information Management System (IMS)
What was the purpose of the IBM DBMS?	the Apollo program
What is the classification of IMS?	hierarchical database
What was the name of Bachman's Turing Award presentation in 1973?	The Programmer as Navigator
Who proposed using a table to store data?	Codd
How is data accessed in a table?	A linked-list system
What model solved the problem of databases where information was missing?	relational
What system assists a user in seeing a table?	DBMS
How was the relational model able to improve over time?	without constant rewriting of links and pointers
What is the relationship called in a hierarchical model?	one-to-many
What is the relationship called in a navigational model?	many-to-many
What is a third type of model that can be combined with heirarchical and navigation models?	tabular
How is information stored in a navigational system?	in a single record
How is a database system frequently used?	to track information about users
How is information stored in a relational system?	normalized into a user table
What happens to blank data fields in a navigational system?	not be placed in the database
What is a key used for?	uniquely defining a particular record
What technique is used to collect into one place?	re-linking
How is information accessed in a relational model?	a "key"
How is data in an optional table accessed?	by searching for this key
How does a program collect information using a navigational system?	require programs to loop
What is used to solve the problem of looping?	a set-oriented language
What computer language came about as a result of the looping problem?	SQL
What type of math was used to create a system to find data sets?	tuple calculus
Who used tuple calculus to show the functionality of databases?	Codd
Who used Codd's paper at Berkeley to improve a geographical database?	Eugene Wong and Michael Stonebraker
What was the name of the project to create a geographical database?	INGRES
When was INGRES first tested?	1973
What computer language was used in INGRES to access data?	QUEL
Is QUEL still used to access data in INGRES?	INGRES moved to the emerging SQL standard
What is a CAFS accelerator?	a hardware disk controller with programmable search capabilities
Did the CAFS accelerator work as planned?	efforts were generally unsuccessful
How are today's database systems run?	general-purpose hardware
Name a company that is still working on the CAFS accellerator?	Netezza and Oracle (Exadata)
What is the system IBM created using Codd's research?	System R
When was IBM's system released?	1974/5
What did System R work on to change the way data was stored?	multi-table systems
When customers first tested IBM's system, what computer language had been added?	SQL
What was the name of the database product created by IBM?	SQL/DS, and, later, Database 2 (DB2)
Who created dBASE?	C. Wayne Ratliff
Why was dBASE unique?	data manipulation is done by dBASE
Why was dBASE successful?	lightweight and easy for any computer user to understand out of the box
What is a benefit of using dBASE?	managing space allocation
In the 1990s, what type of programming changed the handling of databases?	object-oriented
What term is used for the difficulty in database table and programmed object translation?	object-relational impedance mismatch
How is the problem of object-relational impedance mismatch corrected?	object-oriented language
What is the library programmers use to solve object-relational impedance mismatch?	object-relational mappings (ORMs)
What kind of database is XML?	structured document-oriented database
Where are XML databases frequently used?	enterprise database management
What type of processing is used in enterprise database software?	ACID-compliant transaction processing
How is XML used in enterprise database management?	machine-to-machine data
What is used to offer a balance in guarantees?	eventual consistency
What explains the difficulty in a system containing availability, consistency, and partition tolerance guarantees?	the CAP theorem
How many guarantees will most databases tolerate?	two
What should a conceptual data model do?	reflects the structure of the information to be held
What makes a successful data model?	accurately reflect the possible state of the external world being modeled
Asking questions about an organization's needs will help to create what?	definitions of the terminology used for entities
What must one understand in order to create a successful data model?	the application domain
A conceptual data model in separate from the choice of what?	database technology
In what form is the output of a logical database design?	schema
Which data model is displayed as a specific model that uses DBMS?	logical
What decisions must be made in the last stage of database design?	performance, scalability, recovery, security
What is an important goal in in this final stage?	data independence
What factor is reflected in performance requirements?	Physical design
How many conceptual or physical views of data are there?	one
How many different external views of data are there?	any number
What is the benefit of external views of data?	see database information in a more business-related way
What does the conceptual view offer?	a level of indirection between internal and external
How does the conceptual view handle how data is managed?	abstracts away details
What type of view does the conceptual view offer?	common
What is responsible for putting information into permanent storage?	database engine
What do database administrators closely monitor?	storage properties and configuration setting
What is database storage?	physical materialization of a database
While working, does DBMS store information in one place?	several types of storage
What are huge quantities of information stored as?	bits
What does database access limit?	who (a person or a certain computer program) is allowed to access what information
What are examples of database objects?	record types, specific records, data structures
Who sets database access?	special authorized (by the database owner) personnel
What does data security avoid?	unauthorized users from viewing or updating the database
What is a subset of a database called that can be accessed by using a password?	subschemas
What is possible when a DBMS interrogate and update a database?	managing personal databases
What is a unit of work called in a database?	transaction
Are transactions limited?	Each transaction has well defined boundaries
How can database transactions ensure accuracy after a crash?	fault tolerance
Why would someone attempt to unite two different databases?	primarily economical
In order to merge, what must the database maintain?	database related application
What are the important parts of the database related application that should be moved?	conceptual and external architectural levels
How can a DBMS database migration be made easier?	vendor provides tools
Can a DBMS be transfered to a different DBMS?	ano
Name a reason to take a database backward in time?	database is found corrupted
Is each database backup kept in the same file?	dedicated backup files
Who can restore a database that has been corrupted?	database administrator
What parameter is requiret to restore a database?	desired point in time
How can static analysis be useful with query languages?	software verification
What do query languages support in abstract interpretation frameworks?	sound approximation techniques
What is a security measure that uses a relational database system?	watermarking
Can query languages be adjusted?	according to suitable abstractions of the concrete domain of data
What is the largest populated city in Arizona?	Phoenix
How many miles is Tuscon from the U.S.- Mexico border?	60
What nickname does Tuscon have because of their many companies involved in optics?	Optics Valley
What was the population of Tuscon according to the 2010 U.S. Census?	520,116
What was the estimated population of the entire Tuscan area in 2013?	996,544
Which county is Tucson in?	Pima County
Which university is in Tucson?	University of Arizona
How far is Tucson from Phoenix?	108 miles (174 km)
How far is Tucson from Mexico?	60 mi (97 km)
What industry-based nickname does Tucson have?	Optics Valley
What was Tuscon known as 12,000 years ago?	southern Arizona
What group lived in the area that were known for their red-on-brown pottery?	Hohokam
Near what river was a village site dating from 2100 BC found?	Santa Cruz River
Who were probably the first group of people in Tuscan?	Paleo-Indians
How long ago did Tuscan have their first visitors?	12,000 years ago
How long ago were Paleo-Indians known to be in the Tucson area?	about 12,000 years ago
How old was the village site found near the Santa Cruz River?	2100 BC
When was the Early Agricultural period?	1200 BC to AD 150
What happened in the Early Ceramic period?	the first extensive use of pottery vessels for cooking and storage
When did the Hohokam live in the Tucson area?	from AD 600 to 1450
What year did Mexico gain independence from Spain?	1821
Who is considered the founding father of Tuscan?	Hugo O'Conor
Who founded the Mission San Xavier del Bac?	Eusebio Francisco Kino
How many miles was Mission San Xavier del Bac from Tuscon?	7
Which missionary came to the Santa Cruz River area in 1692?	Eusebio Francisco Kino
What religion was Kino?	Jesuit
What mission did Kino found?	Mission San Xavier del Bac
When did Kino found the del Bac mission?	1700
Who is Tucson's 'founding father'?	Hugo O'Conor
What was the date when Arizona was bought?	June 8, 1854
What year did the Overland Mail Corporation end operations?	1861
Arizona is south of which river?	Gila River
What was the name of the deal in which Arizona was bought?	Gadsden Purchase
In what year did Tuscon become a stage station?	1857
When was the Gadsden Purchase?	June 8, 1854
Where did the US buy land from in the Gadsden Purchase?	Mexico
When did the US formally take control of the Tucson area?	March 1856
When did the mail stagecoaches stop running?	August 1861
Why did the mail stagecoaches stop running?	devastating Apache attacks on the stations and coaches
What date did William Whitney Brazelton Die?	August 19, 1878
What is the name of the sheriff who shot William Whitney Brazelton?	Charles A. Shibell
What was Wyatt Earp's job title?	Deputy U.S. Marshal
Who was held responsible for the murder of Morgan Earp?	Frank Stilwell
What Deputy was responsible for the death of Frank Stiwell?	Wyatt Earp
What crime increased in the Tucson area in 1877?	stagecoach robberies
Who was the most famous stagecoach robber in the Tucson area?	William Whitney Brazelton
When was Brazelton killed?	August 19, 1878
Who killed Brazelton?	Charles A. Shibell and his citizen's posse
What was Shibell's job?	Pima County Sheriff
What county is Tuscon located in?	Pima County
What was the population of Tuscon in 2006?	535,000
what were veterans in need of after World War I?	respiratory therapy
What did the U.S. Veterans Administration build around 1910?	Veterans Hospital
What was the population of Tuscon in 1940?	36,818
What was Tucson's population in 1900?	7,531
What was Tucson's population in 1910?	13,913
What was Tucson's population in 1920?	20,292
What was Tucson's population in 1940?	36,818
What was Tucson's population in 2006?	535,000
Which Mountain has the Highest point surrounding Tuscon?	Mount Wrightson
Which desert is Tuscon in?	Sonoran
How many mountain ranges is Tuscon surrounded by?	five
How above sea level is Wasson Peak in feet?	4,687 ft
What direction are the Tortolita Mountains from Tuscon?	north
How high is Tucson's airport?	2,643 ft (806 m) above sea level
What desert is Tucson in?	Sonoran
What mountain range is east of Tucson?	Rincon Mountains
What mountain range is north of Tucson?	Tortolita Mountains
What mountain range is west of Tucson?	Tucson Mountains
How many miles is Tuscon from Phoenix?	118
How many miles is Tuscon from the US - Mexico border?	60
What is the second largest city in Arizona?	Tucson
Where does Tuscon rank in terms of the largest city in the U.S. in 2009?	32nd
What area exceeded 1 million people in 2015?	Greater Tucson Metro
What is Tucson's city population in 2010?	520,116
What is Tucson's metro area population in 2010?	980,263
How does Tucson rank among US cities?	32nd largest
How does Tucson rank among US metro areas?	52nd largest
What is Tucson's metro area population in 2015?	1 million
Which interstate is the only one that uses kilometer posts instead of mileposts?	I-19
Are the speed limits on I-19 marked in miles or kilometers?	miles
What border does I-19 come close to?	U.S.-Mexico border
Which interstate would you take to go to Jackson Florida from Tuscon Arizona?	Interstate 10
Which direction does I-10 run through Tucson?	southeast to northwest
What is the next major town to the west on I-10?	Phoenix
What is the next major town to the east on I-10?	Las Cruces, New Mexico
Which direction does I-19 run from Tucson?	south
What is unusual about I-19?	the only Interstate highway that uses "kilometer posts" instead of "mileposts"
What was the Union Pacific once known as?	Southern Pacific
What year was Locomotive #1673 made in?	1900
What was the name of the retail and community center that took longer than a decade to build?	Rio Nuevo
When did a revitalization of downtown Tucson begin?	At the end of the first decade of the 21st century
What is Rio Nuevo?	a large retail and community center
What is the southern edge of Tucson's downtown?	17th Street
What is the western edge of Tucson's downtown?	I-10
What is the northern edge of Tucson's downtown?	6th Street
Which architect designed the Broadway Village shopping Center?	Josias Joesler
Which part of Tuscon is Broadway Village shopping center located in?	Central
What mall is located in midtown?	El Con Mall
Who designed the Broadway Village shopping center?	Josias Joesler
Where is Broadway Village shopping center?	at the intersection of Broadway Boulevard and Country Club Road
Where is the Lost Barrio?	just East of downtown
Where is the El Con Mall?	in the eastern part of midtown
Where is the 4th Avenue Shopping District?	between downtown and the University
What is Tuscon's largest Park?	Reid Park
What was once named the "ugliest street in America" by Life magazine?	Speedway Boulevard
What mayor was quoted in calling Speedway Boulevard "the ugliest street in America?	James Corbett
Which newspaper did David Leighton work for?	Arizona Daily Star
What city is the Harlem River Speedway in?	New York City
What is Tucson's biggest park?	Reid Park
What sports field is in Reid Park?	Hi Corbett Field
What zoo is in Reid Park?	Reid Park Zoo
What was the "ugliest street in America" in the 1970s?	Speedway Boulevard
What was Speedway Blvd called in the 1990s?	"Street of the Year"
Where does E.University Blvd. lead to?	Fourth Avenue Shopping District
What neighborhood has historic homes?	Sam Hughes neighborhood
What mode of transport is encouraged in Central Tuscon?	bicycle
Of the 3.5 miles from N. Mountain Avenue to Rillito River Park, how many are bike-only?	half
Which Tucson street is devoted to bicycles?	Third Street
How long does N Mountain Ave have a bike lane?	half of the 3.5 miles (5.6 km) to the Rillito River Park
Which park has a multi-use path?	Rillito River Park
Which bike path does Highland lead to?	Barraza-Aviation Parkway
Which shopping area is on East University?	Fourth Avenue Shopping District
What is the percentage of Native Americans in South Tuscon?	10%
What kind of restaurants are widely known in South Tuscon?	Mexican
What are painted do to city policy?	outdoor murals
What percentage of the South Tuscon Population is Mexican-American?	83%
What year was South Tuscon reincorperated?	1940
When was South Tucson first incorporated?	1936
When was South Tucson reincorporated?	1940
How large is South Tucson?	1 sq mi (2.6 km2)
How much of South Tucson is Mexican-American?	83%
How much of South Tucson is Native American?	10%
What interstate is the West side west of?	I-10
What is the name of the movie set in Old West Tuscon?	Old Tucson Studios
What is the name of the national park in Old West Tuscon?	Saguaro National Park West
What is the museum in Old West Tuscon?	Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum
The Marriott Starr Pass Resort & Spa is located where?	Starr Pass
What part of Tucson is considered the West Side?	the area west of I-10
What museum is in Western Tucson?	International Wildlife Museum
What resort is in Western Tucson?	Marriott Starr Pass Resort & Spa
What neighborhood is the Marriott Starr Pass Resort & Spa in?	Starr Pass
What theme park is in Old West Tucson?	Old Tucson Studios
What else is Sentinel Peak also known as?	'A' Mountain
What is the giant letter downtown in honor of?	University of Arizona
What year did the tradition of freshmen whitewashing the "A" begin?	1916
during the Iraq war, what color did anti-war activists paint the "A"?	black
Who intervened when the "A" was painted various colors?	city council
Why is there a giant letter A on a Tucson mountain?	in honor of the University of Arizona
Where is there a giant letter A on a Tucson mountain?	On Sentinel Peak (also known as "'A' Mountain"), just west of downtown
What color did college freshmen paint the A?	white
What color did Iraq War protesters paint the A?	black
How did City Council decide to paint the A?	red, white and blue
What is the Foothills west of?	Sabino Creek
Where are some of the major resorts of Tuscon?	Catalina Foothills
What is La Encantada?	upscale outdoor shopping mall
What is the Foothills east of?	Oracle Road
What community is north of Tucson's city limits?	Catalina Foothills
Where are the most expensive homes in the Tucson metro area?	Catalina Foothills
What is the southern edge of the Catalina Foothills area?	River Road
What outdoor mall is in Catalina Foothills?	La Encantada
Which big resorts are in Catalina Foothills?	Hacienda Del Sol, Westin La Paloma Resort, Loews Ventana Canyon Resort and Canyon Ranch Resort
How many residents live in the master-planned communities?	thousands
Which town is Rancho Vistoso located?	Oro Valley
What mountains is Oro Valley next to?	Santa Catalina Mountains
Which town would you find Dove Mountain and Continental Ranch?	Marana
Where is Oro Valley?	in the western foothills of the Santa Catalina Mountains
Where is the Continental Ranch planned community?	Marana
Where is the Dove Mountain planned community?	Marana
Where is the Rancho Vistoso planned community?	Oro Valley
Which direction from Tucson is Picture Rocks?	northwest
What is considered Tuscon's first suburb?	Casas Adobes
When was the Casas Adobes Plaza established?	1948
What representative was almost assassinated at the La Toscana Village?	Gabrielle Giffords
What nature preserve is in Casas Adobes?	Tohono Chul Park
What mall is located in Casas Adobes?	Foothills Mall
When was the Casas Adobes Plaza built?	1948
What was Tucson's first suburb?	Casas Adobes
Where is Tohono Chul Park?	near the intersection of North Oracle Road and West Ina Road
Who was nearly assassinated in Casas Adobes?	Representative Gabrielle Giffords
What was John Roll's job title?	chief judge for the U.S. District Court for Arizona
What park was developed between the 1950's and 1970's?	Desert Palms Park
What park is in East Tuscon?	Saguaro National Park East
Which estates were named after a ranch of a famous author?	Harold Bell Wright Estates
What year was Tuscon's largest office building built?	1975
What shopping center is located along Broadway?	Park Place
What part of Tucson is Saguaro National Park East in?	East
When was East Tucson developed?	between the 1950s and the 1970s
What is the boundary of East Tucson?	Swan Road
What is the biggest office building in Tucson?	5151 East Broadway
Where is Park Place?	along Broadway (west of Wilmot Road)
Who bought The sanitarium in 1928?	Harvey Adkins
What year where three officer building bought and used for a sanitarium?	1900
Jack Kerouac authored what iconic book?	On the Road
Alan Harrington is considered part of what generation?	beat generation
Which month does the neighborhood celebrates its history in the City Landmark?	February
When was Fort Lowell shut down?	1891
What were some buildings of Fort Lowell bought to be used for in 1900?	a sanitarium
Who bought the Fort Lowell sanitarium in 1928?	Harvey Adkins
Who renovated Fort Lowell's adobe buildings?	The Bolsius family Pete, Nan and Charles Bolsius
In what book did Jack Kerouac write about visiting Tucson?	On the Road
Where is a great place to bird watch in Southeast Tuscon?	The Atterbury Wash
Where do a lot of the families from Davis-Monthan Air Force Base live at?	Rita Ranch
Rita Ranch also has a planned development called what?	Civano
What is the name of the lake in Southeast Tuscon?	Lakeside Lake
What is the name of the High School in the area of Southeast Tuscon?	Santa Rita High School
What Air Force base is in Tucson?	Davis-Monthan Air Force Base
What is the alternate name of Chuck Ford Park?	Lakeside Park
What community college is in southeast Tucson?	Pima Community College East Campus
Where do many Air Force families live?	Rita Ranch
What is the goal of Civano?	showcase ecologically sound building practices and lifestyles
How many miles is Catalina Highway?	25
What town is near the top of Mt. Lemmon?	Summerhaven
What area has a ski lift?	Ski Valley
What two winter sports would you do at the mountain range?	snowboarding and skiing
How long is Catalina Highway?	25 miles (40 km)
What activities are popular in the mountains of Tucson?	cycling, hiking, rock climbing, camping, birding, and wintertime snowboarding and skiing
Where is Summerhaven?	Near the top of Mt. Lemmon
What is in Ski Valley?	a ski lift, several runs, a giftshop, and nearby restaurant
What is in Summerhaven?	log houses and cabins, a general store, and various shops, as well as numerous hiking trails
What kind of climate is Tuscon?	desert
What other city is similar to Tuscon in precipitation and climate?	Alice Springs
What is the average amount of  yearly precipitation in Tuscon in inches?	11.8
What does Tuscon have more than most desert climates?	precipitation
What does Tuscon have a high net loss of?	water
What is Tucson's climate type?	desert
How much rain does Tucson get each year?	11.8 inches (299.7 mm)
What is evapotranspiration?	net loss of water
Which Australian town has a similar climate as Tucson?	Alice Springs
What is Alice Springs's average rainfall?	11 inches (279.4 mm)
What year did the "Stupid Motorist Law" come in effect?	1995
A monsoon can last into what month?	September
How much can a motorist be charged for needing to be rescued after ignoring safety precautions?	2000
What could you say is the average start for a monsoon?	July 3
What is usually higher during a monsoon compared throughout the rest of the year?	humidity
When was the "Stupid Motorist Law" passed?	1995
What is the legal name of the "Stupid Motorist Law"?	Arizona traffic code Title 28-910
How much can the "Stupid Motorist Law" charge people for being rescued?	up to $2000
When does Tucson's monsoon usually start?	around July 3
How long does Tucson's monsoon last?	through August and sometimes into September
What are Tucson's typical winter high temperatures?	between 64 and 75 °F (18 and 24 °C)
What are Tucson's typical winter low temperatures?	between 30 and 44 °F (−1 and 7 °C)
What do Tucson's hard freeze temperatures dip to?	the mid or low-20s (−7 to −4 °C)
How much snow did Tucson get on Feb 20, 2013?	2.0 inches
When had Tucson last had as much snow as 2013?	1987
On what two occasions was Tucson's record high?	June 19, 1960, and July 28, 1995
What was Tucson's record high?	115 °F (46 °C)
What was Tucson's record low?	6 °F (−14 °C)
When was Tucson's record low?	January 7, 1913
What was Tucson's wettest year?	1905
In what month did Tucson get the most rain?	August 1955
When did Tucson get the most rain in 24 hours?	July 29, 1958
In what month did Tucson get the most snow?	December 1971
In what year did Tucson get the most rain?	1983
In what year did Tucson get the least rain?	1953
How many households are there in Tucson as of 2010?	229,762
How many families are there in Tucson as of 2010?	112,455
How many residents are there in Tucson as of 2010?	520,116
How many people per square mile are there in Tucson?	2,500.1
How much of Tucson was non-Hispanic Whites in 1970?	72.8%
What is the second-largest employer in Tucson?	University of Arizona
Where is the US Army Intelligence Center?	Sierra Vista
What railroad route passes through Tucson?	Union Pacific Railroad's Sunset Route
Where does the Sunset Route connect to the west coast?	Los Angeles ports
What was Raytheon previously called?	Hughes Aircraft Co.
What drug company has a major presence in Tucson?	Sanofi-Aventis
How many optics-related companies are in Tucson?	150
What do the 'Optics Valley' companies do?	design and manufacture of optics and optoelectronics systems
What accounting software company has a major presence in Tucson?	Intuit Inc.
When did the Tucson Festival of Books begin?	2009
When is the Tucson Festival of Books held?	a two-day period in March
How many people came to the Tucson Festival of Books in 2010?	80,000
What award did the Tucson Festival of Books give to R. L. Stine?	Founder's Award
When is the Tucson Folk Festival held?	the first Saturday and Sunday of May
Where is the Tucson Folk Festival held?	El Presidio Park
How many performers are in the Tucson Folk Festival?	over 100
How much does the Tucson Folk Festival cost to get in?	free
Who runs the Tucson Folk Festival?	Tucson Kitchen Musicians Association
What season is February in Tucson?	spring
What is the Fiesta de los Vaqueros?	rodeo week
What month is the Fiesta de los Vaqueros held in?	February
Who started the Fiesta de los Vaqueros?	Leighton Kramer
How much time do Tucson schools give students off to attend the Fiesta de los Vaqueros?	two rodeo days off
What time of day is The Procession?	sundown
What is burned at The Procession?	an urn in which written prayers have been collected from participants and spectators
What group runs The Procession?	Many Mouths One Stomach
What kind of group runs The Procession?	non-profit arts organization
What kind of parade is The Procession?	non-motorized
What famous writers have lived in Tucson?	Edward Abbey, Erskine Caldwell, Barbara Kingsolver and David Foster Wallace
What is the Chax Press?	a publisher of poetry books in trade and book arts editions
What does the University of Arizona Poetry Center offer?	a sizable poetry library and presents readings, conferences, and workshops
What university were some of Tucson's famous writers associated with?	University of Arizona
Who is thought to have led to calling Tucson 'The Old Pueblo'?	Mayor R. N. "Bob" Leatherwood
When did Tucson get a railroad?	March 20, 1880
What did Leatherwood call Tucson in a telegram?	"ancient and honorable pueblo"
How did newspapers abbreviate Leatherwood's phrase?	"A. and H. Pueblo"
Who were among the recipients of Leatherwood's telegram?	the President of the United States and the Pope
How many times has the University of Arizona men's basketball team won NCAA tournaments?	25
How many times has the University of Arizona women's softball team gone to NCAA National Championships?	12
How many times has the University of Arizona women's softball team won NCAA National Championships?	8
Who coaches the University of Arizona's swim team?	Frank Busch
Who coaches the University of Arizona men's basketball team?	Sean Miller
Where did the Tucson Sidewinders move to?	Reno, Nevada
What team played at Kino Veterans Memorial Stadium in 2011-2013?	Tucson Padres
Why were the Tucson Padres temporarily in Tucson?	awaiting the building of a new stadium in Escondido
Where did the Padres move when the Escondido stadium fell through?	El Paso, Texas
What is the new name of the Tucson Sidewinders?	Reno Aces
Where does Tucson hold NASCAR races?	Tucson Raceway Park
What kind of races does Rillito Downs hold?	quarter horse races
What former Tucson horse racetrack no longer exists?	Moltacqua racetrack
What is on the former site of the Moltacqua track now?	Sabino Canyon Road and Vactor Ranch Trail
How many asphalt short tracks are in Arizona?	two
Who said Tucson is bicycle-friendly, in 2007?	The League of American Bicyclists
When does El Tour de Tucson happen?	in November on the Saturday before Thanksgiving
Who runs El Tour de Tucson?	Perimeter Bicycling
How many people participate in El Tour de Tucson?	as many as 10,000
How many US cities have at least a gold rating for bicycle-friendliness?	nine
Which political party does Tucson usually support?	Democratic
Which political party does Phoenix usually support?	Republican
How many Federal Congressional districts was Tucson split into in 2013?	three
Who represents Tucson's city center in Congress?	Raul Grijalva
Who represent's Tucson's wealthy areas in Congress?	Martha McSally
When is Tucson's city council primary?	September
How long are Tucson's city council terms?	four-year
When is Tucson's city council general election?	November
Which wards elect city council members in the same year as the mayor?	1, 2, and 4
Which wards elect city council members in the alternate year from the mayor?	3, 5, and 6
When did Tucson begin offering city council candidates public funding?	1985
What is the spending limit for Tucson city council candidates to get public funding?	33¢ for every registered Tucson voter
What is the spending limit for Tucson mayoral candidates to get public funding?	64¢ per registered voter
What major cities later adopted Tucson's city council public funding system?	San Francisco and New York City
How many $10+ donations must Tucson city council candidates receive to get public funding?	200
What is Tucson's daily general newspaper?	Arizona Daily Star
What is Tucson's daily legal paper?	The Daily Territorial
Who publishes Tucson Weekly?	10/13 Communications
Where is 10/13 based?	Boulder, Colo.
What is the University of Arizona's student newspaper?	The Arizona Daily Wildcat
What is Tucson's NBC station?	KVOA 4
What is Tucson's ABC station?	KGUN 9
What is Tucson's Fox station?	KMSB-TV 11
What is Tucson's CBS station?	KOLD-TV 13
What is Tucson's PBS station?	KUAT-TV 6
Who runs Tucson's main power plant?	Tucson Electric Power
What highway is Tucson's main power plant near?	Interstate-10
What does Tucson's main power plant use for fuel?	coal and natural gas
When did Tucson's main power plant begin operation?	1962
How many days of sunshine does Tucson get each year?	over 300
How is most of Tucson's water used?	Agriculture (including golf courses)
How much of Tucson's water is used on agriculture?	69%
How much of Tucson's water is used on residential/city use?	25%
How many days of full sun does Tucson get each year?	over 300
What agency manages Tucson's water?	Arizona Department of Water Resources
How is Tucson replenishing its groundwater?	running part of its share of CAP water into various open portions of local rivers to seep into their aquifer
What does Tucson use reclaimed water for?	irrigation, dust control, and industrial uses
How long has Tucson's water conservation efforts been underway?	more than 27 years
What is the CAP?	Central Arizona Project Aqueduct
How long is the CAP?	more than 300 mi (480 km)
What water source feeds the CAP?	Colorado River
What aquifer is Tucson starting new wells in?	Avra Valley aquifer
How many wells has Tucson stopped using since 2001?	over 80
How long is the Sun Link?	3.9-mile
What is Tucson's bus system called?	Sun Tran
What transit systems does Sun Link connect to?	the University of Arizona's CatTran shuttles, Amtrak, and Greyhound intercity bus service
When did Tucson get a 'Best Transit System' award?	1988 and 2005
What kind of vehicles operate on the Sun Link?	streetcar
Why is cycling popular in Tucson?	its flat terrain and dry climate
What is The Loop?	a network of seven linear parks
How many miles of trails are in The Loop?	over 100
What organization advises the Tucson government on bike concerns?	Tucson-Pima County Bicycle Advisory Committee
What kind of places to ride bikes does Tucson have?	marked bike routes, signal crossings, on-street bike lanes, mountain-biking trails, and dedicated shared-use paths
What kind of government does Armenia have?	democratic
What religion did Armenia support?	Christianity
Who brought Armenia to success in the 1st century BC?	Tigranes the Great
What two empires did Armenia belong to in the beginning of the 5th century?	Byzantine and Sasanian
When was Urartu created?	860 BC
Which two empires ruled Armenia between the 16 and 19th Century?	Ottoman and successive Iranian empires
Who took over Eastern Armenia in the 19th century?	Russian Empire
When did the Armenian Genocide occure?	World War I
When did Armenia become part of the Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic?	1920
When did Armenia gain its independence?	1991
What name did Armenia gain it's name from?	Aram
When did Xenophon visit Armenia?	401 BC
Who first referenced the Armenians?	Hecataeus of Miletus
What language does Armenias resemble most?	Persians
When was the capital of Armenia established?	782 BC
What is the capital of Armenia?	Yerevan
The founding of which city was the first to be ever recorded?	Yerevan
Who ruled Armenia in 782 BC?	King Argishti I
Under who did Areminia become fully sovereign?	King Artaxias I
What Empire did the Orontid Dynasty belong to?	Achaemenid Empire
When did Armenia reach it's peak?	between 95 and 66 BC
Which ruler is responsible for Armenias prosperity?	Tigranes the Great
Who established the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia?	Tiridates I
What made Armenia so easily invadable?	strategic location between two continents
Who ruled the Assyrians between 669-627 BC?	Ashurbanipal
When was the Marzpanate era?	428–636
When did the Principality of Armenia end?	884
Under which ruler did the Principality of Armenia gain its independence?	King Ashot I Bagratuni
Where was the Principality of Armenia centered?	Dvin
Who ruled the Emirate of Armenia?	Prince of Armenia
Who vanquished Bagratid Armenia?	the Byzantine Empire
When did the Seljuk Turks beat the Byzantines?	1071
When was Cilicia founded?	6 January 1198
What was the outcome of the Battle of Manzikert for the Seljuk Turks?	conquered Armenia
Where did Roupen find refuge?	Tarsus of Cilicia
Which family overthrew the Seljuk Turks?	the Zakarid
What principality did the Zakarid family form?	Zakarid Armenia
What area did the Orbelians and Zakarids command together?	Syunik and Vayots Dzor
What area did the Hasan-jalalians command?	Artsakh and Utik
When did the Seljuk Empire experience it's decline?	early 12th century
Which empires seperated Armenia?	Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire
Who controlled Western Armenia between the 16 and 19th Century?	Ottoman
Who controlled Eastern Armenia between the 16 and 19th Century?	Iranian Safavid, Afsharid and Qajar empires
How long did the Turco-Iranian rivalry last?	century
How many Armenians were slaughtered between 1894-1896	80,000 to 300,000
What prompted the state-sponsored slaughter of Armenians?	pushing for more rights
What nicknames was Sultan 'Abdu'l-Hamid II given?	"Red Sultan" or "Bloody Sultan."
What was the name given to the slaughter of the Armenians between 1894-1896?	Hamidian massacres
What type of social system was in place under the Ottoman Empire?	Muslim
What is another name for the Armenian Revolutionary Federation?	Dashnaktsutyun
What was the Dashnaks objective?	creating a "free, independent and unified" Armenia
Which Dashnak groups helped protect Armenian citizens?	fedayi
When did the Dashnaktsutyun originate?	1890s
When did the Adana massacre take place?	April 1909
How many Armenians died in the Adana Massacre?	20,000–30,000
When was Sultan Hamid unseated?	1908
Who unseated Sultan Hamid?	Young Turk Revolution
When was the Armenian Reform package introduced?	1914
What instigated conflict between the Ottoman and Russian Empire?	World War I
When did the Tehcir Law come to fruition?	29 May 1915
Which army had a group of Armenian volunteers fighting for them?	Russian Army
Where did the Armenian Genocide occur?	Anatolia
What do the Armenians see the events of 1915-1917 as?	state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide
How many phases were there to the Armenian Genocide?	two phases
What did the first phase of the Armenian Genocide involve?	killing of the able-bodied male population
What did the second phase of the Armenian Genocide involve?	deportation of women, children, the elderly and infirm
Where did the Armenian Genocide death marches push the deportees to?	Syrian desert
How many Armenians died during the second phase of the Armenian Genocide between 1915-1916??	600,000
Who contests the existence of the Armenian Genocide?	Turkish authorities
What is the estimated sum of people who died during the Armenian Genocide?	between 1 and 1.5 million
Who put together a report about the Armenian Genocide?	Arnold J. Toynbee
When was Toynbee's report put together?	24th May 1916
Who was in charge of the Russian Caucasus Army of Imperial forces?	Nikolai Yudenich
Who was the leader of the Armenian militia?	Andranik Ozanian
When was the Bolshevik Revolution?	1917
Who formed the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic?	Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan
When did the Dashnaktsutyun declare independence?	May 1918
When was the Treaty of Sevres signed?	10 August 1920
What is another name for Ottoman Armenia?	Wilsonian Armenia
Which US president specified the new Armenian borders?	President Woodrow Wilson
When did Cilicia declare independence?	5 August 1920
Who signed the Treaty of Sevres?	Allied and Associated Powers and Ottoman Empire
When was the Treaty of Alexandropol sanctioned?	2 December 1920
What city did current day Gyumri used to be called?	Alexandropol
When did the Armenian republic breakdown?	4 December
Who led the Soviet Eleventh Army?	Grigoriy Ordzhonikidze
What year did Turkish nationalists seize the Armenian Republic?	1920
When was the Transcaucasian SFSR formed?	4 March 1922
The Soviet Union gained control over which city following the Treaty of Kars?	Batumi
What did Turkey gain from the Treaty of Kars?	sovereignty over the cities of Kars, Ardahan, and Iğdır
Who annexed Armenia?	Bolshevist Russia
Who provided the Armenians with supplies?	Moscow
Who succeeded Vladimir Lenin?	Joseph Stalin
Which three parts make up the TSFSR?	Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, and Georgian SSR
When did the TSFSR break up into three parts?	1936
Who succeeded Stalin?	Nikita Khruschev
When was the Armenian Genocide Memorial constructed?	1967
When did Vazgen acquire his position?	1955
When did Stalin pass away?	1953
Where is the memorial for the Armenian Genocide?	Yerevan
In what year did Armenia suffer from a catastrophic earthquake?	1988
How man Armenians resided in Azerbaijan in 1970?	484,000
When was Nagorno-Karabakh removed from Armenia?	1923
Who partitioned Nagorno-Karabakh from Armenia?	Stalin
What does NAA stand for?	New Armenian Army
When was the NAA formed?	May 1990
Who started the fight between the MVD and the NAA in 1918?	the MVD
How many people died as a result of the MVD and NAA clash in 1918?	five Armenians
Continued fighting transpired between the Armenians and Soviets in which city?	Sovetashen
Where did the Armenians living in Baku escape to during the January 1990 massacre?	Armenia
When did Armenia reject the referendum proposing the retention of the Soviet Union?	17 March 1991
When did Turkey decide to become part of the blockade against Armenia?	1993
How does Armenia get most of it's commodities?	rail traffic
Who did Armenia fight in teh Nagorno-Karabakh War?	Azerbaijan
What prevented Armenia from getting it's commodities?	a railway and air blockade
What percent of Armenias commodities were transported via rail traffic?	85%
When did the Karabakh War end?	1994
What does OSCE stand for?	Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Armenia has closed borders with which two countries?	Turkey and Azerbaijan
How many people died as a result of the fighting betwen Armenia and Azerbaijan?	30,000
Who gained the most from the Karabakh War?	Karabakh Armenian forces
What is the lowest score on the Democracy Score scale?	7
What Democracy Score does Armenia have?	5.21
What does the Freedom House classify Armenia as?	Semi-consolidated Authoritarian Regime
What makes Armenia's presidential elections faulty?	polling deficiencies, lack of cooperation by the Electoral Commission, and poor maintenance of electoral lists and polling places
With who does Armenia have bad relations?	Turkey and Azerbaijan
Is the border between Armenia and Azerbaijan open or closed?	closed
When was the Nagorno-Karabakh War?	1990s
When did Turkey close off its border with Armenia?	1993
Which country claims the Armenian Genocide didn't occur?	Turkey
When did Armenia gain independence from the USSR?	1991
Who wants the border between Turkey and Armenia opened?	Turkish business lobby
When did Armenia and Turkey initiate an attempt to reopen their border?	10 October 2009
Who made it difficult to ratify the protocols to reopen the Armenian/Turkey border?	Turkey
Who ratifies protocols in Armenia?	national parliaments
How did Turkey thwart the ratification of these protocols?	continuously added more preconditions to its ratification
Russia has a military base in which city in Armenia?	Gyumri
How many Armenians reside in the United States?	427,822
Why does Russia have a miltary base In Gyumri?	as a deterrent against Turkey
Who gave Russia permission to have a military base in Gyumri?	Armenian government
How many of Armenias inhabitants approve of becoming part of the EU?	64%
What is KFOR?	a NATO-led international force in Kosovo
What are some states join Armenia in the Council of Europe?	France and Greece
When can the EU expect Armenia to attempt to join it?	in a few years
When was the Armenian military created?	1991
When was the Ministry of Defence founded?	1992
What are the four branches of the Armenian Armed Forces?	The Armenian Army, Air Force, Air Defence, and Border Guard
Who is in charge of the the Armenian military?	Colonel General Yuri Khatchaturov
Who is in charge of the Ministry of Defence?	Colonel General Seyran Ohanyan
What does CSTO stand for?	Collective Security Treaty Organisation
What does EAPC stand for?	Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
Who else joins Armenia in the CSTO?	Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan
When did Armenia remove its peacekeepers from Iraq?	October 2008
How many hamaynkner does Armenia have?	915
How many districts does Yerevan have?	twelve
Does Armenia have more rural or uban hamaynker?	rural
What is the Armenian term for settlment?	bnakavayr
What group is opening a research center in Armenia?	Intel Corporation
As opposed to an industry-based economy, what industry is Armenia moving to?	technology industry
The Arnmenian economy depends primarily on what?	investment and support from Armenians abroad
What did Armenias industry-based economy consist of?	chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and textile
Was agriculture more important before or after Armenia left the Soviet Union?	After
Why did agriculture become so significant for Armenia's economy?	food security needs
How much of total employment did agriculture account for at the end of the 1990s?	40%
How much of the GDP has agriculture accounted for most recently?	20%
How many people died because of the Spitak earthquake?	more than 25,000
When was the Spitak earthquake?	1988
How much did the Armenian GDP decrease from 1989-1993	60%
What is the national currency of Armenia?	the dram
What did Armenia declare a cease-fire to in 1994?	Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
Since when has Armenia experienced a positive growth in their economy?	1995
What helped Armenia decrease inflation and create study growth in the economy?	economic reforms
What is one of the newer sectors Armenia has in addition to agriculture?	precious-stone processing
What does IMF stand for?	International Monetary Fund
What dos EBRD stand for?	European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
What does IFI stand for?	international financial institutions
How much in loans has Armenia received since 1993?	$1.1 billion
When did Armenia become a part of the World Trade Organization?	5 February 2003
What is the unemployment rate in Armenia?	15%
To what does Armenia attribute it's high unemployment rate?	refugees from the Karabakh conflict
When did Armenia establish a foreign investment law?	June 1994
When did Armenia establish a law on privatisation?	1997
What percent of Armenian children go to preschool?	35%
What is Armenia's biggest University?	Yerevan State University
When did the National Polytechnic University of Armenia open?	1933
How many students did Yerevan State University have in 1992?	10,000
How many teachers did Yerevan State University have in 1992?	1,300
When was Yerevan State Medical University awarded the Order of Labor red Banner?	1980
When was the Medical Institute formed?	1930
When was Yerevan State Medical Institute renamed to Yerevan State Medical University?	1995
Who founded the Armenian Medical school in Cilician Armenia?	Mkhitar Heratsi
Which doctor did the YSMU rename itself after?	Mkhitar Heratsi
Who is in charge of releasing the World Directory of Medical Schools?	WHO
When was the foreign student department for Armenian diaspora created?	1957
Armenian students attend YMSU with foreign students from where?	India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, the USA and Russian Federation
What does OLPC stand for?	One Laptopschool Per child
What are the names of some of the other higher education organizations in Armenia?	American University of Armenia and the QSI International School of Yerevan
What are some of the graduate programs available at AUA?	Business and Law
What are some examples of Armenian folk music instruments?	the duduk, the dhol, the zurna, and the kanun
Who created the Armenian alphabet?	Saint Mesrop Mashtots
Who composed the Sabre Dance?	Aram Khatchaturian
What is known as one of the most prolific type of religious music in Armenia?	the Armenian chant
What is kef?	Armenian dance music, using Armenian and Middle Eastern folk instruments
What did kef help do?	preserved the folk songs and dances of Western Armenia
Where did the Armenians emigrate from?	Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries
Who is the most well know kef artist?	Richard Hagopian
What type of music had the biggest impact on the kef of the Vosbikian Band?	American Big Band Jazz
When did Armenian pop music become popular?	the 1960s and 1970s
Who were some Armenian pop artists?	Adiss Harmandian and Harout Pamboukjian
What type of musician is Sahan Arzruni?	pianist
What type of band was System of a Down?	heavy metal
What type of songs do armenian youth prefer?	Armenian revolutionary songs
What topics do armenian revolutionary songs usually encompass?	Armenian history and national heroes
What is Obsidian used for?	jewellery and ornamental objects
What are some examples of soviet memorabilia that can be purchased at Vernissage?	nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes
What types of crafts can be purchased at Vernissage?	woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims
What is Vernissage?	arts and crafts market
How many pieces can be found in the Yerevan National Art Gallery?	more than 16,000
Where other than the National Art Gallery can one find art on display in Yerevan?	The Modern Art Museum, the Children’s Picture Gallery, and the Martiros Saryan Museum
What is the earliest period the National Art Gallery has pieces from?	the Middle Ages
Which lake is most popular for water sports in Armenia?	Lake Sevan
What international sports has Armenia done well at?	chess, weightlifting and wrestling
What does IIHF stand for?	Ice Hockey Federation
Which Games does Armenia hold?	Pan-Armenian Games
What Olympic Sport did Hrant Shahinyan compete in?	gymnastics
What medals did Hrant Shahinyan win at the 1952 Summer Olympics?	two golds and two silvers
Where were the 1952 Summer Olympics held?	Helsinki
What year did Armenia begin competiting in the Olympics seperate from the USSR?	1992
What team won the Soviet football Cup in 1973 and 1975?	FC Ararat Yerevan team
Which team did the FC Ararat lose to in the European Cup?	FC Bayern Munich
What FIFA ranking did Armenia hold in 2011?	44th
How many teams does the Armenian Premier League have?	eight teams
Who provided the funds to rebuild the Armenian sports schools?	the Armenian government
What year did Yerevan create a cyclying center?	2005
What prize do Armenians receive from the government if they win a gold medal?	$700,000
How much money was spent to revamp Tsaghkadzor for winter sports?	$9.3 million
How much did Armenia spend to fix up their sports schools?	$1.9 million
What type of food is Armenian food most similair to?	eastern and Mediterranean cuisine
What does Armenian cuisine place an emphasis on?	quality of the ingredients
What does Armenian cuisine use to create its distinctive dishes?	various spices, vegetables, fish, and fruits
What different uses does fruit have in Armenian food?	main ingredient as well as to sour food
What is a large domain of prokaryotic microorganisms?	Bacteria
What configurations can bacteria can bacteria take?	spheres to rods and spirals
When is the typical lenght  for bacteria?	few micrometres
What environments can bacteria live?	present in most of its habitats
What is the relationships between plants animals and bacteria?	symbiotic and parasitic relationships
What amount of bacteria can be found in a gram of soil?	40 million bacterial cells
How many bacteria cells can be in a milliltre of fresh water?	million bacterial cells
How does bacteria help to sustain life in hydrothermal vents and cold seeps?	by converting dissolved compounds
What deepest part of the ocean was bacteria found?	Mariana Trench
Can bacteria survive inside rocks under the sea level?	thrive inside rocks
What is the ratio of human/bacteria cells in human flora?	ten times as many bacterial cells
What keeps bacteria at bay in human body?	the immune system
What type of bacteria can cause infectious diseases?	pathogenic
What are the deadliest diseases caused by bacteria?	respiratory infections
What makes bacteria resistant to antibiotic treatment?	farming
What living organisms are bacteria being reffered as?	prokaryotes
What vital part is missing in bacteria to eukaryotes?	nucleus
When did the scientific classification change?	1990s
What are two main groups prokaryotes can be divided into?	Bacteria and Archaea
When did the first antecedents of bacteria appear on Earth?	4 billion years ago
Why were bacteria and archaea dominant forms of life?	most organisms were microscopic
What are Stromatolites?	bacterial fossils
What pre-historic group did bacteria evolve from?	archaeal/eukaryotic lineage
How did chloroplast appear in first vegetation?	mitochondria also engulfed cyanobacterial-like organisms
Are bacteria cells smaller than eukaryotic cells?	one-tenth the size
What is the common name for shapes and forms of bacteria?	morphologies
How big is Epulopiscium bacteria?	0.7 mm
What are one of the smallest bacteria?	genus Mycoplasma
Is ultramicrobacteria is well examined?	not well-studied
What shape does usually cocci type of bacteria can be?	spherical
What type of bacteria usually takes rod-shaped form?	bacilli
What shape Spirochaetes are?	tightly coiled
What shape was newly discovered bacteria from deep under Earth?	branching filamentous types with a star-shaped cross-section
Can shape of bacteria be beneficial to their survival?	can influence the ability of bacteria to acquire nutrients
What is the usual form for Neiserria bacteria?	diploids (pairs)
What type of bacteria is surrounded by a capsule?	Filamentous bacteria
What well known bacteria structure chains?	Streptococcus
What does typically Staphylococcus look like?	clusters
Formation of what can be related to fungal mycelia?	branched filaments
What does bacteria use to adhere to surfaces?	biofilms
How extent can biofilm be?	up to half a meter in depth
What is part of secondary structure in the complex formation of bacteria?	microcolonies,
What is the purpose of networks of channels in microcolonies?	to enable better diffusion of nutrients
Which bacteria is more difficult to eradicate?	bacteria protected within biofilms
What is the vital nutriment for Myxobacteria?	amino acids
Why do cells of Myxobacteria migrate towards each other?	aggregate to form fruiting bodies
How hard to treat bacteria cells in a passive state?	more resistant
What bacteria do in fruiting bodies?	multicellular organisation
What is a cell membrane?	lipid
What does membrane accomplish?	barrier to hold nutrients, proteins and other essential components
Do bacteria have membrabe-bound organelles in their cytoplasm?	do not
Absence of what make bacteria belong to prokaryotes?	true nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts and the other organelles
What bacteria was observed as before prokaryotic cytoskeleton was discovered?	simple bags of cytoplasm
What is crucial for biochemical reactions?	concentration gradients across membranes
What kind of membrane do bacteria cells are filled with?	light-gathering membrane
How does electron transit occur in bacteria?	between the cytoplasm and the periplasmic space
Can membrane of bacteria create lipid structure?	light-gathering complexes may even form lipid-enclosed structures
What is genetic make of bacteria?	a single circular DNA chromosome
Where is DNA chromosome of bacteria located?	in the cytoplasm
How does nucleoid look?	irregularly shaped body
What are the exceptions of non-internal membrane bacteria?	phylum Planctomycetes and candidate phylum Poribacteria
What is the purpose of polyribosomes in bacteria?	production of proteins
What types of intracellar nutrient can bacteria produce?	glycogen, polyphosphate, sulfur or polyhydroxyalkanoates
What gas vacuoles are respoonsible for in bacteria?	to control their buoyancy
What are the most common nonliving compositions in bacteria?	glycogen, lipid droplets, crystals, and pigments
How does gas vesicles produced by Cyanobacteria help her to move in water?	move up or down into water layers with different light intensities
What are chromatophores used for?	photosynthesis
What composes the cell envelope?	cell membrane and cell wall
What is most common cell wall material?	peptidoglycan
Are cell walls of bacteria similar to cell walls of plants and fungi?	Bacterial cell walls are different
How can antibiotic penicillin destroy bacteria?	by inhibiting a step in the synthesis of peptidoglycan
What are the main materials of cell walls of plants and fungi?	cellulose and chitin
What does gram-positive bacteria have?	thick cell wall containing many layers of peptidoglycan and teichoic acids
Why gram-negative cell bacteria is more toxic than gram-positive bacteria?	polysaccharides and lipid A
What can be endotoxins called?	Lipopolysaccharides
What can different structure of the cell walls of bacteria effect?	differences in antibiotic susceptibility
What is the main defense of human body against eye infections?	enzyme lysozyme, found in human tears
What is the most typical staining technique used to identify acid-fast bacteria?	Ziehl-Neelsen stain
What is mycolic acid is responsible for in Mycobacteria?	staining pattern of poor absorption followed by high retention.
What helps Mycobacteria be resistant to decolorization?	high mycolic acid content
What is the main pathogenic bacteria in L-form class ?	Mycoplasma
What are fimbriae?	fine filaments of protein
What are fimbriae liable for?	involved in attachment to solid surfaces or to other cells
What is the diameter of fimbriae?	2–10 nanometres
What are pili?	cellular appendages
What are highly resistant dormant structures of certain gram-positive bacteria called?	endospores
Is creating endospore a reproductive process?	is not a reproductive process
What are ribosomes in endospores are enclosed in?	cortex layer
What chemical compound comprises 5% to 15% of the dry weight of bacterial spores?	Dipicolinic acid
Is there a metabolism in endospores?	show no detectable metabolism
What extreme physical and chemical stresses can endospores endure?	UV light, gamma radiation, detergents, disinfectants, heat, freezing, pressure
How long can endospores of bacteria stay alive in dormant state?	for millions of years
What endospore-forming bacteria can cause tetanus disease?	Clostridium tetani
What is commonly used to determine taxonomy of bacteria?	The distribution of metabolic traits
How is bacterial metabolism determined?	nutritional groups
What are electron acceptors accountable for?	aerobic or anaerobic respiration
What are three main criterias of bacterial metabolism?	the kind of energy used for growth, the source of carbon, and the electron donors
How does heterotrophic carbon metabolism occur?	organic carbon compounds are used as carbon sources
When carbon metabolism is called autotrophic?	cellular carbon is obtained by fixing carbon dioxide
What category do parasitic bacteria fall into?	Heterotrophic bacteria
Green sulfur-bacteria is typical representative of what type of bacteria?	autotrophic bacteria
What is chemotrophy ?	the use of chemical substances for energy
What do lithotrophs use ?	inorganic electron donors
What type of electron donors organotrophs use?	organic compounds
In what organisms is oxygen used as eelectron acceptor?	anaerobic organisms
What do respiratory organisms use as electron donors?	chemical compounds
What is sulfate-reducing bacteria accountable for?	the production of the highly toxic forms of mercury
What is the by-product of non-repiratory anaerobes?	ethanol
How can anaerobes adjust to the surrounding environment?	can switch between fermentation and different terminal electron acceptors
What are hydrogen and carbon monoxide for Lithotrophic bacteria?	Common inorganic electron donors
How can gas methane be used in exceptional set of conditions by methanotrophic bacteria?	both a source of electrons and a substrate for carbon anabolism
What is the main element for aerobic photorophy?	oxygen
What chemical process  helps bacteria to absorb raw materials?	diffusion
How can bacteria obtain raw materials from the environment?	in the form of relatively small molecules
What process is used by eukaryotic cells to absorb external items?	endocytosis
What part of bacteria cell is used during diffusion?	molecular channels in cell membranes
How size and reproduction are linked in bacteria?	Bacteria grow to a fixed size and then reproduce
How does bacteria reproduce?	through binary fission
If the conditions are right how long does it take for bacteria to reproduce?	divide extremely rapidly
What are produced in cell division?	two identical clone daughter cells
In what environment are bacteria being cultivated in labs?	solid or liquid media
What is typical solid setting?	agar plates
What can help to indentify specific bacteria?	The use of selective media
Which environment is better to isolate a single example of bacteria strain?	agar plates
Which media is preffered to grow larger volumes of bacteria?	liquid growth media
What is the simple way of producing large volume of bacteria cells?	high levels of nutrients
What caused the evolution of different growth strategies in bacteria?	nutrients are limited
What can create a subsequent increase of nutrients in natural environment?	biofilms
What do algal bacteria if nutrients are available?	grow extremely rapidly
What is the first stage of bacteria adaptation?	lag phase
What is the second phase of bacteria growth known for?	rapid exponential growth
The absence of what causes the last stage of bacteria growth?	nutrients
What is called the third statge of growth of bacteria?	stationary phase
How many phase are in the growth of bacteria?	four phases
What shape is chromosome of bacteria?	circular chromosome
What bacteria is an exception to single circular chromosome rule?	Spirochaetes of the genus Borrelia
What bacteria is responsible for Lyme disease?	Borrelia burgdorferi
How does chromosome of Borrelia burgdoferi look like?	single linear chromosome
What makes bacteria an asexual organism?	inherit identical copies of their parent's genes
What can cause mutation in bacteria?	changes to their genetic material DNA
What are two ways changes to DNA of bacteria can occur?	random mutation during replication or "stress-directed mutation"
What is the aftermath of infrequent errors during intracellular assembly of virus particles?	Transduction of bacterial genes
What is the result of bacterial adaptation of E.coli bacteria host and plasmid of another bacteria?	Conjugation
How does conjugation take place?	conjugative plasmid integrates into the host bacterial chromosome
Is conjugation a common bacterial adaptation?	It is seldom
What does transformation of bacteria depends on?	numerous bacterial gene products
How simple is the process of transformation?	this complex process
What is the first requirement in order for bacteria to bind and recombine with other bacteria's DNA	enter a special physiological state termed competence
How big can be the transformation level?	between a third of a chromosome up to the whole chromosome
How rare is the transformation among bacteria organisms?	common
Between what species do usually transduction, conjugation and transformation take place?	the same species
What are the consequences of transfer between different species of bacteria?	transfer of antibiotic resistance
What is horizontal gene transfer?	gene acquisition from other bacteria or the environment
What are Bacteriophages?	viruses that infect bacteria
What can viruses do to bacteria?	infect and lyse their host bacteria
What can happen if Bacteriophage contain genes of host's phenotype?	lethal pathogen
How can bacteria resist virus DNA?	CRISPR system provides bacteria with acquired immunity
What is monotrichous?	single flagellum
How many proteins is typical flagellum consist os?	20 proteins
When flagellum is distributed throughout the surface of the cell?	peritrichous
If bacteria has flagellum at each end what is the name of the species?	amphitrichous
How does flagellum function within the cell?	uses the electrochemical gradient across the membrane
How can we classify the vast variety of bacterial species?	grouping organisms based on similarities
Can classification be helpful in determining differences between distinct species?	unclear
What supports the uncertainty in classification between the same kind of bacteria?	lack of distinctive structures in most bacteria,
What can lateral gene transfer create in bacteria?	different morphologies and metabolisms
What is the way modern classification tries to determine species?	emphasizes molecular systematics
What would original term "bacteria" determine?	all microscopic, single-cell prokaryotes
What are two main groups of prokaryotic organisms are divided into?	Eubacteria and Archaebacteria
What groups of organisms are closely related to each other?	archaea and eukaryotes
What domain system is commonly used nowdays to classify microorganisms?	three-domain system
What was developed by Hans Christian  Gram?	The Gram stain
What year was the Grahm stain was developed?	1884
What color do Gram positive bacteria cell walls turn to after being stained?	purple
What color is typical for Gram-negative bacteria after staining?	pink
What stain shows better test results on Norcadia bacteria?	Ziehl–Neelsen
What technique has becoming more popular in classification of bacteria?	molecular methods
What tool does DNA based diagnostics use?	polymerase chain reaction
What else can molecular methods of classification reveal?	identification of "viable but nonculturable" cells
Can new methods determine a total number of bacteria species?	cannot even be estimated with any certainty
Why are certain bacteria called predatory?	bacteria kill and then consume other microorganisms
Which way do Vampirovibrio absorb nutrients of other microorganisms?	attach to their prey in order to digest them
What technique do Daptobacter use in order to kill other microorganism?	invade another cell and multiply inside the cytosol
Where do Daptobacter bacteria come from?	saprophages
What helps bacteria to survive?	close spatial associations
What kind of bacteria can form interspecies hydrogen transfer?	anaerobic bacteria
What do anaerobic bacteria consume?	butyric acid or propionic acid
Where do bacteria stay in soil?	rhizosphere
What do bacteria do in soil?	converting nitrogen gas to nitrogenous compounds
How does the conversion help the vegetation?	provide an easily absorbable form of nitrogen
What is the amount of bacteria in human intestines?	over 1,000 bacterial species
How does gut flora prevent growth of pathogenic bacteria?	through competitive exclusion
What are the pathogenes?	bacteria form a parasitic association with other organisms
Can cause for most pathogenic diseases be found soon?	may only be discovered many years after
What can pathogenes cause?	human death and disease
How pathogenes interact with it's human host?	pathogen has a characteristic spectrum of interactions
Can all bacteria in human body  be harmful?	exist on the skin or in the nose without causing any disease
Which bacteria cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever disiease?	species of Rickettsia
What type of antibiotics called bacterocidal?	if they kill bacteria
What kind of antibiotics are used for prevention of bacterial growth	bacteriostatic
What is the drawback of using antibiotics if agriculture?	rapid development of antibiotic resistance in bacterial populations
Besides in treating human disease where else are antibiotics used?	in intensive farming to promote animal growth
What is common prevention method of infections in medicine?	sterilizing
What quality of bacteria is being widely used re-cyling?	ability of bacteria to degrade a variety of organic compounds
What is being used in cleaning up oil spills?	Bacteria
What other way is bacteria aiding to nature?	used for the bioremediation
What sciences use bacteria?	molecular biology, genetics and biochemistry
When was the first time bacteria were observed?	1676
Who discovered bacteria?	Dutch microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
How was he able to see bacteria?	using a single-lens microscope of his own design
How long did it take for his discovery to be taken seriously?	over a century
When was the first antibiotic discovered?	In 1910
Who was the creator of antibiotic?	Paul Ehrlich
What bacteria did he treat first?	Treponema pallidum
Who based their research on Enrlich's stains works?	Gram stain and the Ziehl–Neelsen
How was his discovery aknowledged?	had been awarded a 1908 Nobel Prize
What's the abbreviation for a printed wiring board?	PWB
What organization likes the term "circuit card assembly" for boards that have already been assembled?	IPC
What would we call a printed circuit board with embedded electronics, abbreviated PCA?	printed circuit assembly
What's the more appropriate, but mostly unused, name for a printed circuit board when it doesn't have embedded components?	printed wiring board
What abbreviation would the IPC use for an assembled circuit board?	CCA
In the old PCB design method, what was used to connect component pin pads?	traces
What did PCB designers used to employ on a mylar sheet?	photomask
What were traces originally made out of?	self-adhesive tape
Designers would rub on a dry transfer of what to make the process of laying out components simpler?	common component footprints
What kind of metal coated the blank boards used to make PCBs?	copper
What process groups PCBs before transfer to a panel?	Panelization
Is it more common for panels to have a single design or many designs?	a single design
What type of panels can also be referred to as an "array?'	assembly panels
What step of the bare board manufacture would be impossible if panels weren't always used?	the plating process
Besides assembly panels, what's the other type of panel?	bare board manufacturing panels
What is the process called whereby the individual PCBs are separated?	depaneling
What boundaries would you follow to separate PCBs on a panel?	individual circuits
What technology has made depaneling possible without needing to physically interact with the board?	lasers
What does the V-shaped groove method save?	space
What delicate component is less likely to be damaged if laser depanelization is used?	circuits
Do additive or subtractive methods use less raw materials?	additive
What object is used to expose selected parts of the photosensitive film to light?	mask
What chemical element is often present in the bath used to sensitive exposed film after it's been imaged?	palladium
In subtractive methods, what metal covers the board and is then partially removed?	copper
In the additive method, which parts of the laminate are plated with copper?	sensitized areas
In the semi-additive process, what do the areas exposed by the mask become at the end?	traces
What metal is used to plate the unmasked parts of the board in the semi-additive method?	copper
After the mask comes off of the board, what step takes off the original plating?	etching
What company used to make radios with additive boards in the mid-20th century?	General Electric
What weight of plating is possible with copper?	any
What non-professionals might use immersion etching, since it's the easiest way to make a PCB?	hobbyists
If you wanted to speed up the etching process, you could agitate the bath up or add what to it?	Heat
Is the immersion etching process long or short compared to other production methods?	long
What funny name is used for the etching process where air is blown through the etching solution to get it moving around?	bubble etching
What's the fastest and most easily controlled process for etching?	spray etching
If you started with a two-sided laminate etched on either side, laminated to the top and bottom, and processed it again to get traces on the outside layers, how many layers would your final PCB have?	four
What makes up the inside of a multi-layer PCB?	trace layers
Pressure is one thing you need to apply to make a multi-layer PCB; what's the other thing?	heat
What tool is used to push the trace layers in a multi-layer PCB together?	press
What kind of material sometimes used for drilling will lose sharpness quickly if used for PCBs?	high-speed-steel
What property do PCBs have that makes them tough to drill through?	abrasive
What kind of drill bit do you need to drill holes in a PCB?	coated tungsten carbide
What's another name for NCD files that has an "x" in it?	Excellon files
What does the "NCD" in "NCD files" mean?	numerically controlled drill
What do the hole walls in two-layer PCBs have to be before they can be electroplated?	conductive
What's the minimum number of layers a PCB can have to be considered "multi-layer"?	three
What process does a multi-layer PCB usually undergo before plating to make sure the layers have good connectivity with each other?	de-smear
What type of boards undergo the etch-back process?	high reliability
Etch-back removes glass fibers and what other material?	resin
What happens to untreated copper that makes it difficult to solder?	oxidizes
What chemical treatment will prevent bare copper from oxidizing?	benzimidazolethiol
What's the process by which bare copper gets covered in solder?	hot air solder levelling
What does hot air solder leveling ensure the coated copper will have?	solderable surface
What alloy can no longer be used in HASL because of restrictions on the use of one of its metal components?	tin-lead
What does OSP stand for?	organic surface protectant
What metal is often under the gold plating on edge connectors?	nickel
What's the abbreviation for immersion silver plating?	IAg
Ag3Cu is one intermetallic that tin forms; what's the other one?	Cu5Sn6
What might the rapid diffusion of coating metal into tin solder leave in the surface coating?	voids
What's the process whereby metal filaments are grown on or in a PCB via DC voltage?	Electrochemical migration
Along with silver and aluminum, what metal grows metal filaments when exposed to an electric field?	zinc
In addition to "whiskers," what does silver sprout around ions like halide?	conducting surface paths
What do scientist call the function whereby tin changes when it's very cold?	tin pest
What's present in plated surfaces that causes tin to grow metal filaments?	tension
If part of a PCB isn't solderable, what can be used instead?	solder resist
What's another term used for "solder resist"?	solder mask
What solder resist with a four-word name is a popular choice in the industry?	liquid photoimageable solder mask
What kind of coating gets applied to the PWB before light exposure?	photo-sensitive
What solder resist is so inaccurate that few choose it anymore?	screen print epoxy ink
What are bare-board tests looking for besides "opens"?	"shorts"
What conductive metal are the lands on a circuit board made out of?	copper
What's an absent connection that needs to be linked up on an unpopulated board called?	An open
What does a flying probe tester deliver to the contact points during testing?	voltage
What system tells the flying probe where to go and what to do?	CAM system
Surface-mount is one type of construction used in PCB assembly; what's the other one?	through-hole
Which type of construction makes components that use more space?	through-hole
Which of the two kinds of construction is weaker under strain?	surface-mount
If you're building a circuit board that has a lot of components that won't be used, which construction would be better?	surface-mount
What's the most frequently used test configuration procedure for ICs?	Joint Test Action Group
Do test circuits create permanent or temporary connections between traces?	temporary
What component of the printed circuit board is appraised with boundary scan testing?	ICs
To whom would you go to acquire the algorithms you'd use for the Joint Test Action Group procedures?	JTAG tool vendors
What would you avoid by using the Joint Test Action Group standard?	physical test probes
If a PCB is intended for use in an setting with extreme conditions, what would probably be applied?	conformal coating
The conformal coating can prevent leaking, shorts, and what other type of moisture damage?	corrosion
A conformal coating can be applied by spraying the PCB or by doing what else to it?	dipping
What material was first used for conformal coating?	wax
What action is made much more difficult for boards that have a conformal coating?	servicing
What special protection are most PCBs shipped in?	antistatic bags
What force can easily change or even completely destroy an etch on a PCB?	static charge
What's another term for "grounded" in the context of PCBs?	earthed
Non-traditional PCBs include microwave PCBs and what other type of board?	MCMs
What class of PCBs are even more susceptible to static than standard ones?	non-traditional
If a lead wasn't soldered manually, what device was used?	wave soldering machine
Which type of PCB construction technique was used first?	through-hole
In through-hole construction, what are the leads on the front attached to on the back?	copper traces
For boards with two sides, to what angle are leads bent to in order to install them horizontally?	90 degrees
What is improved by bending leads in opposite directions on the back of double-sided PCBs?	mechanical strength
Which type of construction is more expensive?	Through-hole
What type of boards end up with limited routing space in through-hole manufacture?	multi-layer
What force might damage a PCB if large components are surface mounted?	mechanical stress
What components can be surface mounted to save space?	small-sized SMD components
A component might not be able to be made any smaller because of its mechanical limitations or what other need?	power requirements
When did surface-mount become a commonly used manufacturing process?	mid-1990s
What did the new components with end tabs replace?	wire leads
What improvement is possible with surface-mounting that enables higher production and lower labor costs?	automation
What are SMDs?	surface mount devices
Is it the chip or the package that influences the price of an SMD more?	chip
What process is a trace left over from?	etching
Along with thickness, what determines the resistance of a trace?	width
What type of trace is often narrower than a ground trace?	signal
In a multi-layer board, what metal would a ground plane be mostly made out of?	copper
What type of circuits use a stripline and microstrip format?	microwave circuits
What element of a laminate is designated by the cloth to resin ratio, among other things?	type designation
What's the name for the measurement of a laminate's change in thickness as its temperature changes?	Z-axis expansion coefficient
What's the abbreviation for the glass transition temperature of a laminate?	Tg
What's the common name of polytetrafluoroethylene?	Teflon
What pre-preg material is designated by "FR-2"?	phenolic cotton paper
To what type of packaging is thermal expansion particularly critical?	ball grid array
What material delivers optimum dimensional stability?	glass fiber
What dielectric is matte glass and polyester?	FR-6
Along with the non-woven class, what makes up the reinforcement type materials?	woven
Which is the more expensive reinforcement type?	non-woven
What type of structure do woven reinforcements have that cause them to have variation in their electrical parameters?	spatially nonhomogeneous
Which ratio varies because of the structure of woven reinforcements?	resin/glass
For what kind of applications are non-woven reinforcement materials better than woven ones?	RF/analog
What's the temperature at which resin softens and expands called?	glass transition temperature
Along with vias, what makes up the components of a board?	joints
What will happen to the components when the temperature of resin goes above that of glass transition?	mechanical overload
What do thick boards require to resist plating failure?	high Tg matrix
When resin stays below Tg, its thermal expansion is similar to that of copper and what other material?	glass
What will happen to the materials when a board gets wet or is in a humid area?	Moisture absorption
If materials absorb moisture and then are heated enough to vaporize the water, the board might show delamination or what other type of damage?	cracking
What percentage absorption do F-4 epoxies have?	0.15%
What's the approximate relative dielectric constant of most materials in circuit boards?	4
What material has an absorption rate of only 0.01%?	Teflon
What's the minimum amount of copper a layer in a PCB can have to be considered "heavy copper"?	three ounces
About how thick would a PCB layer be if it contained three oz. of copper?	0.0042 inches
What will a circuit board with heavy copper carry very well?	current
What would a PCB designer use heavy copper to make their circuit board resist?	thermal strains
Where does the heat go when it leaves heavy copper-plated vias?	external heat sinks
What arduous aspect of the process can designers skip in Multiwire?	routing of wires
What does the machine create by drawing a straight line between two points on the board?	a connection
Along with quick design times, what problem does Multiwire cut down on?	crosstalk
What makes Multiwire impractical to use when large quantities of a board are needed?	cost
In simple language, what are the interconnections in an embedding matrix?	wires
What type of construction is best for applications that need to portion space carefully?	Cordwood
What gets mounted in the middle of two parallel planes in a cordwood construction?	axial-leaded components
What type of component has to be used in cordwood construction to its detriment?	nickel-leaded
What do insulating cards prevent between interconnection layers?	shorting
What force caused the physical damage to components that affected the Apollo program?	Differential thermal expansion
Who was the German inventor who wrote in 1903 about conductors being laminated in layers to a board?	Albert Hanson
What material did Thomas Edison experiment with by trying to chemically attach conductors to it?	linen paper
What year did Arthur Berry patent his print-and-etch method?	1913
In Max Schoop's method, what was used to create the flame-sprayed pattern on the board?	a patterned mask
Who obtained a patent in 1927 for his method of electroplating circuit patterns?	Charles Ducas
What was Paul Eisler making when he came up with the printed circuit?	a radio set
What event prompted the United States to adopt the printed circuit to make proximity fuses?	World War II
When was the printed circuit released for commercial use in the U.S.?	1948
Who was working on the same type of large-scale application of printed circuits as the U.S. in Britain in the mid-1950s?	Geoffrey Dummer
What process was created by the U.S. Army that led to innovation in consumer electronics?	Auto-Sembly
What company developed the first electronic circuit that could be mass produced and was durable enough to be fired from a gun?	Globe Union
Who was in charge of the Centralab Division of Globe Union when the PCB used in anti-aircraft fuses was invented?	Harry W. Rubinstein
Where did Harry Rubinstein attend college?	University of Wisconsin-Madison
What was the plate used for anti-aircraft proximity fuses in World War II made out of?	ceramic
What award did Rubinstein win in 1984 for his contributions?	Cledo Brunetti Award
What type of construction was originally used for all electronic components?	through-hole
In what year was the Auto-Sembly process created?	1949
What year was the patent for the Auto-Sembly process granted?	1956
Although two men developed the Auto-Sembly process, to whom was the patent officially granted?	U.S. Army
Which part of the Auto-Sembly manufacturing process is the most costly?	drilling holes
How many club members are there?	The Premier League is a corporation in which the 20 member clubs act as shareholders
How many matches does each team play?	Teams play 38 matches each (playing each team in the league twice, home and away), totalling 380 matches in the season.
What days are most games played?	Most games are played on Saturday and Sunday afternoons; others during weekday evenings
Who sponsors the Premier League?	It is currently sponsored by Barclays Bank and thus officially known as the Barclays Premier League and is colloquially known as the Premiership.
What name is the Premier League known as outside of the United Kingdom?	Outside the UK it is commonly referred to as the English Premier League (EPL).
How many member clubs are shareholders in the Premier League?	20
When do Premier League seasons run from?	August to May
How many matches do each team play?	38
Who sponsors the Premier League?	Barclays Bank
What is the Premier League commonly referred to outside the UK?	English Premier League
What date was the Premier League formed?	The competition formed as the FA Premier League on 20 February 1992
Who secured the domestic rights to broadcast games 116 and 38 respectively?	BSkyB and BT Group securing the domestic rights to broadcast 116 and 38 games respectively.
How much was the deal worth?	The deal was worth £1 billion a year domestically as of 2013–14
How much revenue does the league generate in domestic and international television rights?	The league generates €2.2 billion per year in domestic and international television rights
In 2014/15, how much were the teams apportioned in revenues?	In 2014/15, teams were apportioned revenues of £1.6 billion.
When was the Premier League originally formed?	20 February 1992
When was the Football League originally founded?	1888
How many games were secured to broadcast by BSkyB?	116
How many games were secured to broadcast by BT Group?	38
How much income does the Premier League generate per year in worldwide television rights?	€2.2 billion
Is the Premier League the most watched football league in the world?	The Premier League is the most-watched football league in the world,
How many territories is the Premier League broadcast to?	broadcast in 212 territories
What is the potential television audience of the Premier League?	a potential TV audience of 4.7 billion people
What is the Premier League's UEFA co-efficients of leagues rank?	The Premier League rank second in the UEFA coefficients of leagues
What is the average game attendance for the league?	the average Premier League match attendance exceeded 36,000
To how many homes is the Premier League broadcast to?	643 million
What average attendance number was exceeded by the Premier League in the 2014-15 season?	36,000
Which league has the highest average attendance in professional football?	Bundesliga
To how many territories is the Premier League broadcast to?	212
What is the potential television audience of the Premier League?	4.7 billion
When was the low point for English football?	the late '80s had marked a low point for English football
Why was there a low point for English football?	Stadiums were crumbling, supporters endured poor facilities, hooliganism was rife
Why were the English clubs banned from European competition in the 1980's?	English clubs were banned from European competition for five years following the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985.
Had the Football League First Division ever been in the top level?	The Football League First Division, which had been the top level of English football since 1888
In which year were English football clubs banned from competition in Europe?	1985
How long were the clubs banned for?	five years
What did English players do after the ban?	moved abroad
When attendance dropped to the Football League First Division, what else decreased?	revenues
When did the downward trend of the English Football start to turn around?	by the turn of the 1990s the downward trend was starting to reverse
Was England successful in the 1990 FIFA World Cup?	England had been successful in the 1990 FIFA World Cup, reaching the semi-finals.
Did the UEFA remove the 5 year ban on English clubs playing in European competitions in 1990?	UEFA, European football's governing body, lifted the five-year ban on English clubs playing in European competitions in 1990
What did the removal of the ban result in?	(resulting in Manchester United lifting the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1991
Did the Taylor Report on stadiums safety standards propose expensive upgrades to stadiums?	proposed expensive upgrades to create all-seater stadiums in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster
In which year did English football's downward trend stop thanks to England making it to the FIFA World Cup semi-finals?	1990
In which year was the English club ban lifted by UEFA?	1990
In which year shortly thereafter did Manchester United win the UEFA Winners' Cup?	1991
In which month was the Taylor Report published?	January
In which year was the Taylor Report published?	1990
How much money did the Football League receive in revenues from television money for a two year agreement in 1986?	the Football League received £6.3 million for a two-year agreement in 1986
In 1998, the deal was renewed for what amount over four years?	deal was renewed in 1988, the price rose to £44 million over four years.
In 1988, how many clubs threateded to leave and form another league?	ten clubs threatened to leave and form a "super league"
Why did some of the top teams consider leaving the Football league?	to capitalise on the growing influx of money being pumped into the sport.
What did the Football League's television agreement price rise to in 1988?	£44 million
When was the first year that clubs threatened to leave the Football League?	1988
What price was set for Football League television rights in 1986?	£6.3 million
For how many years was the 1986 television rights contract?	two
For how many years was the 1988 television rights contract?	four
In 1991, was a proposal for a new league postponed?	At the close of the 1991 season, a proposal was tabled
What did this agreement establish?	established the basic principles for setting up the FA Premier League.
When was the Founder Members Agreement signed?	The Founder Members Agreement, signed on 17 July 1991
Would the new top division have commerical independence from the Football Association as well as the Football League?	The newly formed top division would have commercial independence from The Football Association and the Football League
Would the FA Premier League be able to negotiate their broadcasting and sponsorship agreements?	giving the FA Premier League licence to negotiate its own broadcast and sponsorship agreements.
On which day was the Founder Members Agreement signed?	17 July 1991
What was the argument made for the splitting off of the FA Premier League which would lead to being able to compete across Europe?	extra income
In which year was the proposal for a new league tabled?	1991
Why did Greg Dyke of London Weekend Television meet with representatives of the biggest five English football clubs in 1990?	The meeting was to pave the way for a break away from The Football League.
Why did Dyke only want the larger clubs featured on national television?	Dyke believed that it would be more lucrative for LWT if only the larger clubs in the country were featured on national television
Did the five clubs think this was a good idea?	The five clubs decided it was a good idea and decided to press ahead with it
Were talks held with the Football Association to see if they were okay with this plan?	David Dein of Arsenal held talks to see whether the FA were receptive to the idea
Who was the London Weekend Television's managing director?	Greg Dyke
In which year did the managing director meet with the representatives of the "big five" football clubs?	1990
In which country did the managing director meet with the representatives of the "big five" football clubs?	England
Which Arsenal representative held talks with the Football Association about getting their backing for the new league?	David Dein
What did the Football Association want to do through building a relationship with the new league?	weaken the Football League's position
When did the First Division clubs resign from the Football League?	In 1992, the First Division clubs resigned from the Football League en masse
When was the FA Premier League formed as a limited company?	on 27 May 1992 the FA Premier League was formed as a limited company working out of an office at the Football Association's then headquarters in Lancaster Gate.
How many divisions did the Premier League start out with at this time?	the Premier League would operate with a single division
How many divisions did the Football League after the the Premier League was founded?	the Football League with three
Was there a change in the competition format after the Premier League was formed?	There was no change in competition format; the same number of teams competed in the top flight
On which date was the FA Premier League formed legally?	27 May 1992
Out of which organization's headquarters did the original FA Premier League staff operate out of?	Football Association
How old was the Football League when the break-up happened?	104
How many divisions were left in the Football League after the split?	three
How many divisions did the Premier League start with after the split?	a single division
When did the Premier League hold its first season?	The league held its first season in 1992–93
Originally, how many clubs did the Premier League have?	was originally composed of 22 clubs.
Who scored the first ever goal for the Premier League	The first ever Premier League goal was scored by Brian Deane of Sheffield United in a 2–1 win against Manchester United.
Which blubs were relegated from the old first division at the end of the 1991-1992 season and didn't take part in the first Premier League season?	Luton Town, Notts County and West Ham United were the three teams relegated from the old first division
In which years were the first season?	1992–93
How many clubs originally made up the league?	22
Who scored the first goal in the Premier League?	Brian Deane
For which team was the first goal scored?	Sheffield United
Against which team was the first goal scored?	Manchester United
What was an important feature of the Premier League in the mid-2000s?	the dominance of the so-called "Big Four" clubs: Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool and Manchester United
Which team had no losses in 2003-2004 and ended up winning the league?	Arsenal going as far as winning the league without losing a single game in 2003–04
Why was Kevin Keegan concerned about the league in May of 2008?	Kevin Keegan stated that "Big Four" dominance threatened the division,
Since 2003-04, has any club won all of its games like Arsenal did?	Arsenal going as far as winning the league without losing a single game in 2003–04, the only time it has ever happened in the Premier League.
In how many season from 2003 to 2009 did the "Big Four" take all four top places in the UEFA Champions League?	5
Which of the "Big Four" teams did not lose a single game in the 2003-04 season?	Arsenal
Who stated that "Big Four" dominance was a threat to the division?	Kevin Keegan
Who said that all of the tussles in the Premier League made it interesting, even if only four teams dominated?	Richard Scudamore
What was Richard Scudamore's job?	Premier League chief executive
Which team finished fourth in the 2009-10 season?	In the 2009–10 season, Tottenham finished fourth and became the first team to break the top four since Everton in 2005
Why was there critcism of the elite clubs?	due to their increasing ability to spend more than the other Premier League clubs.
Which two "Big Four" clubs did not finish in the top four in the 2011-12 season?	That season also saw two of the Big Four (Chelsea and Liverpool) finish outside the top four
Since 1994-95, who was the first club out side of the "Big Four" to win the title	Manchester City won the title in the 2011–12 season, becoming the first club outside the "Big Four" to win since 1994–95.
In the 2009-10 season, which team was the first to break into the "Big Four" since 2005?	Tottenham
In which position did Tottenham finish in the 2009-10 season?	fourth
In 2011-12, which club was the first non-"Big Four" team to win since 1994-95?	Manchester City
In 2011-12, how many "Big Four" clubs finished outside the top four places in the league?	two
In 2005, which was the only non-"Big Four" team to break the top four?	Everton
What was the number of clubs reduced to in 1995.	the number of clubs was reduced to 20 in 1995
In 1995, who requested that domestic leagues lower the amount of games played.	Due to insistence by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA), the international governing body of football
Who insisted that the number of games played in each domestic league must be reduced?	FIFA
In 1995, what was the number of clubs in the league reduced to?	20
On which date did FIFA request that all European leagues reduce the number of teams within themselves to 18?	8 June 2006
In the 2007-08 season, how many teams was the Premier League left with?	20
How many teams were relegated from the Premier League in 1995?	four
How many votes does each Football Association Premier League Ltd (FAPL) club have on issues?	Each club is a shareholder, with one vote each on issues such as rule changes and contracts.
Who is the chairman of the FAPL and when was he appointed?	The current chairman is Sir Dave Richards, who was appointed in April 199
Why did John Quinton and Peter Leaver resign as chairman and chief excutive?	John Quinton and Peter Leaver, were forced to resign in March 1999 after awarding consultancy contracts to former Sky executives Sam Chisholm and David Chance.
Does the Football Association say about the management of the Premier League?	has veto power as a special shareholder during the election of the chairman and chief executive and when new rules are adopted by the league.
Who owns the Football Association Premier League?	member clubs
How many votes do the member clubs of the Premier League have each?	one
What do the people each club elect oversee?	the daily operations of the league
Who is the current chairman of the Premier League?	Sir Dave Richards
Who is the current CEO of the Premier League?	Richard Scudamore
Who decides on how many Premeir League representatives there are for the European Club Association?	the number of clubs and the clubs themselves chosen according to UEFA coefficients.
How many representatives does the Premier League have for the European Club Association for 2012-13?	For the 2012–13 season the Premier League has 10 representatives in the Association
How many members does the European Club Association elect for the UEFA's Club Competitions Committee?	The European Club Association is responsible for electing three members to UEFA's Club Competitions Committee
Which competitions does the Club Competitions Committee have a say in?	Club Competitions Committee, which is involved in the operations of UEFA competitions such as the Champions League and UEFA Europa League.
According to what are the number of and which clubs chosen to attend the European Club Association?	UEFA coefficients
How many representatives did the Premier League have in the European Club Association during the 2012-13 season?	10
How many members is the European Club Association responsible for electing to the UEFA Club Competitions Committee?	three
When does the Premier League have its playing season?	During the course of a season (from August to May)
How many games does each club play each season?	each club plays the others twice (a double round-robin system), once at their home stadium and once at that of their opponents, for a total of 38 games.
How many points does each club receive for each win?	Teams receive three points for a win
Which criteria is used to rank the clubs?	Teams are ranked by total points, then goal difference, and then goals scored.
How is a tie for the championship handled?	If there is a tie for the championship, for relegation, or for qualification to other competitions, a play-off match at a neutral venue decides rank.
How many clubs are currently in the Premier League?	20
Which month marks the start of a Premier League season?	August
Which month marks the start of a Premier League season?	May
How many times does each club play every other club?	twice
How many total games does each club in the Premier League play per season?	38
What will a fifth place Premier League team qualify for?	The team placed fifth in the Premier League automatically qualifies for the UEFA Europa League
What places are reserved for the FA Cup and the League Cup winners?	Two Europa League places are reserved for the winners of each tournament;
Why is it important to have a high Fair Play ranking?	will automatically qualify for the UEFA Europa League first qualifying round
If a team already qualifies for the Champions League and they winner the FA Cup or the League Cup will another team get to qualify for the Champions League?	that place will go to the next-best placed finisher in the Premier League.
How many Europa League places are reserved for domestic tournament winners?	Two
To which league is the fifth place Premier League team automatically qualified for?	UEFA Europa League
The team which has the highest ranking in the Fair Play standings is guaranteed qualification for which qualifying round in the Europa League?	first
Which team did not qualifty for Champions League in 2005 but was able to particpate?	UEFA gave special dispensation for Liverpool to enter the Champions League
Did the Liverpool Club place in the Champions League in 2005?	in 2005, after Liverpool won the Champions League the year before, but did not finish in a Champions League qualification place
How many qualifiers did England have for the Champions League in 2005?	UEFA gave special dispensation for Liverpool to enter the Champions League, giving England five qualifiers.
Do defending champtions get to play in the following year's Champions League if they don't have enough wins to qualify	UEFA subsequently ruled that the defending champions qualify for the competition the following year regardless of their domestic league placing.
How many winning teams from an association can participate in the Champions League?	No association can have more than four entrants in the Champions League
Which team received special dispensation from the UEFA in 2005 so they could enter the Champions League?	Liverpool
Who did UEFA rule should automatically qualify for the Champions League?	the defending champions
At which team's expense does the previous champion's automatic entry into the Champions League without placing in the top four come?	the fourth-placed team
In 2012, which team was automatically qualified for the champion's league even though they did not place in the top four?	Chelsea
Which team was denied entry into the Champions League in 2012 due to being bumped out of the running by the defending champion?	Tottenham Hotspur
How many times have Premier League teams have won the Champions League since 1992-2013?	Premier League clubs had won the UEFA Champions League four times
How many times has the Premier League won the World Cup (FIFA Club) during that same time period?	won by Premier league clubs once (Manchester United in 2008)
How many times have Premier League teams been runners up in the World Cup?	they have also been runners-up twice,
How many times did Premier League clubs win the Champions League between 1992 and 2013?	four
How many runners up in the Champions League were from the Premier League between 1992 and 2013?	five
Which league had the most Champions League wins between 1992 and 2013?	La Liga
Which league had the second most Champions League wins between 1992 and 2013?	Serie A
Which league had only three Champions League wins between 1992 and 2013?	Bundesliga
What were some of the reasons for the increased revenues in 2013-14?	the Premier League had net profits in excess of £78 million, exceeding all other football leagues
What are the Premier League's revenues for 2009-10?	total club revenues of €2.48 billion in 2009–10.
Which award did the Premier League win in 2010?	In 2010 the Premier League was awarded the Queen's Award for Enterprise in the International Trade category
Why did it receive this award?	for its outstanding contribution to international trade and the value it brings to English football and the United Kingdom's broadcasting industry.
What were the Premier League's net profits in 2013-14?	the Premier League had net profits in excess of £78 million, exceeding all other football leagues
Which league has the highest revenue in the world?	Premier League
What were the total revenues of the Premier League in the 2009-10 season?	€2.48 billion
What were the net profits of the Premier League in 2013-14?	£78 million
In which year was the Premier League awarded an International Trade award?	2010
Did Swansea qualify for the Europa Leaque in 2012-13?	In 2012–13, Swansea qualified for the Europa League
When was Swansea City's home match played against Wigan Athletic?	Swansea City's home match at the Liberty Stadium against Wigan Athletic on 20 August 2011.
In 2013-14, how much did the Premier League's Welsh clubs increase by?	The number of Welsh clubs in the Premier League increased to two for the first time in 2013–14,
How did Swansea qualify for the Europa League?	Swansea qualified for the Europa League by winning the League Cup.
Which team gained promotion then but was relegated after its first season?	in 2013–14, as Cardiff City gained promotion, but Cardiff City was relegated after its maiden season.
In which year did a Welsh club participate in the Premier League for the first time?	2011
Which team was promoted to the Premier League in 2011?	Swansea City
In which stadium was the first Premier League match played outside of England?	Liberty Stadium
On which date did Swansea City play its first Premier League game?	20 August 2011
Against which team did Swansea City play its first Premier League game?	Wigan Athletic
Which team received permission to move to Dublin, Ireland in 1998?	in 1998, when Wimbledon received Premier League approval to relocate to Dublin, Ireland,
Are there any clubs Scotland or Ireland in the Premier League?	Participation in the Premier League by some Scottish or Irish clubs has sometimes been discussed, but without result.
What are Scotland's two largest teams?	Scotland's two biggest teams, Celtic and Rangers,
Why didn't they move to Dublin?	the move was blocked by the Football Association of Ireland.
Which team received Premier League approval to relocate to Dublin?	Wimbledon
In which year did a Premier League team consider relocating to Ireland?	1998
Who occasionally discusses a Scottish team joining the Premier League?	the media
Who received broadcasting rights to the Premier League in 1992?	The League's decision to assign broadcasting rights to BSkyB in 1992
Why was this a unique decision?	pay television was an almost untested proposition in the UK market,
What happened to the Premier League's televsion rights after this decision?	the value of the Premier League's TV rights soar.
What was the cause of this?	a combination of Sky's strategy, the quality of Premier League football and the public's appetite for the game
In which year did the Premier League decide to give BSkyB broadcasting rights?	1992
What sort of television was BSkyB that made it such a radical broadcaster to choose for the Premier League?	pay television
Do European Leagues sell their television rights per a collective level?	other European Leagues, including La Liga, in which each club sells its rights individually
What happens when European Leagues sell their televsion rights individually?	a much higher share of the total income going to the top few clubs
How is the teleivsion revenue distributed in the Premier League?	The money is divided into three parts:
How is half of the money distributed?	half is divided equally between the clubs
How is the final quarter of the money distributed?	the final quarter is paid out as facilities fees for games that are shown on television, with the top clubs generally receiving the largest shares of this.
On what sort of basis does the Premier League sell its television rights?	collective basis
How does La Liga sell its broadcasting rights?	individually
Which clubs get the greatest share of broadcasting income when rights are sold individually?	the top few clubs
What percentage of broadcasting revenue is divided equally by all La Liga clubs?	half
What percentage of broadcasting revenue is awarded on a merit basis according to ranking at the end of the season?	one quarter
How much was the amount of first five seasons of the Sky television rights?	The first Sky television rights agreement was worth £304 million over five seasons.
How much many did the Premier League make from selling its internation rights during 2004-07?	The league brought in £320 million from the sale of its international rights for the three-year period from 2004–05 to 2006–07
What happened to Sky's agreement in 2006.	Sky's monopoly was broken from August 2006 when Setanta Sports was awarded rights to show two out of the six packages of matches available.
Why did this happen?	This occurred following an insistence by the European Commission that exclusive rights should not be sold to one television company.
What was the average income from media from 2007-2010 for the Premier League?	giving Premier League clubs an average media income from league games of around £40 million-a-year from 2007 to 2010.
How many seasons did the first television rights contract award to Sky?	five
How much was the first television rights contract awarded to Sky worth?	£304 million
How much was the second television rights contract awarded to Sky worth?	£670 million
How much was the third television rights contract awarded to Sky worth?	£1.024 billion
By being awarded television rights, which other network broke Sky's monopoly on Premier League coverage?	Setanta Sports
Why has there been a several court cases against Sky and Premier League?	The TV rights agreement between the Premier League and Sky has faced accusations of being a cartel
What did the Office of Fair Trading decide regarding the claim that Sky abuses their position in 2002.	Office of Fair Trading in 2002 found BSkyB to be dominant within the pay TV sports market, but concluded that there were insufficient grounds for the claim
Who investigated the Premier League's collective selling rights in 1999?	In July 1999 the Premier League's method of selling rights collectively for all member clubs was investigated by the UK Restrictive Practices Court,
What did they decide about the collective selling issue?	the UK Restrictive Practices Court, who concluded that the agreement was not contrary to the public interest.
What has the agreement between the Premier League and Sky been accused of being?	a cartel
Who investigated the agreement between the Premier League and Sky in 2002?	the Office of Fair Trading
Who investigated how the Premier League sold television rights in 1999?	the UK Restrictive Practices Court
How much money did Premier League earn regarding television rights in 2010-13?	Television rights alone for the period 2010 to 2013 have been purchased for £1.782 billion.
How many games did BT show in 2013-16?	BT had been awarded 38 games a season for the 2013–14 through 2015–16 seasons at £246 million-a-year.
Who will show 116 games for that same time period?	The remaining 116 games were retained by Sky who paid £760 million-a-year.
How much have the domestic televsion rights increased from 2010-12 to 2012-13?	The total domestic rights have raised £3.018 billion, an increase of 70.2% over the 2010–11 to 2012–13 rights.
How much did BT and Sky pay for their rights up to the 2018-19 season?	Sky and BT paid a total of £5.136 billion to renew their contracts with the Premier League for another three years up to the 2018–19 season.
When will the BBC's weekend highlights package run out?	2016
How much were Premier League television rights from 2010 to 2013 purchased for?	£1.782 billion
When did Setanta Sports fail to meet their payments deadline?	22 June 2009
When Setanta Sports could not pay their bill to the league, which network took over broadcast rights from them?	ESPN
On which date was it announced that BT was awarded a broadcasting contract?	13 June 2012
What country is the Premier League the most distributed televised sports broadcast?	The Premier League is particularly popular in Asia, where it is the most widely distributed sports programme
Who broadcasts the Premier League's games in India?	In India, the matches are broadcast live on STAR Sports. In China
Who broadcasts the Premier League's games in China?	In China, the broadcast rights were awarded to Super Sports in a six-year agreement that began in the 2013–14 season.
Who broadcasts the Premier League's games in Canada?	As of the 2013–14 season, Canadian broadcast rights to the Premier League are jointly owned by Sportsnet and TSN
How many games does each of them broadcast?	both rival networks holding rights to 190 matches per season.
On which continent other than Europe is the Premier League especially popular?	Asia
Which network is the main live broadcaster of Premier League in Australia?	Fox Sports
Which network in Australia offers viewers the choice of which Saturday afternoon match they watch?	Foxtel
Which network broadcasts Premier League live in India?	STAR Sports
Which Chinese broadcaster has Premier League rights?	Super Sports
Who broadcasts the Premier League's games in the United States?	The Premier League is broadcast in the United States through NBC Sports.
What was the average viewership in the United States during the 2014-15 season?	with NBC and NBCSN averaging a record 479,000 viewers in the 2014–15 season
How many years did NBC Sports receive an extension for with the Premier League in 2015?	NBC Sports reached a six-year extension with the Premier League in 2015
What was the value of this extension?	in a deal valued at $1 billion (£640 million).
When will this extension end?	through the 2021–22 season
Which American broadcaster shows the Premier League currently?	NBC Sports
By what percentage has viewership in the US risen from 2012 to 2015?	118%
How many viewers on average watched the Premier League 2014-15 season in the US?	479,000
In which year did NBC Sports secure an extension of six years with the Premier League?	2015
How much was the NBC broadcasting deal with the Premier League worth in 2015?	$1 billion
Why has their been distance between the Premier League and the Football League?	in large part to the disparity in revenue from television rights between the leagues,
Did many new teams in the Premier League have any difficulties in their initial season?	many newly promoted teams have found it difficult to avoid relegation in their first season in the Premier League.
Was it unusual for a new team to go back to the Football League after their first season in the Premier League?	In every season except 2001–02 and 2011–12, at least one Premier League newcomer has been relegated back to the Football League.
In the 1997-98 season how many new teams had to go back to the Football League?	In 1997–98 all three promoted clubs were relegated at the end of the season.
Due to the disparity in television rights revenue between leagues, who struggles to avoid relegation in their Premier League first season?	newly promoted teams
In every season but 2001-02 and 2011-12, at least how many Premier League teams have been relegated?	one
How many newly promoted clubs were relegated from the Premier League in 1997-98?	three
If a team is relegated in the Premier League what type of tv payment do they receive?	The Premier League distributes a portion of its television revenue to clubs that are relegated from the league in the form of "parachute payments".
What do critics have to say about this payment?	critics maintain that the payments actually widen the gap between teams that have reached the Premier League and those that have not,
What has happened to some of the clubs who weren't able to get back into the Premier League right away?	financial problems
How much does a Football League club receive on average for their television revenues?	the average Football League Championship club receives £2 million
How does this compare an average Premier League team?	the average Premier League team receives £55 million
To which type of team are parachute payments distributed to in the Premier League?	relegated
Starting in the 2013-14 season, parachute payments are in excess of what amount of revenue?	£60 million
What is said to widen between clubs who reach the Premier League and those who do not thanks to parachute payments?	the gap
What was the result of their recommendation?	as a result all stadiums in the Premier League are all-seater
What did the Taylor Report recommend at the the Hillsborough disaster in 1989?	a recommendation that standing terraces should be abolished
How many stadiums have been closed down since Premier League started?	Nine stadiums that have seen Premier League football have now been demolished.
What was the total seating capacity of stadiums in the Premier League in the 2010-11 season.	The combined total capacity of the Premier League in the 2010–11 season is 770,477 with an average capacity of 38,523.
In how many stadiums had Premier League been played as of the 2015-16 season?	53
What did the Taylor Report recommend to abolish from all stadiums?	standing terraces
How many stadiums in which the Premier League has been played have been demolished as of 2016?	Nine
What is the capacity of Bloomfield Road stadium?	16,220
What is the combined total capacity of all stadiums in the Premier League as of 2011?	770,477
Are attendance remittances that important to the Premier League?	Stadium attendances are a significant source of regular income for Premier League clubs.
What was the Premier Leagues standard attendance in the 2007-08 season?	The Premier League's record average attendance of 36,144 was set during the 2007–08 season.
What was the league's first year attendance average?	the average attendance of 21,126 recorded in the league's first season (1992–93).
Attendance for the 2013-14 season set a new record of how much?	in the 2013–14 season recording an average attendance of 36,695 with a total attendance of just under 14 million,
What was the average attendance for all Premier League clubs during the 2009-10 season?	34,215
What was the total attendance of all Premier League games during the 2009-10 season?	13,001,616
By how many attendees did the average Premier League attendance increase between 1992 and 2009?	13,089
For when did the Taylor Report set the deadline for replacing terraces with seats in stadiums?	1994–95
During which season did the Premier League set a record average attendance of over 36,000 people?	2007–08
What are some of the every day tasks that a manager of a team has to deal with?	Managers in the Premier League are involved in the day-to-day running of the team, including the training, team selection, and player acquisition.
What type of licence does a manager need?	Managers are required to have a UEFA Pro Licence
Is this licence required on a permanent basis?	The UEFA Pro Licence is required by every person who wishes to manage a club in the Premier League on a permanent basis
Give an example of someone who was a caretaker manager?	examples include Paul Hart at Portsmouth and David Pleat at Tottenham Hotspur.
What is a caretaker manager?	Caretaker appointments are managers that fill the gap between a managerial departure and a new appointment.
What license are managers in the Premier League required to hold?	UEFA Pro Licence
Which licence follows completion of both the UEFA B and A licences?	UEFA Pro Licence
For how long at most is an unlicenced caretaker manager allowed to control a Premier League team for?	12 weeks
Which caretaker manager was later promoted to permanent manager at Portsmouth?	Paul Hart
Which caretaker manager was later promoted to permanent manager at Tottenham Hotspur?	David Pleat
Which team in 1999 had a line-up for starting that was consisted of all foreign players?	On 26 December 1999, Chelsea became the first Premier League side to field an entirely foreign starting line-up,
At the beginning of the Premier League how many foreign players were there for the first  round of games?	At the inception of the Premier League in 1992–93, just eleven players named in the starting line-ups for the first round of matches
By the 2000-1 season what was the percentage of foreign players?	By 2000–01, the number of foreign players participating in the Premier League was 36 per cent of the total.
Which team in 2005 had all-foreign team players?	on 14 February 2005 Arsenal were the first to name a completely foreign 16-man squad for a match
In 2009, what percent of the players were English in the Premier League?	By 2009, under 40% of the players in the Premier League were English.
How many of the original Premier League players in the 1992-93 season hailed from outside the UK or Ireland?	eleven
By 2000-01, what percentage of players in the Premier League were from outside the UK and Ireland?	36
By 2004-05, what percentage of players in the Premier League were from outside the UK and Ireland?	45
On which date did Chelsea host an entirely foreign starting line-up and therefore become the first team to do so?	26 December 1999
On which date did Arsenal name a fully foreign 16-man squad for a match?	14 February 2005
Why did the Home Office change it rules regardin work permits in 1999?	In response to concerns that clubs were increasingly passing over young English players in favour of foreign players
What was one of their changes?	A non-EU player applying for the permit must have played for his country in at least 75 per cent of its competitive 'A' team matches
What was another requirement of foreign players?	his country must have averaged at least 70th place in the official FIFA world rankings over the previous two years.
Could a club appeal a requirement?	If a player does not meet those criteria, the club wishing to sign him may appeal.
In which year did the Home Office tighten rules on granting work permits to foreign football players?	1999
For what percent must a player play of the competitive A team matches for which he was available for selection in the previous two years to get a work permit from the Home OFfice?	75
Over the last two years, what rank must a player's team average at least in order for them to receive a work permit from the Home Office?	70th place
What can a club do if a player they wish to sign does not meet the Home Office's work permit requirements?	appeal
When are the transfer windows?	The two transfer windows run from the last day of the season to 31 August and from 31 December to 31 January.
Can players be transferred under an emergency outside the transfer windows?	Player registrations cannot be exchanged outside these windows except under specific licence from the FA, usually on an emergency basis.
What new rule was put into practice during the 2010-11 season?	As of the 2010–11 season, the Premier League introduced new rules mandating that each club must register a maximum 25-man squad of players aged over 21,
Why was this new rule put into effect?	This was to enable the 'home grown' rule to be enacted,
When can a player be transferred?	Players may only be transferred during transfer windows that are set by the Football Association.
During which time can a player be transferred from one European football league to another?	transfer windows
How many transfer windows are available each year from the Football Association?	two
On which basis are transfers outside of transfer windows licenced?	emergency
What is the maximum number of players able to be registered to a Premier League team?	25
How many of a 25-member Premier League squad must be from the UK or Ireland?	8
Have transfer fees been increasing over the past years?	The record transfer fee for a Premier League player has risen steadily over the lifetime of the competition.
What was the record breaking transfer fee in 1996?	Alan Shearer made a record breaking £15 million move to Newcastle United in 1996.
In 2009, what was the transfer fee for Cristiano Ronaldo?	Manchester United's sale of Cristiano Ronaldo to Real Madrid for £80 million in 2009,
What was the transfer fee for Gareth Bale in 2013.	Tottenham Hotspur selling Gareth Bale to Real Madrid for £85 million in 2013,
What was Luis Suarez's transfer fee in 2014?	Liverpool selling Luis Suárez to Barcelona for £75 million in 2014.
Who was the first British player in the Premier League to receive a transfer fee greater than £3 million?	Alan Shearer
Who was the first British player in the Premier League to receive a transfer fee greater than £15 million?	Alan Shearer
Who paid £15 million to transfer Alan Shearer to their club?	Newcastle United
In which year did Newcastle United pay £15 million to transfer Alan Shearer to their club?	1996
For how much did Tottenham Hotspur sell Gareth Bale to Real Madrid for in 2013?	£85 million
Who is the Golden Boot award given to each season?	The Golden Boot is awarded to the top Premier League scorer at the end of each season.
Who has the record for most goals in the Premier League?	Newcastle United striker Alan Shearer holds the record for most Premier League goals with 260
How many players have achieved 100 goals?	Twenty-four players have reached the 100-goal mark
How many different players have won the top scorer title?	14 different players from 10 different clubs have won or shared the top scorers title.
Who has the record for scoring the most goals in single season?	Andrew Cole and Alan Shearer hold the record for most goals in a season (34) – for Newcastle and Blackburn respectively.
To whom is the Golden Boot award given to?	the top Premier League scorer
Who holds the record for the most goals in the Premier League?	260
How many players have 100 goals or more in the Premier League?	Twenty-four
How many different players have won or shared the top scorer title in the Premier League?	14
Who had scored four overall scoring titles as of the 2006 season?	Thierry Henry
What is the Premier League Championship trophy based on?	The design of the trophy is based on the heraldry of Three Lions that is associated with English football.
Where on the trophy can two of the lions be seen?	Two of the lions are found above the handles on either side of the trophy
Where can the third lion be seen?	the third is symbolised by the captain of the title winning team as he raises the trophy, and its gold crown, above his head at the end of the season
What do the ribbons on the trophy mean?	The ribbons that drape the handles are presented in the team colours of the league champions that year.
The Golden Boot is made of sterling silver, silver gilt and which semi-precious stone?	malachite
On what type of metal band are the title-winning clubs listed on the Golden Boot?	silver
What does the green colour of Malachite on the Golden Boot represent?	the green field of play
How many lions are found on the Golden Boot?	Two
Who symbolizes the third lion not found on the Golden Boot trophy?	the captain of the title winning team
When did the Roman Republic begin?	509 BC
When did the Roman Republic end?	27 BC
What marked the beginning of the Roman Republic?	the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom
When was Cleopatra defeated at the Battle of Actium?	31 BC
What do most consider to be the event that ended the Roman Republic?	Roman Senate's grant of extraordinary powers to Octavian
Who elected consuls in the Roman government?	citizens
Who eventually became full members of the aristocracy?	leading plebeian families
What were Rome's legislative structures eventually turned into?	the Justinian Code
What was the senate that advised consuls in the Roman government comprised of?	appointed magistrates
What went hand and hand with military success?	political success
What factor is considered by some to be the main driving force behind the expansion of Rome?	inter-state factors
What type of policy is considered by some to be responsible for Rome's many military conflicts?	imperialism
What was a common conclusion to wars in the early days of republican Rome?	restoration of the way things were
What type of alliance was created between the various Roman city-states?	mutual self-protection
What did Roman settlers commonly seek out?	land
After what war did the alliances start to solidify?	Second Punic War
What helped Rome move closer to a confrontation with several other major powers in the area?	This growing coalition
What towns had chosen Hannibal's side?	southern Italian
What did city-states hope to gain from the Roman confederacy?	membership (and protection)
What effect did the weakening of Ptolemaic Egypt have on nearby areas?	destabilisation
Who attempted to find out how Rome dominated the Greek east?	Polybius
Why was Rome involved in matters in the Greek east?	alliance-seeking
Which countries citie-states attempted to gain the protection of Rome?	Greek
What was seen as the behind the Roman influence in the east?	crisis management
At what point was the entire Roman world joined together under Roman control?	the time of the Roman Empire
What was not seen as an influence of Rome's influence in the west?	intentional empire-building
What type of city-states were involved with the Roman Republic?	independent
In what battle did Rome claim victory over several Latin cities in?	the Battle of Lake Regillus
What year did the Battle of Lake Regillus take place?	496 BC
In what year did Rome claim victory against the city of Veii?	477 BC
What Roman battle took place in the year 446 BC?	the Battle of Corbione
Who initially had control over the Sabines?	Etruscan control
When did the Battle of Allia River approximately end?	387 BC
How many of the Roman military were involved in the Battle of Allia River?	15,000 troops
Where did the Romans attempt to escape to after their loss against the Gauls?	Rome
What is the name of the chieftan who led his army to victory in the Battle of Allia River?	Brennus
Who asked Rome for assistance after being overburdened by their enemies?	two Etruscan towns
What country did the Romans continue to expand to after Rome was sacked?	Italy
How many battles were conducted by Rome before they were forced to flee in The First Samnite War?	two battles
What caused the Romans early withdrawl in The First Samnite War?	revolt of several of their Latin allies
When did The First Samnite War end?	341 BC
Who did Rome claim victory against in The Battle of Vesuvius?	Latins
Who suffered a great amount of losses battling the Roman army?	Pyrrhus
What did Rome refuse to do in their relations with Pyrrhus?	negotiate
What military leader does the term Pyrrhic victory come from?	Pyrrhus
What ultimately caused Pyrrhus to vacate completely from the country of Italy?	Seeing little hope for further gains
In what year did the Battle of Beneventum take place?	275 BC
What battles were initially complete disasters for Rome?	naval battles
What type of engine was invented by the Romans?	grappling engine
Who did the Carthaginians hire to lead their army after several losses against the Romans?	Xanthippus
Who claimed victory at the Battle of Aegates Islands?	The Romans
Who lost access to the Mediterranean after numerous naval losses?	the Carthaginians
What was the name of Hannibal's family member that wanted to join his army in battle?	Hasdrubal Barca
At what river was Hasdrubal Barca defeated at?	Metaurus River
In which battle was Hannibal clearly defeated at?	the Battle of Zama
Who had led the army that the Romans had sent to Africa?	Scipio Africanus
Why did the Romans send an army to Africa?	to threaten the Carthaginian capital
What had prevented Carthage from defending their territory from pirates?	Treaties
What type of colony was Carthage primarily comprised of?	punic colonies
What cities flourished after they were conquered by the Romans?	punic cities
What was the main request of the Romans that Carthage turned down?	complete surrender
Who did the Numidians form an alliance with?	Rome
What kingdom sent an ambassador to Italy in an attempt to form an alliance against Rome?	Macedonia
Where did Philip V want to extend his control to?	westward
What peninsula was the kingdom of Macedonia able to be found in?	Greek peninsula
At what point did Rome discover that an alliance between Philip V and Hannibal had been achieved?	Philip's emissaries were captured by a Roman fleet
Who did Philip V seek an alliance with?	Hannibal
What was declared by the Romans now that the Philip had been defeated?	"Peace of the Greeks"
Where did the Romans remove their troops from after Philip's loss?	Greece
What request of Rome was ignored by Philip V that quickly led to the start of the Second Macedonian War?	an ultimatum to cease his campaigns against Rome's new Greek allies
In what year did Philip lose the Battle of Cynoscephalae?	197 BC
What was Philip forced to return after his loss in the Battle of Cynoscephalae?	his recent Greek conquests
Who had now been appointed as a military advisor to the emperor of Seleucid?	Hannibal
What was thought to be the plan of Hannibal and the emperor of Seleucid?	an outright conquest not just of Greece, but of Rome itself
Which empire currently controlled the majority of the former Persian Empire?	Seleucids
Who had managed to recreate nearly the entirety of the empire of Alexander the Great?	Seleucids
Which former enemy wanted an alliance with the Romans?	Philip
Which town in Italy now housed a large Roman garrison?	Sicily
Why was a garrison implented in Italy by the Romans?	in case the Seleucids ever got to Italy
Who had been defeated in the Battle of Thermopylae?	the Seleucids
Why did the Romans decide to withdraw their forces from Greece?	assuming (or hoping) that the lack of a major Greek power would ensure a stable peace
What loss started a decline of the Seleucids Empire?	Battle of Magnesia
In what year did Philip pass away?	179 BC
Who was next in line to the throne at the time of Philip's death?	Perseus
In what year were did the Macedonians lose The Battle of Pydna?	168 BC
How did Rome respond to their successive losses against the Macedonians?	by sending a stronger army
Who had initially begun the Third Macedonian War?	Rome
How many republics was the Kingdom of Macedonia splintered into?	four client republics
In what year did the Fourt Macedonian War end?	148 BC
Who did Rome fight in the Fourth Macedonian War?	a Macedonian pretender to the throne
What effect did the establishment of the kingdom of Macedonia have on Greece?	destabilizing
Who could claim victory at the Second Battle of Pydna?	The Romans
What war is considered to be the last Roman pacification in Northern Africa?	The Jugurthine War
What eventually caused Jugurtha to become a captive?	treachery
Who attempted to usurp the throne of Numidia?	Jugurtha
When did the Jugurthine War end?	104 BC
Who did Jugurtha have to bribe in order for them to accept him as the new leader of Numidia?	the Romans
When did the Cimbrian War end?	101 BC
In what year did Rome come into contact with a couple Celtic tribes?	121 BC
What war began in the year 113 BC?	The Cimbrian War
Where did the tribes that were almost annihilated in the Battle of Vercellae hail from?	northern Europe
How were soldiers rewarded by Roman generals?	with plunder
Who saw increased loyalty from the Roman soldiers?	their generals
Who was greater in numbers than the Roman slave masters?	the slaves
Around how many rebellious uprisings and civil wars happened in the 1st century BC?	twelve
Which individual later became princeps after having challenged the senate?	Octavian
How many slaves at most were under the command of Spartacus?	150,000
When was the beginning of the Social War?	91 BC
How many Italians became citizens after the loss of the Social War?	more than 500,000
How many slave uprisings were there between the years of 135 BC and 71 BC?	three
Ultimately what started the Social War?	allies complained that they shared the risk of Rome's military campaigns, but not its rewards
What type of war was caused by the clash of two generals?	civil wars
In what year did Marius and Sull begin to clash?	88 BC
In what specific section of Rome did the Battle of the Colline Gate take place?	very door of the city
Who was defeated in the Battle of the Colline Gate?	an army of the Marius supporters
What can be considered one of the causes that led to the downfall of the Roman Republic?	the willingness of Roman troops to wage war against one another
Who was the leader of Pontus in the year 85 BC?	Mithridates the Great
With which individual did Lucius Cornelius have a rivalry?	Gaius Marius
How did the ruler of Pontus anger Rome?	by seeking to expand his kingdom
When was the last year of Mithridates the Great's reign?	63 BC
How many Romans lived in Mithridate the Great's kingdom in 88 BC?	80,000
Who held  a term as praetor in the Iberian Peninsula?	Julius Caesar
Why did Julius Caesar wish to invade Gaul?	would give him the dramatic military success he sought
When did Julius Caesar's term as consul end?	59 BC
What military leader was Julius Caesar a contemporary of?	Pompey
What was the reasoning Julius Caesar used to start the Gallic Wars?	two local tribes began to migrate on a route that would take them near (not into) the Roman province of Transalpine Gaul
When was the invasion of the Parthian Empire begun?	53 BC
Who started the invasion of the Parthian Empire?	Crassus
In what battle did Marcus Licinius Crassus die?	the Battle of Carrhae
Who was believed to have had a secret allegiance with enemies of Julius Caesar?	Pompey
What did the senators request of Caesar in order for him to stand for consul?	turned over control of his armies to the state
During what year did Caesar's armies cross the river Rubicon?	49 BC
Who would be seen as having been defeated in the Battle of Pharsalus?	Pompey
Who decided to attack Pompey in Greece?	Caesar
In what country did Pompey die in?	Egypt
In which year did The Battle of Pharsalus take place?	48 BC
Who was now considered to be the primary figure in the Roman state?	Caesar
Which group of people conspired against Caesar in order to have him assassinated?	senators
Which former lieutenant of Caesar was considered a public threat after Caesar was assassinated?	Mark Antony
When did Julius Caesar die?	March 44 BC
Why did the Roman senators wish to have Caesar assassinated?	the Roman Republic was in danger
What failure caused the the flares of civil war to spark up again?	Second Triumvirate of Octavian
In what year was Octavian first allowed to use the names Augustus and Princeps?	27 BC
Who defeated Cleopatra and Mark Antony at the Battle of Actium?	Octavian
Which individual was granted permanent consular powers?	Octavian
Who has been designated as the first Emperor of Rome?	Octavian
Who would elect a king in the Roman Kingdom prior to the revolution?	senators
What was the length of a term that a king would be elected for in the Roman Kingdom?	life term
When did the last king of the Roman Kingdom lose his seat of power?	509 BC
Who was considered to be the last king of the Roman Kingdom?	Lucius Tarquinius Superbus
Who were the joint consulars considered to be an equal of politically?	old king
In what year was the city in conflict with two nearby tribes?	494 BC
Which group of people requested the ability to elect officials?	The plebeians
What were the assistants to the plebeian tribunes named?	plebeian aediles
Who used the vetoes that they had been given to prevent the appointment of magistrates?	the tribunes
During what century were reformed passed that allowed laws passed by the plebeians to have the full force of the law?	5th century BC
What year were limits placed upon plebeians that prevented them from holding more than one office concurrently?	342 BC
What could no longer be associated with debt after laws were passed preventing it?	interest
What year saw the election of a plebeian to the office of praetor?	337 BC
How did senators attempt to gain the favor of the tribunes?	gave the tribunes a great deal of power
What was considered a pathway to holding a higher office?	the tribunate
In what year was the Plebiscitum Ovinium initiative enacted?	before 312 BCE
Who had already held a large amount of magisterial offices?	plebeians
Who was allowed to be elected to high office positions?	only patricians
What initiative provided censors with the abillity to appoint new senators?	Plebiscitum Ovinium
Who could a newly elected magistrate expect to be appointed by?	the censor
What was the economic status of your typical plebeian in 287 BC?	poor
Who refused to concern themselves with the plebeians debt situation?	senators
What did the patrician senators refusal to address the accumulating debt of the plebeians lead to?	the final plebeian secession
What law was passed that allowed the Plebeian Council to consider a bill without the approval of the patrician senators?	the Lex Hortensia
Which group of people were now considered to be politically equal with the plebeians?	patricians
Which group of people rebelled by vacating Rome?	The plebeians
How many plebeian families had an identical standing as the old aristocratic patrician families?	A small number
What did the rebelling plebeians want before they returned to Rome?	more rights
What years did no important political changes happen during?	287 BC and 133 BC
Why was the senate considered to be supreme during this time?	because the era was dominated by questions of foreign and military policy
What group of people often failed to use the power that was given to them?	the plebeians
What was a political element that satiated the plebeians?	the possession of power
Who enacted crucial laws during this period of time?	the senate
What had caused citizens to vacate their farms?	long military campaigns
How could a candidate assure the vote of a poverty stricken plebeian?	offered them the most
What type of culture was a side effect of the rampant poverty of the average plebeian?	culture of dependency
What caused the bankruptcy of many farmers during this era?	commodity prices fell
Who had bought the now bankrupt farms?	landed aristocracy
To what position was Tiberius Gracchus elected?	tribune
Who had tried to enact a law that places a limit on the amount of property any single individual could possess?	Tiberius Gracchus
When was Tiberius Gracchus murdered?	when he stood for reelection to the tribunate
Which tribune was impeached by the Plebeian Council?	Marcus Octavius
What was considered to be the opposite of Roman constitutional theory?	that a representative of the people ceases to be one when he acts against the wishes of the people
In what year was Gaius elected to office?	123 BC
Who brought forward a law that would given citizenship right to Italian allies of Rome?	Gaius
What is considered to be the end game of Gaius Gracchus?	weaken the senate and to strengthen the democratic forces
Which elected official lost the election in 121 BC?	Gaius
What was the location of the Gaius Gracchus murder?	Capitoline Hill in Rome
Who was the illegitimate offspring of the King Micipsa of Numidia?	Jugurtha
Who was Jugurtha's rival?	Gaius Marius
When was Gaius Marius elected to the position of consul?	107 BC
Who did not agree with the election of Gaius Marius?	aristocratic senators
Which individual did the populares part have an allegiance with?	Marius
In what year was a Roman army dispatched to terminate the King of Pontus?	88 BC
Who was ordered by the senate to become commander in the conflict with King Mithridates?	Lucius Cornelius Sulla
What political party did Lucius Cornelius Sulla belong to?	populares
Who had successfully passed a law whose sole purpose was to lessen the power of the tribunate?	Sulla
What happened after Sulla returned to the conflict with Mithridates?	Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna soon took control of the city
How many years was normal to span between offices prior to the populares controlling the city?	ten-year interval
Who were slaughtered upon the arrival of Sulla in Rome?	most of Marius' supporters
In what year did Sulla die?	78 BC
In what year did Sulla succesfully take over the populares controlled city?	83 BC
Which leader had achieved peace with Mithridates?	Sulla
Where in the year 77 BC was an uprising?	Spain
Which former lieutenant of Sulla had dismantled most of the constitution that Sulla had crafted?	Pompey
In what year was the election held that let Pompey and Crassus obtain the seat of consul?	70 BC
Who was the instigator in the slave revolt in Italy?	Spartacus
When did Pompey return to Rome after having quelled the uprising in Spain?	71 BC
When did the movement that considered the use of peaceful means to solve the plight of lesser classes begin?	Around 66 BC
How many former consuls in Rome were executed as a result of a conspiracy?	one former consul
What town was a common site of agitation within the area?	Faesulae
Who can lay claim to the destruction of Lucius Sergius Catilina's forces?	Cicero
Which individual had planned an uprising that ideally would see the death of most of the Roman senators?	Lucius Sergius Catilina
In which year would Julius Caesar hope to be elected to the position of consul?	59 BC
What was the name of the private agreement between Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus?	First Triumvirate
What was Crassus agree to receive in the First Triumvirate agreement?	a future consulship
When did Julius Caesar return to Rome?	61 BC
What provided the Roman senate with exuberance?	successes against Catiline
Who had tried to prevent the enactment of the laws that Caesar had proposed?	Bibulus
What type of case saw Cicero testify against Clodius?	sacrilege case
Who enacted a law that would increase the partial grain subsidy?	Clodius
Which individual lost his home to a fire?	Cicero
Who was elected to the tribunate in 58 BC?	Publius Clodius Pulcher
Who was responsible for the attacks on followers of Pompey?	Clodius
What political position were Pompey and Crassus assured they would receive in 55 BC?	consul
What caused the death of Julius Caesar's female offspring?	childbirth
Which individual ran for consul in 55 BC?	Domitius Ahenobarbus
Who was responsible for an expedition against the Parthian Kingdom?	Crassus
In which year did Clodius die?	52 BC
Who was responsible for the death of Clodius?	Milo
Who did the senators decide would aid them in their conflict with Caesar?	Pompey
What type of powers were granted to Pompey by the senate?	dictatorial
Ultimately what forced the senate to abandon Rome and flee to Greece?	Caesar's rapid advance
In Rome during this time who was considered to hold both the dictatorship and the position of the tribunate?	Caesar
What power could Caesar use against the senate should he choose?	power to veto
In what year was Caesar given the power of a censor?	46 BC
What is considered to have counteracted the prestige of the senatorial aristocracy?	raised the membership of the Senate to 900
On what date was Caesar killed?	March 15, 44 BC
Who comprised most of the members of the conspiracy to assassinate Caesar?	senators
What did some members of the conspiracy believe Caesar would bring back?	the monarchy
Why did many members of the senate flee the city after Caesar's death?	fear of retaliation
Who did Gaius Cassius and Marcus Brutus lead the conspiracy against?	Caesar
Who was soon allied with Caesar's adopted son following his death?	Mark Antony
In what battle did Mark Antony see defeat?	Battle of Actium
In what year did the Battle of Philippi end?	42 BC
How did Mark Antony die?	he committed suicide
What was the alliance that was formed with Marcus Lepidus named?	the Second Triumvirate
Who in Rome was responsible for imposing tribute on nations that they had conquered?	Rome's military
What could be considered a trait of Rome's military campaigns?	obstinate persistence
What was considered a problem in the Roman Republic during its last century?	civil war
What would often lead Rome to wage war in foreign lands?	defense of an ally
Who introduced the phalanx formation into Rome's army?	Servius Tullius
Were Roman soldiers expected to purchase their own equipment?	wealthiest citizens, who were able to purchase the best equipment
Who were contained in the first rank of the phalanx formation?	wealthiest citizens
From what people did it appear the Etruscans had model their form of warfare on?	Greeks
Where did Dionysius hail from?	Halicarnassus
What was a detriment of using the phalanx formation?	only effective when fighting in large, open spaces
In what century was the phalanx formation finally discarded by the Roman people?	4th century BC
What fighting formation would eventually replace the phalanx in battle?	manipular formation
Where is the likely source of the change to the manipular formation?	copied from Rome's Samnite enemies
What type of ground could be found in the central Italian peninsula?	hilly terrain
How many horseman were likely to be found in a single manipular legion?	300 horsemen
Where could you expect the extensive amount of cavalry troops to be sourced from?	richest class of equestrians
What often neglected social class was the light infantry comprised of?	lower social classes.
What type of infantry joined light, and the cavalry in battle?	heavy infantry
Small shields could be found in what section of the infantry?	light infantry
Where did Rome receive half of their army from?	the Socii
How many calvary did Rome's Italian allies use?	900 cavalry
How many soldiers were available to Rome at the start of the Second Punic War?	770,000 men
What did Rome's Italian allies call their battle formation?	alae
What allowed Rome to source some of their military from other nearby areas?	military confederation with the other peoples
During what century did Roman controlled areas see a decline in their populations?	2nd century BC
What caused the Roman state to provide armaments to their army?	greater collapse of the middle classes
What was considered an attributing factor to the decline of the Roman population?	huge losses incurred during various wars
What were soldiers expected to own prior to the year 217 BC?	property
Who was now able to join military service in 107 BC?	all citizens
Where would legionaries in the Roman army likely to be sourced from?	citizen stock
Who would likely make up the majority of the Roman army's light infantry?	non-citizens
Which consul was responsible for the reforms that allowed all citizens access to join the Roman army?	Gaius Marius
What was the process that removed the property requirement for the Roman military called?	Marian reforms
Around how many units could be expected to be contained within a cohort?	480 infantrymen
How many troops were placed into each tent group?	8 men
Who would now be used as scouts instead of fighting alongside the army in the battlefield?	cavalry troops
What designation of troops was considered to make up the majority of a legion?	cohort
In which sea was a large amount of naval vessels sent in order to remove Cilician pirates?	Mediterranean Sea
Around how many ships were sent into service from Greek cities?	as many as a thousand ships
Who was ultimately responsible for the naval ships that were sent to the English Channel?	Caesar
What was the driving force behind the revitalization of the Roman naval forces?	to meet several new demands
What aspect of the Roman military saw a decline in size after the subjugation of the Mediterranean?	Roman navy
What was the general source of the Roman senate's authority?	the esteem and prestige of the senators
Who was responsible for overseeing a military action?	the senate
What was a motion that was enacted by the senate called?	senatus consulta
What area was the likely focal point of the Roman senate?	foreign policy
What governing Roman body would self-select their own members during times of great distress?	the senate itself would select its members
What was the main requirement of seeking a trial in the Roman courts?	legal status of Roman citizenship
Who would be expected to oversee a capital case in the Roman courts?	assemblies
Which designation of people made up the entirety of the members of a comitia?	optimo jure
Who did the assemblies elected by the optimo jure elect?	magistrates
What type of assembly could specific groupings of optimo jure be found in?	concilia
What Roman assembly elected both magistrates and censors?	Comitia Centuriata
What profession of people made up the entireity of the Comitia Centuriata?	centuries
Which elected official had imperium powers?	magistrates
Would the Comitia Centuriata occasionally be called upon to serve as the highest court of appeal?	It also served as the highest court of appeal in certain judicial cases
How many tribes were considered to be in the Comitia Tributa?	35 tribes
How were the assembly of tribes segregated into specific tribes?	geographical subdivisions
What assembly was responsible for the election of quaestors?	the Comitia Tributa
When would the assembly of tribes cease voting?	Once a measure received support from a majority of the tribes
Who would be responsible for the election of a plebeian tribune?	a plebeian
Who had the right to grant powers to a magistrate?	People of Rome
What is considered to be the most authoritative constitutional power?	imperium
What did the constitutional power of imperium grant a magistrate?	authority to command a military force
What would be one of the duties that a newly elected magistrate could expect to perform?	to look for omens
What power was in possession of every single magistrate in Rome?	power of coercion
How long concurrently could an elected magistrate serve in office?	one-year
How many people would serve concurrently in a single magisterial office?	at least two people
What form of due process was a harbinger of our vary own habeas corpus?	Provocatio
What would you call a magistrate who had his powers of imperium continued?	promagistrate
Who would a Roman go see in an attempt to reverse the decision of a magistrate?	a tribune
Which official had supremacy in both civil and military matters?	Consuls
Who was responsible for the adminstration of civil laws?	Praetors
Who was responsible for the handling of the Roman census?	two censors
How long could an elected censor remain in office for?	18-month term
What officer primarily had duties over finance matters?	quaestors
How long could a dictator be appointed for in times of certain emergencies?	six months
What would happen during the commencement of a dictator's term?	Constitutional government would be dissolved
What type of offense was the harm of a tribute treated as?	capital offense
What was the ultimate source of the tribunes powers?	their sacrosanctity
Where did the bulk of the cities populace live?	the city center
What type of housing could be located in the city center?	apartment blocks
From what local area in Rome is the word palace borrowed from?	Palatine Hill
How many areas in Rome could be called hills?	seven
What culture did Rome have an extreme amount of influence on?	European cultures
What language was commonly used in scholarly mathematical writings prior to the 19th century?	Latin
From which people were many facets of Roman culture copied from?	Greeks
What was considered to be the dominant language in the Roman Republic?	Latin
Around what percentage of the Roman populace were thought to be slaves?	over 25%
Where in the Roman Republic could slaves be acquired?	slave markets
Were slave masters allowed to free their slaves in the Roman Republic?	Many slaves were freed by the masters for services rendered
What branch of law did Rome lack?	law enforcement
Who was responsible for seeking justice in the Roman courts?	an accuser who was forced to prove the entire case himself
What article of clothing could generally be found on a male Roman?	a toga
What garment was worn by male gendered adults to convey their status as a citizen of Rome?	toga virilis
What was typically worn after the loss of a loved one in the Roman Republic?	The toga pulla
Which official would wear a garment containing broad red striping?	Senators
How did a womans garment typically vary from a mans in the Roman Republic?	usually brightly coloured
When were the staple foods in the Roman republic typically eaten at?	11 o'clock
What did people in the Roman Republic use to consume solid foods?	Fingers were used
What type of food was cheese considered to be in Rome?	staple
What form of expression did the Roman Horace practice?	poet
What did Romans sit on when they had a meal at home?	stools
What beverage was consumed by all the classes in the Roman Republic?	Wine
What was considered a compelling way to defame poltical rivals?	An accurate accusation of being an alcoholic
During what meals was wine commonly drank?	all meals
What was considered an indication of alcoholism in the Roman Republic?	Drinking on an empty stomach
How did Romans develop their male children as Roman citizens?	physical training
Who could be expected to obtain guidance in the art of weaving?	Girls
What Roman art involved speeches made to the public?	Oratory
When did academic schooling begin in the Roman Republic?	around 200 BC
What caused the Romans to conform several educational concepts to their own system?	various military conquests in the Greek East
What was the primary language of the Romans?	Latin
What type of language is French considered to be?	Romance languages
What type of Latin was likely spoken in Rome?	Vulgar Latin
How would Vulgar Latin eventually differ from Classical Latin?	pronunciation
Which Germanic originating language densely acquired aspects from Latin?	English
Who was responsible for massively affecting Roman literature?	Greek authors
What style of literature could commonly be found in Roman works?	poetry
Who was the author of the epic poem Aeneid?	Virgil
What Roman poet attempted to develop science in their poetry?	Lucretius
Which epic poem tells the tale of the founding of the city that one day would become Rome?	Aeneid
What was considered to be dominant part of normal life?	Music
What language does the word Music see it's origins in?	Greek
What do many people consider to be the source of our modern musics familiarity with us?	developments only within the last 1,000 years
Could events in the Roman Republic often include music?	Many private and public events were accompanied by music
What was a primary cause of the modification of Roman architectural elements?	urban requirements changed
What Roman construction material has continued to be a mystery to this day?	Roman concrete
Do any Roman structures still exist in our time?	even after more than 2,000 years some Roman structures still stand magnificently
What facet of the capital city was emulated by other urban centers in the Roman Republic?	The architectural style
What was the name of the area in which youth played and exercised?	Campus Martius
What could you also call Rome's Campus Maritus?	Field of Mars
What is the Roman board game Tabula a precursor to?	backgammon
What was Roman version of Chess called?	Latrunculi
When did the Roman religion that is generally identified with the republic first established?	around 500 BC
Who did the Romans adapt several of their religious convictions from?	Greek
Where did a large amount of the deities that were worshiped in Roman civilization come from?	Proto-Indo-European pantheon
What religious element could be found in all Roman households?	an altar
What in Roman society was considered to be a temple to the gods?	each household
When do most people believe the Pacific War began?	early December 1941
On what date did Japan attack Pearl Harbor?	7/8 December 1941
When did the Second Sino-Japanese War begin?	7 July 1937
Which countries did the Second Sino-Japanese War encompass?	Empire of Japan and the Republic of China
Has Japan ever attacked Thailand?	Japan invaded Thailand
What is the generally accepted date the Pacific War started?	7/8 December 1941
When did Japan invade Manchuria?	19 September 1931
What nation initiated hostilities?	Japan
When did Japan invade China?	7 July 1937
What was the Pacific War theater part of after December 1941?	World War II
What events ended the war with Japan?	atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
On what date did Japan surrender?	2 September 1945
What changed in the ruling of Japan after the war?	a new liberal-democratic constitution
Where did Japan's surrender occur?	aboard the battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay
What was the process called whereby the leader of Japan stepped down?	Shinto Directive
What nation were the allies against?	Japan
What nations comprised the Axis?	Germany and Italy
What cities were destroyed by atom bombs?	Hiroshima and Nagasaki
When did the Soviet Union invade Manchuria?	8 August 1945
When did Japan surrender?	2 September 1945
By what name was the war with Japan referred?	Greater East Asia War
What did Japanese officials call the war?	Japan–China Incident
What was the reason Japan gave for the war?	achieving their independence from the Western powers
What date was the new name of the war released?	12 December
What name did Japan call the war?	Greater East Asia War
When did Japan adobt the name for the war?	10 December 1941
What was Japan's publicised war goal?	independence from the Western powers
What did Japan call the occupied group of Asian nations?	Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere
How was the name of the war chosen by Japan?	by a cabinet decision
What role did Thailand play in the war?	temporary alliance
Which group controlled Chinese costal regions?	Wang Jingwei regime
Which army invaded Burma?	Phayap Army
Burma was formerly annexed by what country?	Britain
What states assisting Japan was Thailand a part of?	Axis
What year did Thailand form an alliance with Japan?	1941
What army invaded northeastern Burma?	Phayap Army
What were the Japanese puppet states?	Manchukuo and Mengjiang
Who controlled the coast of China?	Wang Jingwei regime
Did the U.S. believe that Thailand was an Axis ally?	not an ally
What does the U.S. believe caused Thailand to help Japan?	blackmail
Is Thailand treated differently than other Axis countries?	the same way
According to the USA, what country did Japan blackmail?	Thailand
What nations were occupied by the Axis?	Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Poland, and the Netherlands
After 1945, how did the USA treat Thailand?	not as a former enemy
Who occupied Thailand according to the USA?	Japanese troops
Where did many of Japan's soldiers come from?	Korea and Formosa
What type of soldiers came from Hong Kong?	Collaborationist units
What other Asian country, a group of islands, helped the Japanese?	Philippines
What French forces assisted Japan?	Vichy
What colonies did Japan conscript soldiers from?	Korea and Formosa
Who were the collaborators assisting Japan in Hong King?	ex-colonial police
Did Mexico play a part in the war?	took part
What other major continent participated as an ally of the U.S.?	Australia
On which side of the war were the Chinese?	United States
What colonies did the Netherlands possess?	Dutch East Indies and the western part of New Guinea
What large Asian country was allied with the United States?	Republic of China
What was the name of the Philippines nation?	Commonwealth of the Philippines
What nation possessed the Dutch East Indies?	Netherlands
What nation possessed west New Guinea?	Netherlands
What incident occured on July 7, 1937?	Marco Polo Bridge Incident
Who supplied assistance to the Chinese military?	Soviet Union
When did the Nanking Massacre occur?	December 1937
Where was the first Nationalist victory?	Taierzhuang
How did people around the world react to Japan's Panay Incident?	condemned
When was the Marco Polo Bridge Incident?	7 July 1937
What incident started the war between China and Japan?	Marco Polo Bridge Incident
What was the capital of China?	Nanking
When was Nanking captured?	December 1937
What nation provided material support to China?	Soviet Union
Who controled Indochina in 1940?	Vichy France
Who were the Axis Powers along with Japan in 1940?	Germany and Italy
When did Japan invade Indochina?	September 1940
Did Japan and Germany work closely together prior to 1944?	little coordination
When did Japan take over Indochina?	September 1940
Who controlled Indochina before the Japanese takeover?	Vichy France
When did Japan become an Axis power?	27 September
How much coordination was there between Japan and Germany?	little
How many nations comprised the Axis powers?	three
Why did the Chinese ultimately fail in its counter offensives?	low military-industrial capacity
What policy did Japan adopt to retaliate against China?	"Three Alls Policy" ("Kill all, Burn all, Loot all")
What slowed the Japanese in their attacks on China?	mountainous terrain
In what city did Japan set up a provisional capital?	Chungking
What was Japan's "Three Alls Policy"?	"Kill all, Burn all, Loot all"
What year did China and Japan reach a stalemate?	1941
Where was the Chinese provisional capital?	Chungking
What natural obsticles stalled the Japanese offensive against the Chinese?	mountainous terrain
What group organised guerrilla warfare against the Japanese in China?	Communists
Who was the leader of the Nationalist government?	Chiang Kai-shek
When did cooperation between communist and nationalist forces end?	January 1941
Did Japan support rival governments?	supporting several
When did the co-operation between Chinese nationalist forces and communists end?	January 1941
What was Wang Jingwei's government considered?	puppet
What government did Chiang Kai-shek lead?	Nationalist government
Which Japanese Admiral felt it was necessary to go to war with the U.S.?	Sankichi Takahashi
Why was the Dutch East Indies important to Japan?	oil reserves
In what year did the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere expand?	1940
Who said a showdown between Japan and the United States would be necessary?	Admiral Sankichi Takahashi
What was the importance of the Dutch East Indies to Japan?	oil reserves
By what year did Japanese strategists expand their concept of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere?	1940
What were these embargoes called by the Japanese media?	"ABCD ("American-British-Chinese-Dutch")
What did The West do to disuade Japan in China and French Indochina?	stopped selling oil, iron ore, and steel to Japan
Why was denying supplies important to the western countries?	denying it the raw materials needed to continue its activities
Why did Western powers stop selling resources to Japan?	to discourage Japanese militarism
How did Japan view Western embargos?	as acts of aggression
What percent of oil made up Japan's domestic consumption?	about 80%
What did the Japanese media refer to the embargoes as?	"ABCD line"
What would Japan accomplish by peace after their early victories?	recognize Japanese hegemony in Asia.
Did The Japanese believe they could defeate the U.S.?	impossible
What was Japan's strategic goal in attacking America?	defeated by reaching limited military objectives, not by total conquest
What did the Japanese military leadership think the chances were of complete military victory ove the United States?	impossible
What did Japan want recognised in planned peace negotiations after their initial victories?	Japanese hegemony in Asia
If acceptable negotiations btween Japan and the United States were reached, what would be done regarding the attacks?	canceled
What was the conduct of the war against the United States based on?	historical experiences
How many U.S. battleships were incapacitated in the Pearl Harbor attacks?	eight
Was America at war when Japan attacked Pearl Harbor?	not officially at war
How many Americans died in the Pearl Harbor attacks?	2,403
Why did Japan attack America?	allow Japan free rein in Asia
What were the most vital American ships at the time of the attack?	aircraft carriers
When did Japan launch the aattack on Pearl Harbor?	7 December
How many American battleships were put out of action in the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan?	eight
How many US citizens were killed in the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan?	2,403
How many aircraft did the United States lose in the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan?	188
Where were the American aircraft carriers during the attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan?	at sea
What program allowed America to sell military supplies to Britain and the Soviet Union?	Lend-Lease
On what day did the U.S. and its allies declar war on Japan?	8 December
How long after the Pearl Harbor attacks did Germany and Italy declare war?	Four days
Was Germany's declaration of war with the U.S. considered to be sound strategy?	strategic blunder
how many members did the America First Committee have?	800,000
What group was opposed to American involvement in the war in Europe?	America First Committee
When did the United States declare war on Japan?	8 December
How many days after the attack on Pearl Harbor did Germany wait to declare war on the United States?	Four
Who predicted Germany's declaration of war against the United States months before?	Commander Arthur McCollum
What date was the first official use of the term United Nations?	1 January 1942
Who was appointed to command the Allied forces in Southeast Asia in 1942?	General Sir Archibald Wavell
When did General Wavell assume control of the Southheast Asia Allied forces?	15 January
How spread out were the Allied forces in Southeastern Asia?	thinly
Where did General Wavell command the Allied forces from?	Bandung
What islands did Japan invade?	Solomon Islands
When did Allied forces surrender Singapore to the Japanese?	15 February 1942
How many Allied prisoners did Japan take after the Battle of Singapore?	about 130,000
When did General Wavell resign as commander of the Allied forces of Southeastern Asia?	25 February
After Wavell resigned from ABDACOM, What post did he return to?	Commander-in-Chief, India
When did the Chinese attack Burma?	March 1942
How many British soldiers were rescued by the Chinese 38th Division on April 16??	7,000
Who led the rescue of British forces during the Battle of Yenangyaung?	Sun Li-jen
How many of Chiang Kai-Shek's troops were controlled by warlords?	550,000
What was Chiang Kai-Shek's strongest army?	Szechuan army
How many Australian divisions steamed from the Mid-East for Singapore?	Two
Where did Churchill want the Australian divisions bound for Singapore to be diverted to?	Burma
What Japanese group opposed an invasion of Australia?	Japanese Army
What was the capital of Papua?	Port Moresby
What country did Japan isolate Australia from with a blockade?	United States
Who ordered General MacArthur to make a defense plan with Australia?	President Franklin Roosevelt
When was General MacArthur ordered to make a defense plan with Australia?	March 1942
Who was the Supreme Commander of the South West Allied forces?	MacArthur
Where was MacArthur's headquarters moved to in March of 1942?	Melbourne
How many Japanese submarines shelled Sydney on June 8, 1942?	two
What American president was a member of the Pacific War Council?	President Franklin D. Roosevelt
When was the Pacific War Council formed in Washingto D.C.?	1 April 1942
Who was President Roosevelt's key advisor?	Harry Hopkins
Where was the U.S.-UK Combined Chiefs of Staff located?	Washington
Where was the Australian and Dutch guerilla campaign led?	Portuguese Timor
What American carrier joined the USS Yorktown to stop the Japanese attack on Port Moresby in 1942?	USS Lexington
What admiral was the USS Lexington under?	Admiral Fletcher
When was the Battle of the Coral Sea fought?	May 1942
What Japanese carrier was lost in the Battle of the Coral Sea?	Shōhō
What American carrier was sunk in the Battle of the Coral Sea?	Lexington
In Yamamoto's plan, what northern islands were to be attacked?	Aleutian Islands
What was the second stage objective of Yamaoto's plan?	capture of Midway
How many planes did Nagumo have for the Midway invasion?	272
How many planes did the United States have in the Battle of Midway?	348
How many U.S. planes were land-based?	115
When did the Japanese fleet arrive off Midway?	4 June
How many TBD Devastator torpedo bombers were lauched from the Hornet?	15
How many times did Nagumo change orders for arming his aircraft?	twice
How many carriers did Nagumo have at the Battle of Midway?	four
What were on the decks of the Japanese aircraft carriers when the American dive bobers attacked?	munitions
At what altitude did the American dive bombers commence their attck on the Japanese carriers?	10,000 feet
Which Japanese carrier survived the first wave of American dive bombers in the Battle of Midway.	Hiryū
Who won the Battle of Midway?	Allies
How many fleet carriers were lost by the Japanese in the Battle of Midway?	four
What mountains did the Australian battalions fight a rearguard action over on the Kokoda Track?	Owen Stanley Ranges
What forces releived the worn Australian reserve battalions?	Second Australian Imperial Force
In 1942, what Australian Air Force base was attacked by Japanese marines?	Milne Bay
Where was Milne Bay located in New Guinea?	eastern tip
What theater did the Second Australian Imperial Force come from before they relieved the reserve battalions in New Guinea?	Mediterranean
Where were most of the Japanese aircraft in the South Pacific redeployed to defend?	Guadalcanal
Where did Japanese ground attack repeatedly?forces	Henderson Field
What did the Allies call the Japanese convoys supplying the ground forces attacking Henderson Field?	"Tokyo Express"
What was the reason for the name "Ironbottom Sound" of the water stretches new Guadalcanal?	the multitude of ships sunk
When did the Japanese give up trying to recapture Henderson Field?	February 1943
Where were the 40th, 3rd, and 6th divisions massed at in China?	Yueyang
What is the first river that the 40th, 3rd, and 6th Japanese divisions crossed while advancing southward?	Xinqiang River
How many Chinese civilians were estimated to have died during the Japanese Zhejiang-Jiangxi Campaign?	250,000
What is the river that the 40th, 3rd, and 6th Japanese divisions tried crossing to reach Changsha?	Miluo River
Who commanded the Imperial Japanese 11th Army on November, 1943?	Isamu Yokoyama
What Allied command replaced the British India Command in August, 1943?	South East Asia Command
Who was appointed Supreme Commander of the SEAC in October, 1943?	Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten
Who was deputy commander to Mountbatten?	General Joseph Stilwell
What was the name of the new link between India and China by land?	Ledo Road
The British and Indian Fourteenth Army was formed to take on what force?	Japanese in Burma
What did the United States turn it's industry to in the two years folloing the Battle of Midway?	increased numbers of ships, planes, and trained aircrew
How were the bypassed Japanese strongholds neutralized?	air attack
What blockade against Japan  was to be improved on?	submarine blockade
What did submarines sinking Japanese ships do?	strangled Japan
What type of vessels were part of a major role in defeating Japan?	submarines
What percent did submarines make up in the US Navy fighting Japan?	two percent
What happened to the Japanese fleet when nearly all oil imports were cut off?	virtually stranded
What percentage of Japanese merchantmen were sunk by U.S. submarines?	56%
What percentage of Japanese warships were sunk by U.S. submarines?	28%
What future U.S. president was rescued by a submarine?	George H.W. Bush
What was one of the important roles submarine played in the war?	reconnaissance roles
What doctrine did Roosevelt give for submarines against Japan?	unrestricted submarine warfare
Who was the Dutch Admiral in charge of the East Indies?	Conrad Helfrich
What was the nickname given to the Dutch Admiral in charge of the East Indies?	"Ship-a-day Helfrich"
What was the first Japanese warship to be sunk by submarine?	Sagiri
When was the first Japanese warship sunk by a submarine?	24 December 1941
What doctrine stated that only fleet battles could win naval campaigns?	Imperial Japanese Navy
What was commerce raiding refered to as?	guerre de course
What was the primary use of Japanese submarines?	long-range reconnaissance
When was the Japanese submarine offensive against Australia?	1942 and 1943
What did the Japanese submarine offensive against Austrailia achieve?	little
What did the US Navy rely on?	commerce raiding
What led to guerrilla submarine missions in early 1942?	Allied forces surrounded in the Philippines
What did Admiral Nimitze rely on submarines for?	close surveillance of enemy bases
When were the defective torpedo problems of the US Navy corrected?	September 1943
What was the "maru code"?	Japanese merchant marine code
When did the US Navy begin to use it's submarines to maximum effect?	1944
How many Japanese ships were sunk in 1942 by United States submarines?	180
How many Japanese merchant ships did Allied submarines sink during the war?	1,200
How many Japanese carriers were sunk during the war?	eight
How many Japanese ships were sunk in 1944 by United States submarines?	603
What was the code name for the mid-1944 offensive across China?	Operation Ichi-Go
Where did the Chinese stop the Operation Ichi-Go incursion?	Guangxi
What was the largest Japanese offensive in World War II?	Operation Ichi-Go
Who was able to take advantage of the social confusion created by Operation Ichi-Go?	Chinese Communist guerrillas
How many casualties did the Japanese suffer during Operation Ichi-Go?	about 100,000
What command prepared offensives into Burma after the Allied setbacks in 1943?	South East Asia command
Who led Chinese and American troops for NCAC?	Joseph Stilwell
What road did the NCAC extend into northern Burma?	Ledo Road
Who advanced aling the Arakan Province coast?	XV Corps
Who did aircraft drop supplies to isolated units until they could be relieved?	XV Corps
What month did the Japanese launch an offensive into India?	March
Who commanded the Japanese Fifteenth Army in Operation U-Go?	Lieutenant General Renya Mutaguchi
Where had the Japanese advanced to?	Kohima in Nagaland
What did the Japanese cut?	main road to Imphal
What had the Japanese failed to capture?	defences at Kohima
What happened to Mutaguchi's troops?	starved
When was the Japanese siege of Imphal broken?	22 June
How many troops had the Japanese lost?	50,000
What was the main cause of death of the Japanese troops?	starvation and disease
What battle was the advance in the Arakan halted to release troops for?	Battle of Imphal
Who aided the Americans and Chinese during the advance in northern Burma?	Chindits
What fortified position was captured by the Chinese Expeditionary Force?	Mount Song
When did the Chinese invade northern Burma?	middle of 1944
What airfield was taken by the NCAC in August, 1944?	Myitkyina
What was it imperative for the Japanese to hold?	Saipan
How many fleet carriers did the U.S. Fifth Fleet have?	15
How many fleet planes did the U.S. Fifth Fleet have?	956
What was the search radius of U.S. Navy Hellcat fighters?	325-mile
How many carriers did Ozawa have?	nine
How many of Ozawa's submarines were sunk by American destroyers?	17
In what sequence did Japanese planes arrive at their targets?	staggered
How many American warships were damaged during the Great Marianas Turkey Shoot?	one
Where did the radio interception orders to U.S> Hellcat fighters come from?	combat information centers
Who gave the directive for all carriers in the US Navy to have combat information centers?	Nimitz
On what day did U.S> planes located Ozawa's fleet?	second
How many miles away was Ozawa's fleet located?	275
How many planes did the U.S. lose?	130
How many planes did Japan lose?	450
How many U.S. aircrews were lost?	76
What is argued to be the largest naval battle in history?	Battle of Leyte Gulf
When did the Battle of Leyte Gulf occur?	23 to 26 October 1944
When did Nimitz launch a carrier raid against Formosa?	12 October
What was the largest naval battle in World War II?	Battle of Leyte Gulf
What did Nimitz favor blockading?	Philippines
Who would enter Leyte Gulf to attack the Allied landing forces?	V. Adm. Takeo Kurita
How many Japanese forces were likely to be destroyed?	one or more
What was the namee of the plan where Ozawa's force would lure the U.S. 3rd Fleet away from Leyte?	Sho-1
How many battleships were in Kurita's "Center Force"?	five
How many cruisers were in Kurita's "Center Force"?	12
How many destroyers were in Kurita's "Center Force"?	13
When did Kurita's force enter the Sibuyan Sea?	24 October
How many battleships were in Nishimura's force?	two
Which Japanese admiral was a  rival of Nishimura?	Shima
How many miles was Shima's fleet behind Nishimura?	22
Who set the trap for the Japanese forces as they sailed by Panaon Island?	R. Adm. Jesse Oldendorf
How many battleships did the U.S.-Australian 7th Fleet have?	six
When did the allies spot Ozawa's "Northern Force"?	16:40 on 24 October
How many aircraft carriers were in Ozawa's "Northern Force"?	four
How many planes were in the U.S. 3rd Fleet?	1,000
How many cruisers were in the U.S. Third Fleet?	17
How many destroyers were in the U.S. Third Fleet?	63
When did Kurita pass through the San Bernardino Strait?	03:00 on 25 October
Where did Kurit head after passing through the San Bernardino Strait?	along the coast of Samar
Admiral Kincaid commanded what three groups of the Seventh Fleet?	Taffy 1, 2 and 3
What broke the Japanes formations under Kurita?	Destroyer attacks
How many of Kurita's heavy cruisers were sunk?	Three
What were the Leyte beachheads of the U.S. Sixth Army secured from?	attack from the sea
When did Operation Ten-Go occur?	April 1945
How many battleships did Kurita begin Operation Ten-Go with?	five
What was the last battleship in history to engage in combat with another battleship?	Yamashiro
Which battleship was still capable of combat when Kurita returned to Japan?	Yamato
When did the U.S. Sixth Army land on the eastern shore of Leyte?	20 October 1944
Where did the Japanese rush reinforcments to on the western side of Leyte?	Ormoc Bay area
What force devastated resupply attempts by the Japanese?	U.S. Fifth Air Force
Fighting continued on Leyte for how long?	months
What was the neighboring island to the north of Leyte.	Samar
Landings were made on the beaches of what island on December 15, 1944?	Mindoro
Lingayen Gulf operations supported what landings?	Luzon
Who led the Sixth Army?	General Krueger
Clark field was how many miles northwest of Manila?	40
What island was between Borneo and Mindoro?	Palawan
What island was invaded by the Eighth Army on February 28?	Palawan
Where did the Eighth Army land?	Puerto Princesa
Who aided U.S. forces in finding Japanese holdouts in the Philippines?	Filipino guerrillas
What is the western-most Philippine island?	Palawan
What was "Operation Detachment"?	battle of Iwo Jima
When did "Operation Detachment" occur?	February 1945
How many square miles is the island of Iwo Jima?	8
Iwo Jima is halfway between the Mariana Islands and what city?	Tokyo
How many airfields were on Iwo Jima?	three
How many miles of hidden tunnel were on the island?	11
What were the pillboxes and bunkers connected by?	underground tunnels
Who transformed the island into a fortress?	Kuribayashi
Who did the network of fortifications on the island favor?	the defender
When did Iwo Jima come under bombardment?	mid-June 1944
How many men landed on Iwo Jima on February 19, 1945?	some 30,000
What was the name of the mountain on Iwo Jima?	Mount Suribachi
How many U.S. Marines were killed by the time thhey reached the west coast of the island?	almost 2,000
What marine regiment reached the summit of Mount Suribachi?	28th
When was the summit of Mount Suribachi reached by U.S. marines?	23 February
Who said "there will be a Marine Corps for the next 500 years"?	Navy Secretary James Forrestal
When was the island of Iwo Jima secured by the Americans?	26 March
How many Japanese prisoners were taken on Iwo Jima?	1,083
What was the capital of Burma?	Rangoon
What was the principle port of Burma?	Rangoon
When was Operation Dracula launched?	1 May
What force was delayed by Japanese rearguards north of Rangoon?	Fourteenth Army
What month was a delay caused by Japanese rearguards north of Rangoon?	April
How many British and Australian prisoners survived out of about 2500 around Sandakan?	six
Sandakan was located in what providence?	Borneo
In 1945, how many years had Japan already been at war with China?	seven
What battle did the Japanese Army begin to prepare for in March 1945?	Battle of West Hunan
How many Japanese soldiers were mobilized to capture the Chinese airfields and railroads in West Hunan?	80,000
Who was the Chinese commander-in-chief of the 10th and 27th Army Groups?	He Yingqin
When did Chinese forces retake Guangxi?	August 1945
How many B-29 bombers were airbases need for in Okinawa?	3,000
How many squadrons of B=17 bombers were airbases need for in Okinawa?	240
How many Japanese troops were on Okinawa?	115,000
When did the United States land forces on Okinawa?	1 April 1945
How many U.S. ships were lost at Okinawa?	38
What percent of Japanese troops died on Okinawa?	94
Using a total blockade and air raids, what did the US Navy hope to force?	Japanese surrender
How many Japanese troops defended Okinawa?	117,000
How did the Japanese attempt to cause high Allied casualties?	kamikaze tactics
Who was over the new U.S. Strategic Air Forces in the Pacific command?	General Curtis LeMay
How many people were killed in the incendry attack on Tokyo on March 9-10, 1945?	100,000
When was the Potsdam Declaration issued?	26 July 1945
Who oversaw Operation Starvation?	General Curtis LeMay
What ultimatum stated that Japan would face "prompt and utter destruction" if it did not surrender?	Potsdam Declaration
America dropped what on August 6, 1945?	atomic bomb
What was the forst Japenese city nuked by the United States?	Hiroshima
What was the name of the blockade and bombing of Japan planed to make them surrender?	Operation Downfall
When did American drop a nuclear bomb on Nagasaki?	9 August
Who wrote that a Soviet invasion of Japan was unlikely?	Richard B. Frank
When did the soviet Union invade Manchukuo?	9 August 1945
What was the last campaign of World War II?	Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation
What was the largest campaign of the Soviets against Japan?	Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation
Who gained Manchukuo, Mengjiang, and northern Korea after the Manchurian Strategic Offensive Campaign?	Soviet Union
When did hostilities between Japan and the Soviet Union resum after six years of peace?	9 August 1945
How did the Japanese refer to the atomic bombings and the Soviet invasion?	"Twin Shocks"
When did Japan surrender?	15 August
What was the one condition Japan wanted before accepting the Potsdam terms?	"prerogative of His Majesty as a Sovereign Ruler"
What was the reply to Japan about the surrender condition?	"authority" of the emperor "shall be subject to the Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers"
What was it called when the Japanese Cabinet accepted the Potsdam terms?	"sacred decision"
What date does Japan consider the end of the Pacific War?	14 August
What day is know in the United States as "V-J Day"?	15 August
When did Japan formally have signed the surrender?	2 September 1945
On what battleship was the surrender document signed by the Japanese delagation?	USS Missouri
Who accepted the Japanese surrender?	General Douglas MacArthur
How many women are believed to have been sexual slaves for the Japenese Army?	200,000
In 1948, how many Dutch women brought a case to the Batavia Military Tribunal?	35
In 2001 which Japanese Prime <Minister apologized for the brothels.	Junichiro Koizumi
In 2007 which Japenese Prime Minister said there was no proof of coercion of women to be sexual slaves?	Shinzō Abe
Where were the sexual slave women mostly from?	Korea and China
About how many Australians were taken prisoner after the fall of Singapore and British Malaya?	15,000
In what year did Japan establish a base in New Guinea?	1942
What date was the Australian mainland first attacked?	19 February
What mainland Australian city was attacked by the Japanese on February 19?	Darwin
For how many months was Australia attacked from the air by Japan?	19
Richmond is located at what line of the James river?	the fall line
At what intersections is the Richmond located?	Interstate 95 and Interstate 64, and encircled by Interstate 295 and Virginia State Route 288.
What counties are located? around Washington.D.C?	Henrico and Chesterfield counties
What suburb is located on the southwest?	Midlothian
What suburb is located on the north and west?	Glen Allen
What are the major roads in Richmond?	Interstate 95 and Interstate 64, and encircled by Interstate 295 and Virginia State Route 288
What is the closest historically famous city is 44 miles away?	44 miles (71 km) west of Williamsburg
What counties surround Richmond?	Henrico and Chesterfield counties
Name at least two major suburbs of Richmond.	Midlothian to the southwest, Glen Allen to the north and west, Short Pump to the west and Mechanicsville to the northeast
How many miles east of Richmond is Williamsburg?	44
How many kilometers west of Charlottesville is Richmond?	106
Leaving Washington DC, what cardinal direction would one travel to reach Richmond?	south
What is Richmond's southwestern suburb?	Midlothian
Where is Short Pump located in relation to Richmond?	west
Richmond was an important city of what confederacy?	the Powhatan Confederacy
Richmond was briefly settled by whom?	English colonists from Jamestown
When did Jamestown Colonist settle in Richmond?	1609, and in 1610–1611
When was present day Richmond founded?	1737
what famous speech did Patrick Henry give in Richmond?	Give me liberty or give me death
When was Richmond first settled?	1609
When was the City of Richmond founded?	1737
What famous revolutionary war speech was given in Richmond?  Where?	Patrick Henry's "Give me liberty or give me death" speech in 1775 at St. John's Church
What 'side' was Richmond on in the Civil War?	Confederate
Who wrote the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom?	Thomas Jefferson
What was the nationality of the people who settled Richmond in 1609?	English
In what year was the current city of Richmond founded?	1737
What famous speech did Patrick Henry give in Richmond?	Give me liberty or give me death
In what building did Patrick Henry give his famous speech?	St. John's Church
Who was the author of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom?	Thomas Jefferson
What things are important to the economy of Richmond?	law, finance, and government, with federal, state, and local governmental agencies
What judicial branches are located in Richmond?	The city is home to both the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, one of 13 United States courts of appeals
There is a Federal Reserve Bank located in Richmond.  How many are there, total?	12 Federal Reserve Banks
Name a Fortune 500 company with it's headquarters in Richmond	Dominion Resources and MeadWestvaco
Along with law and finance, what is a major component of Richmond's economy?	government
What circuit of the US Court of Appeals is based in Richmond?	Fourth
How many circuit courts of appeal are there in the United States?	13
How many Federal Reserve Banks exist?	12
Along with MeadWestvaco, what Fortune 500 company is based in Richmond?	Dominion Resources
What year did Patrick Henry give his speech?	1775
What happened on April 18, 1780?	the state capital was moved from the colonial capital of Williamsburg to Richmond
What did Patrick Henry's speech encourage to happen?	Virginia's participation in the First Continental Congress and setting the course for revolution and independence
What's one reason the capital was moved to Richmond?	to isolate the capital from British attack
Who was Governor of Virginia in 1781	Thomas Jefferson
What did Patrick Henry's famous speech persuade Virginians to send delegates to?	First Continental Congress
What was the capital of Virginia prior to Richmond?	Williamsburg
What general led the troops that burned Richmond?	Benedict Arnold
Who led the militia that defended Richmond?	Sampson Mathews
Who was the governor of Virginia in 1781?	Thomas Jefferson
What is the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom?	the basis for the separation of church and state
Who drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom?	Thomas Jefferson
Who designed the Richmond Capital Building?	Thomas Jefferson
Who is Charles-Louis Clerisseau?	Capitol building, was designed by
When was the Capital building completed?	1788
Who aided Jefferson in designing the Virginia State Capitol?	Charles-Louis Clérisseau
In what year was the Virginia State Capitol finished?	1788
What was the capital of Virginia circa 1786?	Richmond
What notable document was authored by Thomas Jefferson in 1786?	Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom
In what year could Richmond first be said to have recovered from the destruction of the American Revolution?	1782
What man-made body of water was designed in part by George Washington?	James River and Kanawha Canal
To where was the canal designed by Washington intended to ferry water?	Kanawha River
To what city was Henry Brown shipped as freight?	Philadelphia
What was Henry Brown's nickname?	Box
What sort of economic center was Richmond in the wake of the American Revolution?	industrial
On what date was Virginia's secession from the Union?	17 April 1861
After leaving the Union, what nation did Virginia join?	Confederacy
Along with 1864-5, what year notably saw US campaigns directed at Richmond?	1862
What was the name of the biggest factory in the Confederate States of America?	Tredegar Iron Works
What was the name of the first ironclad warship that saw combat?	CSS Virginia
What is another name for the Confederacy's executive mansion?	White House of the Confederacy
How far away from the Confederate executive mansion was the Virginia State Capitol?	two blocks
Who commanded the Union armies during the Seven Days Battles?	McClellan
Where was Petersburg located in relation to Ford Stedman?	east
5000 men represented what fraction of General Lee's army?	tenth
On what road did the US Army Sixth Corps shatter the Confederate line?	Boydton Plank
What general commanded the attack on Fort Stedman?	John B. Gordon
In what month of 1865 was Richmond judged to be no longer able to be defended?	March
What was contained in warehouses that were notably burned by Confederates when evacuating Richmond?	tobacco
What general received the surrender of Richmond?	Godfrey Weitzel
On what day did the Confederacy surrender Richmond to the Union?	April 2, 1865
By what means did Davis leave Richmond?	train
What percentage of Richmond was destroyed by fire after the Confederate evacuation?	25
What was the date before the day Lincoln entered Richmond?	April 3
How many soldiers did Lee have remaining when he surrendered?	10000
To what state did Davis travel after Lee surrendered?	North Carolina
In what structure did Lee surrender to Grant?	Appomattox Court House
How many years did Davis spend in Fort Monroe?	two
What mode of transportation took over from the canals?	railroads
What sort of railroad crossing was first built at Richmond?	triple
Who was the inventor of the cigarette-rolling machine?	James Albert Bonsack
From what city did James Bonsack originate?	Roanoke
What was the name of the first American trolley system powered by electricity?	Richmond Union Passenger Railway
When the 1900s began, how many people lived in Richmond?	85,050
How many square kilometers was Richmond at the start of the 20th century?	13
What percentage of Richmond's 1900 population was African American?	37.9
What was another name for Richmond's Jackson Ward?	Wall Street of Black America
Who was the inaugural president of the St. Luke Penny Savings Bank?	Maggie L. Walker
When did the so-called downtown boom in Richmond end?	1965
About how many structures were built in Richmond during the downtown boom?	700
What combined with the Richmond Professional Institute to form Virginia Commonwealth University?	Medical College of Virginia
In what direction did Richmond's borders expand in 1970?	south
People of what county did not want to join Richmond circa 1970?	Chesterfield
How many square kilometers is Richmond?	160
How many square miles of Richmond is water?	2.7
What percentage of Richmond is made up of water?	4.3
In which of Virginia's regions is Richmond?	Piedmont
Along with the James and the Chickahominy, what is a notable river in the area near Richmond?	Appomattox
What neighborhood is located in between Church and Shockoe Hill?	Shockoe Bottom
What Richmond neighborhood is home to the Jefferson Hotel?	Monroe Ward
What neighborhood of Richmond contains St. John's Church?	Church Hill
What is Fairfield Court?	public housing projects
In what year was the Richmond street grid first developed?	1737
The neighborhood of Newtowne West is north of what street?	Broad
Along with Newtowne West, to what neighborhood is Carver regarded as having comparable demographics?	Jackson Ward
What Richmond street contains a notable amount of Victorian buildings?	Monument Avenue
In what part of Richmond is the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts found?	Museum District
What is the primary race of the population of the Randolph neighborhood?	black
What name is given to the part of Richmond located to the south of the James?	Southside
Along with the affluent, what is the socioeconomic class of the inhabitants of the Southside?	middle class
What notable public housing projects are present in the Southside?	Hillside Court
Prior to joining Richmond, what county was a significant portion of Southside part of?	Chesterfield
What is the economic status of the Manchester part of Richmond?	impoverished
What is Richmond's Köppen climate classification?	Cfa
How could one characterize the winters in Richmond?	generally cool
What geographic feature keeps some cold inland air from reaching Richmond?	mountains
In what month of the year does Richmond's chilliest weather typically end?	February
About how many days a year does the temperature in Richmond go above 32 degrees Celsius?	43
What season in Richmond is most likely to see periods of dryness?	autumn
How many times does Richmond receive 7.6 centimeters or more of snow in a 24 hour period annually?	once
About how many centimeters of snow does Richmond experience in the fall?	27
During what span of 2010 did snowfall remain for a significant amount of time on the ground in Richmond?	January 30 to February 14
What types of ice storms sometimes hit Richmond?	freezing rain or glaze
What is the most likely month for the James to flood Richmond?	March
What month sees the lowest likelihood of the James flooding?	July
In 1955, Richmond was hit with three hurricanes in how many weeks?	six
In 1955, what two hurricanes occurred within a week of one another?	Hurricane Connie and Hurricane Diane
What hurricane hit Richmond in 2004?	Gaston
In 2000, how many families lived in Richmond?	43,627
As of 2000, how many people lived in Richmond per square kilometer?	1,271.3
What percentage of the Richmond population of 2000 was Pacific Islander?	0.1
What was the largest racial group in Richmond as of 2000?	African American
In 2000, what percentage of Richmond residents were multiracial?	1.5
What crime notably increased in Richmond over the course of the 1980s?	murder
In 1985, how many people were murdered in Richmond?	93
How many people per 100,000 were murdered in Richmond in 1990?	56.1
How many murders occurred in Richmond in 1995?	120
What is the oldest Presbyterian church in Richmond?	First Presbyterian Church
Who was a notable congregant at Second Presbyterian Church?	Stonewall Jackson
What architectural style was Second Presbyterian Church built in?	Gothic
On what date did the oldest Catholic church open in Richmond?	May 25, 1834
In what year was Richmond's First Baptist Church founded?	1780
Along with Chabad of Virginia, what is the other Orthodox synagogue in Richmond?	Keneseth Beth Israel
What grades does the Rudlin Torah academy serve?	K–12
What sect of Judaism is Rudlin Torah affiliated with?	Orthodox
What are the names of the Conservative synagogues in Richmond?	Beth El and Or Atid
How many synagogues in the Reform tradition are present in Richmond?	three
Where did Richmond's Nation of Islam members initially meet?	Temple #24
On what street is Masjid Bilal located?	Chimbarazoo Boulevard
What was Masjid Bilal previously known as?	Masjid Muhammad #24
What year saw the establishment of the Islamic Center of Virginia?	1973
On what street can Shabaaz Restaurant be found?	Nine Mile Road
How many Indian-descended families lived in or around Richmond in 2011?	6,000
What does CCI stand for?	Cultural Center of India
In what county can CCI be found?	Chesterfield
What road is CCI near?	Iron Bridge
Along with CCI, what is the other Hindu gathering place near Richmond?	Hindu Center of Virginia
What federal court is located in Richmond?	United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Along with Philip Morris and CapitalOne, what prominent corporation is present in Richmond?	Genworth Financial
What type of business is LeClairRyan?	law firms
When did the Troutman Sanders-Mays & Valentine LLP merger occur?	2001
How many Federal Reserve Banks exist in the United States?	12
How many square meters of space does Virginia BioTechnology Research Park consist of?	53,400
What does the United Network for Organ Sharing do?	maintains the nation's organ transplant waiting list
What was the cost of the Philip Morris R&D facility opened at the Virginia BioTechnology Research Park?	$350 million
When did Philip Morris' R&D facility open?	2007
What Virginia Commonwealth University campus is near Virginia BioTechnology Research Park?	Medical College of Virginia
What periodical called Richmond "The Next Great American Food City"?	Departures magazine
According to Southern Living, what are the three best restaurants in Richmond?	Comfort, Heritage and The Roosevelt
How many microbreweries exist in Richmond?	twelve
What was the first microbrewery to set up shop in Richmond?	Legend Brewery
When was James River Distillery founded?	2014
What movie, which filmed in Richmond, featured Daniel Day-Lewis?	Lincoln
Who notably appeared in Killing Kennedy?	Rob Lowe
On what television channel can the show Turn be seen?	AMC
When will Mercy Street first be shown on television?	Winter 2016
What channel is Killing Kennedy on?	National Geographic Channel
According to MarketWatch, where did Richmond rank among cities for business?	third
What did MarketWatch think was the fourth best city for business?	Boston
What type of business is Dominion Resources?	electric utility
Prior to moving to the Richmond area, where was Altria's headquarters located?	New York City
What company moved to Richmond from Connecticut?	MeadWestvaco
Where is SunTrust Bank headquartered?	Atlanta
What city is the headquarters of McKesson located in?	San Francisco
Who owns Philip Morris USA?	Altria
What DuPont factory is located in the Richmond area?	Spruance Plant
What was the former name of UPS Freight?	Overnite Transportation
What architectural style was the 1919 Broad Street Union Station constructed in?	neoclassical
How far away from the Virginia Center for Architecture is the Children's Museum of Richmond?	two blocks
What district of Richmond is the Virginia Historical Society located in?	Museum District
What museum is next to the Science Museum of Virginia?	Children's Museum of Richmond
In what former industrial facility is the Richmond National Battlefield Park Visitors Center located?	Tredegar Iron Works
What government building is the Museum of the Confederacy located near?	Virginia State Capitol
What is another name for the Davis Mansion?	White House of the Confederacy
On what Richmond street did General Lee live for a while?	Franklin
Where are the Reconciliation Statues outside Richmond located?	Liverpool and Benin
What office was held by the inhabitant of the John Marshall House?	Chief Justice of the United States
How many United States presidents are interred in Hollywood Cemetery?	two
Who gave a speech that contained the famous saying "Give me liberty or give me death"?	Patrick Henry
Where did Patrick Henry deliver his memorable speech?	St. John's Church
What was the nickname of Bill Robinson?	Bojangles
Near what park is the monument dedicated to the person traditionally regarded as discovering America?	Byrd
How many bells are contained in the World War I Memorial Carillon?	56
The dead of what war were the first to be commemorated by the Virginia War Memorial?	World War II
In what neighborhood is the monument to Bill Robinson located?	Jackson Ward
What notable project was funded by Richmond's "admissions tax"?	CentreStage
Along with blues and bluegrass, what is a type of folk music traditional to Virginia?	country
Along with busking and itinerant folk shows, what is an example of venueless art?	house shows
Along with Hamilton Glass and El Kamino, who is a mural artist local to Richmond?	Nils Westergard
What periodical has attempted to attract internationally known mural artists to Richmond?	RVA
What Richmond street art gathering has brought mural artists to the city?	RVA Street Art Festival
In what city did Lewis Hallam present Shakespeare's plays?	Williamsburg
What family of actors notably performed in 19th century Richmond?	Booth
What is Virginia Museum Theater known as today?	Leslie Cheek
During what decade did the Virginia Museum most significantly work to promote theater in Richmond?	1970s
What disaster destroyed many of the early buildings in Richmond?	Evacuation Fire
What percentage of Richmond's buildings were burned in a single fire in 1865?	25
What is the name of the era from which the building housing the Edgar Allan Poe Museum dates?	colonial
Prior to what year was the Patterson-Schutte House built?	1750
What state has the oldest capital building used continuously since it was built?	Maryland
What architectural style was used to design the Virginia State Capitol?	neo-classical
What notable federal government buildings were designed in the neoclassical style?	White House and The Capitol
What is the architectural style of the 1845 Egyptian Building?	Egyptian Revival
Who were the designers of the Virginia State Capitol?	Thomas Jefferson and Charles-Louis Clérisseau
What architectural style was used to design Branch House?	Tudor
Who designed Branch House?	John Russell Pope
What is another name for Broad Street Station?	Union Station
What style of architecture was used in the design of Union Station?	Beaux-Arts
Who designed the Commonwealth Club?	Carrère and Hastings
What United States city has the most cast iron architecture?	New Orleans
In what year did iron production in Richmond peak?	1890
How many more iron workers than construction workers were being employed in Richmond in 1890?	seven times
Along with Jackson and Monroe Wards, what neighborhood notably features cast-iron fences?	Church Hill
Who was the designer of the Federal Reserve Building?	Minoru Yamasaki
Who designed the General Assembly Offices at the Eighth and Main Building?	Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
What architectural style was the Rice House designed in?	International
What university was Landis Gores associated with?	Harvard
Who did Landis Gores design a home for?	W.G. Harris
What Native American tribe at one time lived on Belle Isle?	Powhatan
During what conflict was Belle Isle used as a prison?	Civil War
Between Brown's Island and Belle Isle, which is bigger?	Belle Isle
On what island does the James River Beer and Seafood Festival take place?	Brown's Island
How often does Friday Cheers take place on Brown's Island?	weekly
What part of Richmond is Maymont close to?	Fan District
How many kilometers long is the track in Byrd Park?	1.6
How many monuments can be found in Byrd Park?	two
In what year was the World War I Memorial Carillon constructed?	1926
What was previously located at the present location of Forest Hill Park?	Forest Hill Amusement Park
What sport do the Washington Redskins play?	Football
What sport do the Richmond Kickers compete in?	soccer
With what Major League Baseball team are the Richmond Flying Squirrels associated?	San Francisco Giants
What is the home ground of the Richmond Kickers?	City Stadium
Where did the Richmond Braves move to?	Georgia
When did the RIR begin to host the Capital City 400?	1962
When did the Suntrust Indy Challenge stop being run at RIR?	2009
In what direction does one travel from Richmond to reach Southside Speedway?	southwest
What is the shape of Southside Speedway?	oval
Along with "The Action Track," what is a nickname of Southside Speedway?	Toughest Track in the South
What company owns the company that owns the Richmond Times-Dispatch?	Berkshire Hathaway
How many people buy the Richmond Times-Dispatch on Sunday?	120,000
What newspaper is published by Landmark Communications?	Style Weekly
Before switching to its current publication schedule, how often was RVA Magazine published?	monthly
Along with the Voice, what is Richmond's black-oriented news publication?	Richmond Free Press
Per Nielsen, how many homes exist in the Richmond-Petersburg DMA?	553,950
Where does the Richmind-Petersburg DMA rank in the United States?	58th
With what network is WUPV 65 affiliated?	CW
What type of channel is WCVW 57?	Public Broadcasting
What Richmond-area station is affiliated with CBS?	WTVR-TV 6
How many representatives make up the Richmond city council?	nine
What official is in charge of Richmond's executive branch?	mayor
How many years does the term of a Richmond city council representative last?	four
On what day of the week does the city council meet?	Mondays
In what month does the city council not meet?	August
What is A. Carl Prince's religious affiliation?	Baptist
What is the current mayor of Richmond?	Dwight C. Jones
In what year was the first black Baptist minister elected to the city council?	1990
In what district did A. Carl Prince win election to the city council?	Eighth
What political organization supported the city council candidacy of A. Carl Prince?	Richmond Crusade for Voters
How many high schools are there in Richmond?	eight
How many primary and secondary school students attend school in Richmond?	24,000
For whom is the Governor's School in Richmond named?	Maggie L. Walker
Where was Richmond's Governor's School rated by Newsweek in 2012?	16
When did Patrick Henry School of Science and Arts open its doors?	2010
What type of university is the University of Richmond?	private
What is a for-profit university in Richmond?	South University - Richmond
What does BTSR stand for?	Baptist Theological Seminary in Richmond
Where is John Tyler Community College located?	Chesterfield County
What is Richmond's public university?	Virginia Commonwealth
How many kilometers away from Richmond is Richmond International Airport?	11
About how long does it take to drive from Richmond International Airport to Williamsburg?	an hour
How many airlines operate out of Richmond International?	nine
What percentage increase in passenger traffic did Richmond International experience between 2005 and 2006?	13
What direction do you travel to get from Richmond to Sandston?	southeast
What is the street address if the Greyhound bus terminal in Richmond?	2910 N Boulevard
How long does a bus trip from Richmond to New York City take?	7.5 hours
What is the lowest fare on Megabus?	$1
How much did the Department of Transportation give to Richmond for its Rapid Transit System?	$25 million
What city in Maryland does Megabus travel to?	Baltimore
What counties does the GRTC link to Richmond?	Henrico, and Chesterfield
Along with Short Pump, what comprises the far part of the West End?	Innsbrook
According to a GRTC report, what is an example of what most of its riders lack?	private vehicle
What is GRTC an initialism of?	Greater Richmond Transit Company
What station services all southern rail traffic passing through Richmond?	Staples Mill Road Station
What is the name of the railroad station inside Richmond proper?	Main Street Station
In what year was Richmond's railroad station renovated?	2004
Along with Williamsburg, what city's rail traffic uses the Main Street Station?	Newport News
Why does the Main Street Station only receive rail traffic from Newport News and Williamsburg?	track layout
Who is Richmond's electricity supplier?	Dominion Virginia Power
How many states does Dominion Virginia Power operate in?	nine
Along with Surry Nuclear Generating Station, what is Richmond's main electricity generator?	North Anna Nuclear Generating Station
In what town is a coal-fired plant that provides power to Richmond located?	Chester
What type of power plant is Darbytown?	natural gas
How many kilometers of sewer lines exist in Richmond?	61
How much water is contained in Shockoe Retention Basin?	44-million-gallon
How many Richmond inhabitants get their water from the wastewater treatment plant?	62,000
How much sewage and stormwater can the treatment plant adjacent to the James River treat daily?	70 million gallons
Which city in Mexico does San Diego border?	Tijuana
Aside from healthcare, which employment sector has strongly emerged in San Diego?	biotechnology development
Of all military branches, which one has the strongest presence in San Diego?	United States Navy
What is unique about San Diego's harbors?	deep-water
Of the top 10 largest cities in the country, which place does San Diego rank?	eighth
Who claimed the San Diego Bay area for Spain in 1542?	Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo
What native people lived in the San Diego area before the Europeans arrived?	Kumeyaay
In what year did San Diego become part of the United States?	1850
After the land was claimed for Spain, how many years passed before the settlement of Alta began?	200
Who was sent to survey the California coast in 1602?	Sebastián Vizcaíno
Who was the harbor named for?	Catholic Saint Didacus
Who conducted the first Christian service to be recorded in Alta?	Friar Antonio de la Ascensión
What was the name of Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo's ship?	San Salvador
Where did Cabrillo leave from to embark on his journey to the West Coast?	Navidad, New Spain
Who did Junipero Serra commission to found the Mission San Diego de Alcala in 1769?	Franciscan friars
What historic trail starting point developed at Mission San Diego?	El Camino Real
What was developed on a hill by the San Diego River?	Fort Presidio of San Diego
How many neophytes resided in the San Diego area in 1797?	1,400
What are the Presidio and Mission considered today?	National Historic Landmarks
Who was elected as the Mission's first municipal magistrate?	Juan María Osuna
What was the name of the Mexican territory San Diego became part of in 1821?	Alta California
Why did San Diego lose its pueblo status in 1838?	its size dropped to an estimated 100 to 150 residents
What happened as the population shifted to more level ground below Presidio Hill?	The fort on Presidio Hill was gradually abandoned
Who was in the running for the first alcalde position, but was defeated in the election?	Pío Pico
Who commissioned Captain Archibald Gillespie to lead 50 men on horseback to the north?	Commodore Robert F. Stockton
What battle took place in the San Pasqual Valley?	Battle of San Pasqual
What extreme measure did the Californios take to try to draw the Americans out of the pueblo?	The Californios drove cattle away from the pueblo
Who led the group from San Diego that rescued Kearny's men?	Lieutenant Gray
How many weeks did Mexican partisans hold San Diego before it was recaptured by Americans?	three weeks
What treaty was used by Stockton and Kearny on January 1, 1847?	Treaty of Cahuenga
What was established after negotiations over San Diego between the Mexcians and Americans?	Mexican-American border
Which war played a role in ceding San Diego to the United States?	Mexican–American War of 1846–48
What was the name of the treaty developed between Mexico and the United States in 1848?	Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
Why was the border between Mexico and the United States established one league south of San Diego Bay's most southern tip?	to include the entire bay within the United States
In what year did San Diego officially become a city?	1850
Who was San Diego's first mayor?	Joshua H. Bean
What happened two years after San Diego elected it's first mayor?	the city was bankrupt
Who controlled San Diego's charter for 2 years after it was revoked by California legislature?	a board of trustees
When was San Diego's current charter adopted?	1931
What was the main flaw of San Diego's original location?	several miles away from navigable water
Who developed New San Diego that was south of the first location?	William Heath Davis
Who was largely responsible for the population growth of Downtown San Diego?	Alonzo Horton
What happened in 1878 that played a role in San Diego's economic growth?	the arrival of a railroad connection
What was San Diego's downtown area originally called?	New Town
What park in San Diego hosted two World Fairs near the beginning of the 20th century?	Balboa Park
Where did many of the San Diego Zoo's exotic animals come from?	Panama-California Exposition in 1915
What festival was celebrated in the 1950s in recognition of the city's Mexican and Spanish past?	Fiesta del Pacifico
What happened to many of the structures developed for the World Fairs?	Most were eventually rebuilt, using castings of the original façades to retain the architectural style.
Which World Fair was hosted in San Diego in 1935?	California Pacific International Exposition
What names was given to coastal artillery batteries erected shortly after 1852?	Fort Rosecrans
What was the name of Charles A. Lindbergh's plane that was built in San Diego by Ryan Airlines?	Spirit of St. Louis
What was the original name of today's Marine Corps Air Station Miramar?	Camp Kearny
What branch of the military began to have a strong presence in San Diego in 1901?	U.S. Navy
What airplane developer was founded in San Diego in 1923?	Consolidated Aircraft
When did San Diego's population grow so rapidly that it nearly doubled?	during and after World War II
What was the name of the attack the Japanese had planned against San Diego?	Operation Cherry Blossoms at Night
What were the Japanese originally going to drop on San Diego from their kamikaze planes?	fleas infected with plague (Yersinia pestis)
Why didn't the Japanese launch their planned attack on September 22, 1945?	Japan surrendered five weeks earlier
How many civilians were the Japanese hoping to kill during their planned attack on San Diego?	tens of thousands of civilians
What nickname was San Diego given by the tuna canning industry in the 1970s?	the tuna capital of the world
How many jobs were created by the mid-1930s thanks to San Diego's tuna cannery that was developed in 1911?	more than 1,000
Why were the canneries ultimately closed by the early 1980s?	rising costs and foreign competition
Immigrants from what country were primarily hired by the fishing fleets that supported the canneries??	Japan
From what region in Portugal did immigrants come from to work in San Diego's fishing industry?	Portuguese Azores
In what direction does the San Diego River run through the city?	east to west
What bodies of water can be found separating different developed areas of the city?	reservoirs
What is created by the many canyons and hills throughout San Diego?	small pockets of natural open space
What divides the city's northern and southern segments?	San Diego River
Where did the San Diego River once flow to?	San Diego Bay
What community covers the area from Downtown San Diego to the peninsula?	Point Loma
Where is Otay Mesa found within the city?	next to the Mexico–United States border
Which valley is encompassed by the most northeast portion of San Diego?	San Pasqual Valley
What is the only coastal community in San Diego without the word "beach" in its name?	La Jolla
What was the first skyscraper built in San Diego that was over 300-feet tall?	El Cortez Hotel
How tall is One America Plaza?	500 feet
What played a role in determining the maximum height skyscrapers can be in San Diego?	San Diego International Airport
What organization regulates building heights in San Diego?	Federal Aviation Administration
What bank spent time as being the tallest building in San Diego?	Union Bank of California Building
When does San Diego receive most of its precipitation?	between December and March
How many days of the year does San Diego typically experience temperatures above 70 degrees Fahrenheit ?	201 days
What ranked San Diego as having the country's best summer climate?	Weather Channel
What type of weather can one expect to experience in San Diego in the winter?	mild
What type of climate is San Diego classified as having?	semi-arid climate
What areas experience the most significant temperature variations?	inland areas
What is the average high temperature in El Cajon in August?	88 °F
What frequently blankets San Diego in May and June?	a thick "marine layer" cloud cover
What is the average January low temperature in downtown San Diego?	50 °F (10 °C)
What effect does the springtime cloud cover have on the temperature?	keep the air cool and damp
What is the average rainfall in February along the coast?	2 inches (51 mm)
What is significant about the weather that San Diego experienced in December 1921?	wettest month on record
What months are nearly completely dry in San Diego?	May through September
What is the average annual precipitation along San Diego's coast?	10.65 inches (271 mm)
What areas of San Diego typically experienced the greatest rainfall?	higher elevation areas
What trees are protected along the coast of San Diego?	Torrey pine
What drought-resistant shrub is San Diego known for?	chaparral
Where can one find the most sage scrub in San Diego?	low elevations
How is San Diego able to offer everything from tidal marsh to canyons?	The steep and varied topography and proximity to the ocean create a number of different habitats
What disadvantage comes along with sage scrub habitats?	prone to wildfire
How many bird species have been observed in San Diego?	492
What birding event does the Audubon Society host every year?	Christmas Bird Count
What is special about the animal and plant species found in San Diego?	highest counts of animal and plant species that appear on the endangered species list
What word describes San Diego County due to the many birds residing there?	birdiest
What flyway contributes to the diverse bird population in San Diego County?	Pacific Flyway
When did California's largest wildfire of the century take place?	October 2003
How many acres were burned in the historic Cedar Fire of 2003?	280,000 acres (1,100 km2)
Why did San Diego schools close during the Cedar Fire?	poor air quality
How many years after the Cedar Fire did additional fires destroy Rancho Santa Fe?	four years later
How many homes were destroyed in the Cedar Fire?	more than 2,200
In the top five largest urban areas in California, where does San Diego rank?	third-largest
What area does Los Angeles and San Francisco merge with to form metropolitan areas larger than San Diego?	Riverside–San Bernardino
What was the population of San Diego at the time of the 2010 census?	1,307,402
How many square miles does San Diego cover?	372.1
What is the population of San Diego's urgan area?	2,956,746
What was the population density of San Diego in 2009?	3,771.9 people per square mile (1,456.4/km2)
What ethnicity made up 15.9.% of San Diego's population in 2009?	Asian
In 2009, what percentage of the population was Hispanic?	28.8%
What was San Diego's population at the time of the 2010 census?	1,307,402
What was the population increase in San Diego from 2009 to 2010?	just under 7%
In what year was the household median income in San Diego at $45,733?	2000
What was the median age of non-Hispanic whites in 2008?	41.6
What did the average salary increase to at the time of the 2008 census?	$66,715
Of the population of individuals 55 and older, what percentage were non-Hispanic whites in 2008?	63.1%
In 2008, which racial group had the most individuals under the age of 18?	Hispanics
What regional planning agency offers graphs and tables of census information for San Diego?	SANDAG
What percentage of San Diego's population was under the age of 18 in 2000?	24.0%
Which age group accounted for 10.5% of the population in 2000?	65 and over
In what year was the median age of residents in San Diego 35.6?	2011
What percentage of the population in 2011 were millenials?	27.1%
What percentage of the population fell below the poverty line in San Diego in 2005?	14.6%
What did Money magazine rate San Diego as being in 2006?	fifth-best place to live in the United States
What magazine rated San Diego as being the country's fifth wealthiest city?	Forbes
In 2000,  what was the median salary for females in San Diego?	$31,076
What percentage of familes were below the poverty line in 2005?	10.6%
What type of tours attract a large number of visitors to San Diego?	beer tours
What big event takes place in San Diego in November?	San Diego Beer Week
What historical mission is a major tourist attraction in San Diego?	Mission San Diego de Alcala
What popular park in San Diego is home to the San Diego Zoo, SeaWorld, and countless museums?	Balboa Park
What nickname has the city  been given as a result of its extensive craft beer industry?	America's Craft Beer Capital
Where is San Diego's border crossing?	the San Ysidro neighborhood at the San Ysidro Port of Entry
How long is the border that San Diego shares with Mexico?	15-mile (24 km)
What is the volumte of trucks handled at the Otay Mesa crossing?	the third-highest volume of trucks and dollar value of trade among all United States-Mexico land crossings.
Where is the next nearest commercial crossing at the border?	Otay Mesa
How many border crossings does San Diego share with Mexico?	two
Why is San Diego known as an iHub Innovation Center?	for collaboration potentially between wireless and life sciences
What is San Diego's largest software company?	Websense Inc
What cellular company is headquartered in San Diego that uses the AT&T network?	Cricket Communications
What sector does ESET fall under?	security
What cellular  company is one of the city's largest private-sector employers?	Qualcomm
What institution has contributed to the growth of fuel biotechnology?	University of California
What city does San Diego come in second to in the biotech industry?	Boston
How many contract research organizations are in San Diego?	140
What two areas have the numerous research facilities and offices for biotech companies?	La Jolla and nearby Sorrento Valley
What two major biotech companies are headquartered in San Diego?	Illumina and Neurocrine Biosciences
What museum has a branch at the Santa Fe Depot?	Museum of Contemporary Art San Diego (MCASD)
In what district can historic ship exhibits be found?	Columbia district downtown
Where can one find the San Diego Zoo?	Balboa Park
Which museum houses the USS Midway aircraft carrier?	San Diego Aircraft Carrier Museum
What space-focused museum is in Balboa Park?	San Diego Air & Space Museum
Who is the director of the San Diego Symphony?	Jahja Ling
Where can one enjoy a performance directed by Christopher Ashley?	La Jolla Playhouse at UCSD
What did Opera America call the San Diego Opera at the Civic Center Plaza?	one of the top 10 opera companies in the United States
Which theater is known for hosting a variety of musicals and plays?	San Diego Repertory Theatre at the Lyceum Theatres
How far back to San Diego's roots in the arts and theater sector go?	1898
What tournament used to be known as the Buick Invitational?	Farmers Insurance Open
How many times were the America's Cup yacht races hosted by the San Diego Yacht Club from 1988 to 1955?	three times
What beach sport was inveted in San Diego?	Over-the-line
What yacht-related event is held annually in Mission Bay?	Over-the-line championships
What golf course hosts the Farmers Insurance Open?	Torrey Pines Golf Course
How many employees are there in San Diego for every 137 residents?	one
In what year did the city vote to change to a strong mayor government?	2004
Despite being a sanctuary city, what program does San Diego county participate in?	Secure Communities program
What is the number of members on the city's council?	9
What is the county's payroll?	greater than $733 million.
Who votes in the city's attorney and mayor?	voters of the entire city
How long is the term for council members?	four-year terms,
Were there more Democrats or Republicans in 2007?	Democrats outnumbered Republicans by about 7 to 6
Who is Kevin Faulconer?	current mayor
Who elects members of city council?	single member districts within the city
What two members of city council were convicted of extortion in 2005?	Ralph Inzunza and Deputy Mayor Michael Zucchet
What strip club-related law were the council members trying to repeal?	no touch
In what year were Zucchet's seven out of nine counts acquitted?	2009
How long was Inzunza's  prison sentence?	21 months
Who did Inzunza and Zucche accept money from?	a strip club owner and his associates
Why was Mayor Bob Filner asked to resign?	allegations of repeated sexual harassment
How many women claimed to be sexually harassed by Filner?	18
What was Filner's sentence?	house arrest and probation
When did a mediation process begin between Filner and a city representative?	August 19
How long did Filner's trial last?	six weeks
What happened to the crime rate in San Diego between 1990 and 2000?	San Diego had a declining crime rate from 1990 to 2000
What did Business Insider call San Diego in 2013?	20th-safest city in America
In what place did Forbes rank San Diego on it's top 10 list?	ninth
What percentage did the crime rate in San Diego drop from 2002 to 2006?	0.8%
What type of crime increased between 2002 and 2006?	property crime
Which television station began broadcasting  on May 16, 1949?	KFMB
What is San Diego's cable penetration rate?	80.6 percent
Why was San Diego eligible for two VHF channels?	because of its relative proximity to the larger city
In what year did UHF channels beging being licensed by the FCC?	1952
What independent station is in San Diego?	KUSI 51
How many duopolies does the Mexico side of San Diego-Tijuana have?	two
What two stations are owned by Azteca?	XHJK-TV and XHTIT-TV
What company owns XHDTV-TV and XHAS-TV?	Entravision Communications
Which station is ran by Bay City Television?	XETV-TV
What is another name Free Radio San Diego is known by?	Pirate Radio San Diego
In addition to Free Radio San Diego, what other pirate station is in San Diego?	106.9FM
What is the largest nationwide broadcaster in San Diego?	Clear Channel Communications
Which language are some local radio stations available in?	Spanish
What is the exact setting for FM News & Talk?	95.7
What major interstate runs from Tijuana to Los Angeles?	Interstate 8
Where does Interstate 805 split from I-5?	near the Mexican border
Which interstate directly connects the east with the Arizona Sun Corridor and Imperial County?	Interstate 8
What two major cities are Inland Empire connected to via Interstate 15?	Las Vegas and Salt Lake City
What percentage of San Diego's residents rely on theri automobile as a primary source of transportation?	over 80 percent
What highway connects the I-805 with the downtown area?	SR 94
Where does SR 94 merge with I-15?	at Miramar
Where does SR 75 flow primarily through?	San Diego Bay
In what year was San Diego rated as the country's best densely populated city for cycling?	2006
Why are older neighborhoods in San Diego popular with cyclists?	the grid street patterns
What makes San Diego the ideal city to commute via bike?	dry and mild climate
Why are average trip distances so lengthy in San Diego?	the city's hilly, canyon-like terrain
What areas of San Diego are primarily served by the trolley?	downtown and surrounding urban communities
What public transportation is in the works to be completed by 2018?	A planned Mid-Coast extension of the Trolley
How many Amtrak stations are in San Diego?	two
What number can you dial from any phone for public transportation information in San Diego?	511
Where do the Amtrak and Coaster trains primarily run?	along the coastline
What is the more popular name of Lindbergh Field?	San Diego International Airport (SAN)
How many passengers did San Diego Internatonal Airport serve in 2005?	17 million
What is the purpose of the Tijuana Cross-border Terminal?	give direct access to Tijuana International Airport
What independent agency operates San Diego International Airport?	San Diego Regional Airport Authority
What two general aviation airports are operated by the San Diego Regional Airport Authority?	Montgomery Field (MYF) and Brown Field (SDM)
What is the name given to the highly congested spot where Interstates 5 and 805 meet?	The Merge
What tollway connects Otay Mesa with SR 54?	The South Bay Expressway
Which terminal was expanded in the San Diego International Airport in 2013?	Terminal 2
What type of special lanes were added to Interstate 15?	high-occupancy-vehicle (HOV) "managed lanes"
In 2007, what percentage of the roads in San Diego were considered acceptable?	37 percent
Islamic World is another way to refer to what?	Muslim world
When speaking of religion, what does Ummah refer to?	those who adhere to the teachings of Islam
When speaking about culture, what does Ummah refer to?	Islamic civilization
Community, or Nation are direct translations of what word in reference to Islam?	Ummah
When did the Islamic Golden age start?	622
What other age occurred at the same time as the Islamic Golden Age?	the Middle Ages
There what is the latest year for the end of the Islamic Golden Age?	1492
What years did Abbasid caliph Harun ar-Rashid reign?	786 to 809
Where was the House of Wisdom held?	Baghdad
What type of ceramic art was popular from the 8th to the 18th century in the art of Islam?	glazed ceramics
Which ceramic glazing was developed by those potters which were Islamic?	Tin-opacified glazing
Where would one find the earliest examples of opaque glazes in the Muslim world?	Basra
Around when were the first opaque glazes developed?	8th century
Where were stone-paste ceramics invented?	9th century Iraq
What is the most widely known fictional work from the Islamic world?	One Thousand and One Nights
Arabian nights was originally based upon what Persian work?	Hezār Afsān (Thousand Fables)
In what century was One Thousand and One Nights completed?	14th century
When did One Thousand and One Nights first get translated in the West?	18th century
Who was the first westerner to translate One Thousand and One Nights?	Antoine Galland
Layla and Majnun is an example of what kind of poetry?	Arabic poetry and Persian poetry
Which era is Layla and Majnun from?	Umayyad era
In what century does Layla and Majnun originate?	7th century
What kind of story is told in Shahnameh?	a mythical and heroic retelling of Persian history
Who wrote Shahnameh?	Ferdowsi
What is another name for Ibn Tufail?	Abubacer
What Arabic book is Ibn Tufail noted for writing?	Hayy ibn Yaqdhan (Philosophus Autodidactus)
Who wrote Theologus Autodidactus?	Ibn al-Nafis
What person wrote The Incoherence of the Philosophers?	Al-Ghazali
Who was the main chracter of Philosophus Autodidactus?	Hayy
What was the life span of Ibn al-Nafis?	1213–1288
What type of book is Theologus Autodidactus the first type of?	science fiction
What did Ibn al-Nafis use to explain the events in Theologus Autodidactus?	scientific knowledge
Which year did a translation of Philosophus Autodidactus in Latin come to be?	1671
Who wrote Robinson Crusoe?	Daniel Defoe
Who first translated Philosophus Autodidactus into latin?	Edward Pococke the Younger
Simon Ockley translated Philosophus Autodidactus into English, in what year did he do that?	1708
What book is Robert Boyle believe to have written after being inspired by Philosophus Autodidactus?	The Aspiring Naturalist
In what year was Kitab al-Miraj likely translated into Latin?	in 1264 or shortly before
Who wrote the Divine Comedy?	Dante Alighieri
Which works by Shakespeare is believed to be inspired by The Moors?	Merchant of Venice, Titus Andronicus and Othello
In what century is it believed that delegations of Moors began to influence western works by the likes of Shakespeare?	17th century
What aspects from Islamic works did the Divine Comedy feature?	episodes about Bolgia from Arabic works on Islamic eschatology
What was the life span of Ibn Sina?	980–1037
How many books were said to have been written by Ibn Sina?	450
What subjects did Ibn Sina mainly write about?	philosophy and medicine
What medical book is Ibn Sina most noted for in European universities?	The Canon of Medicine
What philosophical encyclopedia is Ibn Sina known for writing?	The Book of Healing
Which philosopher from the Muslim world influenced modern philosophy?	Ibn Tufail
Who wrote Hayy ibn Yaqdha?	Ibn Tufail
In what year was Hayy ibn Yaqdha translated to the Latin language?	1671
What kind of book is Hayy ibn Yaqdha?	philosophical novel
Which philosopher of the Muslim world is considered an important author of work on evolution?	al-Jahiz
Ibn al-Haytham can be known by another name, what is it?	Alhazen
What type of work is Ibn al-Haytham known to have pioneered?	phenomenology and the philosophy of science
Who is considered to have been the one that founded Illuminationist philosophy?	Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Which philosopher in the Muslim world championed inductive logic in their works?	Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
Ibn al-Haytham experimented with what around the year 1000?	optics
Ibn al-Haytham wrote about his work around the year 1000, what was it?	Book of Optics
Who is believed to have discovered decagonal quasicrystal geometry?	Medieval Muslim artists
Regarding the intromission theory of light, who showed the first proof?	Ibn al-Haytham
Which Muslim scientist worked on trigonometry?	al-Khwarzimi
What work is Mansur ibn Muhammad ibn al-Faqih Ilyas known for writing?	Tashrih al-badan (Anatomy of the body)
In what century did Tashrih al-badan come into being?	15th century
Who theorized about pulmonary circulation?	Ibn al-Nafis
Who wrote The Canon of Medicine?	Avicenna
Who wrote Kitab al-Tasrif?	Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi
What field did Muḥammad ibn Jābir al-Ḥarrānī al-Battānī contribute to?	astronomy
What work is Muḥammad ibn Jābir al-Ḥarrānī al-Battānī known for as it regards to earth?	improved the precision of the measurement of the precession of the Earth's axis
Who created the astrolabe?	the Greeks
What model did the work of Muslim World astronomers contribute to?	the Copernican heliocentric model
Who is said to have mastered the astrolabe?	Islamic astronomers and engineers
which crops were brought to europe from the Muslim World?	almonds and citrus fruit
What was the windmill used for?	irrigation and farming
Trading in the Indian ocean was mainly controlled by whom?	Arab merchants
Where was an important center of Indian Ocean trading in the 16th century?	Hormuz
When did the Portuguese arrive in the Indian Ocean?	16th century
How early did people in the Muslim World start using watermills?	7th century
In what century had mills such as gristmills and sawmills dominate the Islamic world?	11th century
At what point was the use of watermills common in the Muslim World?	9th century
Who invented crankshafts?	Muslim engineers
Who was the inventor of water turbines?	Muslim engineers
What percentage of the humans in the world are considered Muslim?	20%
How many Muslims are believed to live on earth?	1,5 billion
In how many nations are Muslims in the majority of people?	49
How many languages are spoken by Muslims?	hundreds
Which Muslim denominations are the most dominant?	Sunni and Shia
What are the two main things differentiating Sunni and Shia?	how the life of the ummah ("faithful") should be governed, and the role of the imam
Who is believed, among Sunnis,  to be the political successor of the Prophet?	Abu Bakr
Who was Abu Bakr?	father of the Prophet's favourite wife
Who was Ali ibn Abi Talib?	husband of the Prophet's daughter Fatimah
What is the literacy rate in Kuwait?	over 97%
In 2015 it was reported that what percentage of the Muslim World was not literate?	37%
What organizations studied literacy in the Muslim World in 2015?	Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
Which regions have the lowest rate of literacy in the Muslim world?	Mali, Afghanistan, Chad and parts of Africa
Which organization for scientific publications was established in Pakistan in 2002?	Higher Education Commission
How much did the Higher Education Commission impact the number of PhDs in Pakistan?	5-fold increase
What science university did Saudi Arabia establish?	King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Where is Zayed University?	United Arab Emirates
How many universities were in Pakistan in 2001?	115
What is considered the most important work of Islamic architecture?	the mosque
What type of decorations are used in Muslim world decorative art rather than pictures?	decorative calligraphy
What is the definition of haram?	forbidden
Where in Muslim architecture are pictures forbidden?	mosque architecture
Where is one permitted to use representations of humans?	secular architecture
Why is depicting God forbidden in the Islamic world?	such artistic depictions may lead to idolatry
What do Muslims believe of the form of God?	God is incorporeal
How many sura's in the Quran begin with "In the name of God?"	All but one
What is the policy in the Muslim world on depicting Mohammed?	prohibited
What other religions might one find depictions of God, or Prophets forbidden?	Jewish and some Christian theology
What is the repetitive use of geometric floral designs known as in Islamic art?	arabesque
Islam forbade types of art found in what religions?	pre-Islamic pagan religions
Miniature paintings of the Ottoman empire featured what kind of subjects?	people and animals
What is one reason the art of Islam may be abstract?	to symbolize the transcendence, indivisible and infinite nature of God
In mosques domes may have what kind of scripts decorating them?	kufic and naskh scripts
What are the main distinctive features of Islamic architecture?	ordered repetition, radiating structures, and rhythmic, metric patterns
What physical characteristics are common in Islamic architecture?	columns, piers and arches
When did domes first appear in the architecture of the Muslim World?	691
Which mosque is believed to be the first with a dome?	Dome of the Rock mosque
When was the Taj Mahal constructed?	17th century
What is another name for the Shamsi Hijri calender?	The Solar Hijri calendar
What is one way to abbreviate the Solar Hiljri calender?	SH
What is the customary calendar of Iran?	the Shamsi Hijri calendar
How many months are in the Shamsi Hijri calendar?	twelve months
What is the first year of the Shamsi Hijri Calender based on?	Prophet Muhammad's migration to Medina
How many Muslim nations require women to cover their legs, shoulders, or whole body?	a small minority
What are the restrictions on the dress of Muslim women considered in the West?	sexist and oppressive
Why do some Muslims oppose allowing women to reveal more of themselves?	women to reveal too much in order to be deemed attractive
In its most strict style what must a woman cover in some Muslim nations?	the face
Which country borders Iran to Iran's northwest?	Armenia
How many people live in Iran?	78.4 million
What is Iran's land mass in square miles?	636,372 sq mi
What is the unofficial name for Iran?	Persia
What is Iran's official country name?	the Islamic Republic of Iran
What civilizations formed in Iran during 3200-2800 BC?	the Proto-Elamite and Elamite kingdoms
When did the Iranian Medes first unify an empire in the area?	625 BC
Who found the Archaemenid Empire in 550 BC?	Cyrus the Great
When did the Archaemenid Empire collapse?	330 BC
Who ended the Archaemenid Empire by conquest in 330 BC?	Alexander the Great
What year did the Rashidun Arabs invade Iran?	633 AD
What year did the Rashidun Arabs conquer Iran?	651 AD
What religion did the Rashidun Arabs convert the indigenous conquered peoples to?	Sunni Islam
Which country took over Iran's territories in the Caucasus in the 19th Century?	Imperial Russia
What movement led to Iran becoming an Islamic republic in 1979?	1979 Revolution
What resource does Iran have the largest supply of in the world?	natural gas
What city is Iran's capital?	Tehran
How does Iran effect the world economy and international energy markets?	through its large reserves of fossil fuels
What resource does Iran have the fourth largest supply of in the world?	proven oil reserves
How many UNESCO World Heritage Sites does Iran have?	19
What century did terms referencing Iran begin to be recorded?	3rd-century
What inscription referenced the term Aryan to Iranians?	Parthian
What Proto-Indo-European term means "skillful assembler?"	*ar-yo-
What is attested as a self-identifier in Iranian languages?	the gentilic
What other term in the 3rd Century besides Aryan also refer to Iran?	Ērān
Which historians referred to Iran as Persis?	Greek historians
What has the West historically referred Iran as?	Persia
When did Persians settle on the west shore of Lake Urmia?	the 9th century BC
After Lake Urmia, Persis then shifted over to what region?	the southern end of the Zagros Mountains,
What is Persis known as today?	Fars Province
When did Reza Shan request that Iran officially be referred to as Iran and not Persia?	1935
Which newspaper reported the official name request in 1935?	New York Times
Which name is officially used politically?	Iran
Who endorsed a move to use Persia and Iran interchangeably after opposition to the official name change?	Professor Ehsan Yarshater
How long ago were the earliest artifacts from that were evidence of humans in Iran?	the Lower Paleolithic era, c. 800,000–200,000 BC
When did early agricultural communities in Iran begin to appear and prosper?	10th to 8th millennium BC
What region of Iran did Neanderthal artifacts from the Middle Paleolithic Period were found?	the Zagros region
What were dug up from the archaeological sites Kashafrud and Ganj Par in Iran?	The earliest archaeological artifacts in Iran
What ancient city dates back as early as 4395 BC in Iran?	Susa
How long ago did ancient cultures and settlements exist across the Iranian plateau?	the 4th millennium BC
During what Age was Iran the site of several of these ancient civilizations?	Bronze Age
Which ancient civilization in Iran during the 4th Millenium was the most prominent?	Elam
Elam's writing system had paralleled Sumer's cuneiform since what era?	the 3rd millennium BC
Who dominated the area of Irea between the 10th Century BC to the late 7th Century BC?	the Assyrian Empire
When did this Civil War take place to free the Iranian peoples from Assyrian rule?	between 616 BC and 605 BC
How long did the Assyrian Empire control and rule Iran?	three centuries
Who lead the Persians into a coalition with the Medes, Babylon, Scythians, and Cimmerians to fight against the Assyrians?	king Cyaxares
When did the Median tribes unify under a single ruler to form the Median Empire?	728 BC
Who founded the Achaemenid Empire when the city states in Iran came together in unification?	Cyrus the Great
When did Cyrus the Great found the Achaemenid Empire?	550 BC
Who triggered the Persian Revolt?	the Median ruler Astyages
What resulted from the Persian Revolt?	The conquest of Media
What was the first world goverment the world had seen at the time it existed?	the Achaemenid Empire
What was the largest empire the world had seen at the time it existed?	the Achaemenid Empire
What sea did the Achaemenid Empire control the majority of the coastal regions of?	the Black Sea
The Achaemenid Empire expanded into what part of Asia?	Central Asia
The Achaemenid Empire controlled all of the significant settlements of what ancient country during its greatest extent?	ancient Egypt
The Achaemenid Empire was the known enemy of what nation's histories during its existence?	the Greek city states
How many people lived in the Archaemenid Empire in 480BC?	50 million people
The Achaemenid Empire had what percentage of the word's population in 480BC?	44% of the world's population
What was the Achaemenid Empire's official language?	Imperial Aramaic
What Seven Wonder of the Ancient world was built by the Archaemenid Empire in the 4th Century BC?	the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus
Who invaded the Archaemenid Empire in 334BC?	Alexander the Great
Who was the last Archaemenid Emperor at the time of its defeat by Alexander the Great?	Darius III
Who controlled the Archaemenid Empire after Alexander the Great died prematurely?	the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire
When did the Parthian Empire rise to become the main power in Iran?	In the middle of the 2nd century BC
When did the Sassanid Empire succeed the Parthian Empire in control of Iran?	224 CE
What wars in the 600s CE lead to the weakening of Iran and a subsequent invasion by the Arabs?	Byzantine-Sassanid Wars
When did the Arabs invade Iran?	the 7th century
Which Arab Caliphate defeated Iran first?	Arab Rashidun Caliphate
What special tax did the discriminated Iranians - both converted and nonconverted - have to pay?	Jizya
What academy was the most important medical center of the world at the time and became Islamicized after the Arab invasions?	Academy of Gunde Shapur
What period was known for an era where Iranian civilization blossomed and peaked?	the Islamic Golden Age
When did the Islamic Golden Age reach its zenith?	by the 10th and 11th centuries
Prominent Iranian writers during this time of the Islamic Golden Age contributed to what area of writing?	scientific writing
Where was the main area where the peak of scientific activity take place during the Islamic Golden Age?	Iran
What tribes migranted en masse to the Iranian plateau in the 10th Century?	Turkic tribes
Where did these Turkic tribes come from before the migrated into Iran in the 10th Century?	Central Asia
The Abbasid army replaced Iranian and Arabic men with Turkic tribesmen as what element in their army?	mamluks (slave-warriors)
In what year did the Ghaznavids briefly control large portions of Iran?	999
How were the Ghaznavids different from the original Turkics that migrated into Iran?	These Turks had been Persianized and had adopted Persian models of administration and rulership
Who established an Ilkhanate in Iran after the break up of the Mongol Empire in 1256?	Hulagu Khan
Timur established the Timurid Empire in Iran in what year?	1370
How long did the Timurid empire last in Iran?	156 years
The Ilkhans and Tumrids had what type of culture when ruling Iran?	a culture that was distinctively Iranian
How many citizens were massacred in Isfahan by Timur in 1387?	70,000 citizens
Who established the Safavid Dynasty?	Ismail I from Ardabil
What was the capital of the Safavid Dynasty?	Tabriz
Ismail I forced a conversion to what Islamic branch?	Shia Islam
What country is currently the only official Shia nation of the world?	Iran
What Empire neighbored and had a rivalry with Safavid Iran?	Ottoman Empire
Safavid Iran peaked during whose reign?	Abbas the Great
When did the Safavid Empire peak?	1587–1629
Who ended Safavid power in Iran in 1722?	Pashtun rebels
Who was the last Safavid ruler who was defeated in 1722 by the Pashtuns in Isfahan?	Soltan Hosein
Who drove out the Pashtuns from Iran in 1729?	Nader Shah
Nader Shah expanded Iranian power to its highest peak since what Empire?	the Sassanid Empire
Nader Shah took back what territories that were annexed by the Ottomans and the Russians?	Caucasian territories
Where was Nader Shan from?	Khorasan
In what year were the Pashtuns defeated and driven out of Iran?	1729
Whose death in 1779 led to a civil war in Iran?	Karim Khan
Who founded the following Qajar Empire in 1794?	Aqa Mohammad Khan
The Qajars drove the Russians out of what entire region?	the entire Caucasus
The Qajars defeated the Russians at what battle to take over Tblisi?	Battle of Krtsanisi
Iran lost territory in the Caucasus during what wars in the early 1800s?	Russo-Persian wars
What wars resulted in Iran losing control of the Caucasus to the Russians?	the 19th century Russo-Persian wars
What region consisting of Dagestan, Georgia, Armenia, & Azerbaijan did Iran lose control of to the Russians?	the Caucasus
What century did Iran lose the Caucasus to Russia?	the 19th century
The Gulistan and Turkmenchay treaties between Iran and Russia confirmed what?	Iran irrevocably lost control over its integral territories in the region
When did a series of protests over foreign concessions sales in Iran occur?	Between 1872 and 1905
What resulted from the series of protests in Iran over foreign concessions sales?	the Iranian Constitutional Revolution
The first national parliament of Iran was founded in what year?	in 1906
The first Constitution of Iran was founded in what year?	in 1906
The Iranian Constitution did what for Christians, Jews, and Zoroastrians in Iran?	official recognition of Iran's three religious minorities
The constitutional movement in Iran lasted from 1906 until what year?	until 1911
The British occupied Western Iran from World War 1 until finally withdrawing in what year?	1921
Who was defeated and forced to abdicate at the end of the Iranian constitutional movement?	Mohammad Ali Shah
In 1911, Russians occupied Northern Iran under what pretext?	restoring order
Who massacred many Assyrian Iranians around Urmia during World War 1?	Ottoman armies
When was Reza Shah forced to abdicate in Iran?	1941
Who succeeded Reza Shah after his abdication?	his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi established what enormous supply route during World War 2?	the Persian Corridor
Who backed two puppet regimes in/around Iran during WWII?	the Soviet Union
What happened which ended in two puppet states dissolving and Soviet withdrawal out of Iran after WWII?	the Iran crisis of 1946
What year did oil price spikes in Iran lead to inflation?	1973
What caused inflation to Iran's economy during the oil price spike in 1973?	economy of Iran was flooded with foreign currency
Iran's inflation led to what in 1975-1976?	an economic recession
Why did millions of youth migrate to the urban areas of Iran in the mid 1970s?	construction jobs
Due to increased unemployment, who mainly opposed the Shah's regime?	millions of youth who had migrated to the cities
The new Iranian government following the Shah's downfall dealt with the Kurdish rebellion in what year?	1979
How did the new Iranian government handle the rebellions and uprisings following their rise to power?	in a violent manner
The new Iranian government purged itself of what political opposition?	non-Islamist
What happened to the nationalists and Marxists that had helped the Islamic ruling government to depose the Shah?	were executed
Who seized the US Embassy in Iran in 1979?	a group of students
When was the US Embassy in Iran seized?	November 4, 1979
ALl of the hostages were completely freed as the result of what treaty?	Algiers Accords
Who won the 1980 US Presidential Elections after President Carter's repeated failed attempts to resolve the US Iranian Embassy situation?	Ronald Reagan
How many hostages were taken in the US Embassy seizure?	52 personnel and citizens
Who invaded Iran in 1980?	the Iraqi army
When did the Iranian army push the Iraqis back into Iraq?	mid 1982
Who mediated the truce which ended the Iran-Iraq War?	the UN
When did the Iran-Iraq War finally end?	1988
How many civilians in Iran were killed during the Iran-Iraq War?	11,000–16,000
What latitudes does Iran lie between?	24° and 40° N
What is the size of Iran?	1,648,195 km2 (636,372 sq mi)
Where does Iran border the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman?	to the south
What longitudes does Iran lie between?	44° and 64° E
What does Iran border with to its north?	the Caspian Sea
Iran's landscape is dominated by what geographical feature?	rugged mountain ranges
What is Iran's highest mountain?	Mount Damavand
How tall is Mount Damavand?	5,610 m (18,406 ft)
Mount Damavand is located in what range?	Alborz Mountains
Iran's climate along its Capsian coast and northen forests is?	subtropical
During what season does Iran's northern region's temperatures never go higher than 29c?	Summer
What is the annual precipitation in Iran's eastern plains?	680 mm (26.8 in)
What is the annual precipitation in Iran's western plains?	1,700 mm (66.9 in)
According to Gary Lewis of the UN, what is the most pressing human security challenge in Iran?	Water scarcity
In Iran's western Zagros Basin, temperatures do not exceed what level during the summer?	38 °C (100.4 °F)
In Iran's western Zagros Basin, what are the average daily temperatures during winter?	below zero
The eastern and central basins of Iran experience how much annual precipitation?	less than 200 mm (7.9 in) of rain
What is the coastal plains of Iran's annual precipitation ranges?	135 to 355 mm (5.3 to 14.0 in)
The Iranian Parliament does not demand environmental impact studies before approving what projects?	large national development projects
How many species of Iranian wildlife are listed by the IUCN as endangered?	74 species
The Iranian Parliament lets who exploit mines without guidance from the Department of the Environment?	Ministry of Industries and Mines
The Iranian Parliament passes legislation without the involvement of what department to the detriment of wildlife?	Department of Environment
What is the sixth most populous city of Iran?	Shiraz
What is Shiraz' population by the 2011 Census?	1.4 million
Shiraz is the capital of what Province?	Fars Province
What ancient civilization has majorly influenced the Fars Province?	Babylonian civilization
Persians have been in the Fars Province since what century?	9th century BC
The Iranina Islamic Republic is based on what document?	the 1979 Constitution
What is the Leader of the Revolution also known as?	Supreme Leader
Who is the Commander in Chief of the Iranian Army?	The Supreme Leader
The Supreme Leader appoints how many members of the Guardian Council?	six
Who is responsible for electing and dismissing the Supreme Leader?	The Assembly of Experts
In Iran, who has the final say in all matters directly related to the Supreme Leader?	the Supreme Leader
Who exercises exective powers in Iran?	The President
The Council of Ministers is appointed and supervised by who?	The President
How many Vice-Presidents serve under the President in Iran?	Eight
The legislature approves the 8 vice presidents and how many cabinet members?	twenty-two
How many jurists are in the Guardian Council?	twelve jurists
Who can veto Parliament?	The Guardian Council
What Council acts as a mediator when there are disputes between the Parliament and the Guardian Council?	The Expediency Council
How long are the terms of local city councils that are present in all Iranian cities and villages?	four-year terms
Who is responsible for interpreting the Constitution?	The Guardian Council
When crimes are committed by clerics, who handles the cases?	The Special Clerical Court
The Special Clerical Court is accountable to only which body?	the Supreme Leader
How often does the Assembly of Experts meet?	one week annually
The Assembly of Experts has how many clerics?	86
Which body can remove the Supreme Leader at any time by constitutional right?	The Assembly of Experts
Iran's nuclear program has caused discord within the international community since when?	Since 2005
Which country did Iran's leadership was quoted as being a possible target of its atomic weapons?	Israel
Who imposed sanctions against Iran as a result of Iran's nuclear program?	UN Security Council
When was it estimated by the US Director of National Intelligence that Iran would be able to develop a nuclear weapon?	2013
What is Iran's volunteer militia force named?	the Basij
How many full-time members does the Basij have?	90,000
How many members in total does the Basij have?	Up to 11 million men and women
In 2007 what was Iran spending 2.6% of its GDP on?	military spending
In 2014, Iran spent how much on weapons spending?	$15 billion
What is Iran's most advanced missile?	The Fajr-3 (MIRV)
Why did Iran have to build its own military hardware, vehicles, and weapons after the 1979 Revolution?	foreign embargoes
Since when has Iran developed its domestic military infrastructure?	1979 Revolution
The Fajr-3 missile uses what type of propulsion system?	liquid fuel
By 2007, Iran's crude oil exports resulted in how much of its foreign exchange currency?	$70 billion
What is a main cause of Iran's constant budget deficits?	large-scale state subsidies
What year did Iran pass an economic reform plan that would replace subsidies with targeted social assistance programs?	2010
In 2008, how much was Iran's state subsidy in its energy sector?	more than $84 billion
How much of Iran's budget came from oil and natural gas reserves in 2006?	about 45%
What is a main goal of Iran's market reform plans?	diversify Iran's oil-reliant economy
The Global COmpetitiveness Report in 2010 ranked Iran where out of 139 countries?	ranked 69
What Iranian nationalized industry has been noncompetitive and managed badly?	the bonyads
What, along with a lack of competition, has held back Iran's nationalized industries?	lagging corruption in the public sector
How much was 1 US Dollar worth in Iranian Rials in early 2012?	16,000
How much was 1 US Dollar worth in Iranian Rials in April 2013?	36,000
What year did a nuclear and sanctions relief deal happen for Iran?	2015
What economic sanction against Iranian crude oil has adversely affected the Iranian economy?	embargo
What would possibly prevent the even spread of relief benefits from Iran's nuclear and sanctions deal of 2015?	the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
What does Teheran, Isfahan, Mashhad, and Shiraz have in common?	the most popular tourist destinations
How many tourist visas were granted in 2003?	300,000
Which group made up the majority of granted tourist visas in 2003?	Asian Muslims
In 2003, what was Iran's worldwide rank in tourism revenues?	ranked 68th
What was Iran's rank in the top 10 Middle East destinations according to UNESCO?	rated 4th
How much natural gas reserves does Iran have?	33.6 trillion cubic metres
What is Iran ranked in the world in proved gas reserves?	second largest
How much oil reserves does Iran have?	153,600,000,000 barrels
Where does Iran rank in OPEC's top oil exporting nations?	2nd largest
How much did Iran spend in oil imports in 2005?	US$4 billion
When did Iran open its first wind-powered plants?	2004
When did Iran open its first geothermal plants?	2004
How much did Iran's installed capacity of power increase to after it added new hydroelectric power in 2004?	33,000 megawatts
How much of Iran's 33k megawatt installed capacity was based on natural gas?	75%
How much of Iran's 33k megawatt installed capacity was based on oil?	18%
Which Iranian scientist co-invented the first gas laser?	Ali Javan
Which Iranian cardiologist developed and invented the first artificial cardiac pump?	Tofy Mussivand
In 2014, Maryam Mirzakhani became the first women ever and first Iranian to win what prestigious mathematics award?	the Fields Medal
Which Iranian scientist discovered HbA1c to further treatment and research of diabetes?	Samuel Rahbar
When did Ali Javan, an Iranian scientist, co-invent the first gas laser?	1960
What is Iran's presumed largest ethnic group?	Persians
What is Iran's presumed 2nd largest ethnic group?	Azerbaijanis
Persians make up what percentage of Iran's population?	53%
Ethnic minorities such as Azerbaijanis make up what percentage of Iran's population?	22%
What percentage of Iran speaks any type of Iranian language?	79%
What other branch of Islam is recognized by the Iranian government?	Sunni branch
Are the religious minorities in Iran - Christianity, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and Sunnis - a part of the Iranian Parliament?	have reserved seats
What religious minority is not officially recognized by the Iranian government?	the Bahá'í Faith
How long has the Bahai Faith been persecuted in Iran?	since the 19th century
Which religious minority since the 1979 Revolution has been persecuted and in some cases executed by the Iranian government?	the Bahá'í Faith
What were the first known examples of Iranian visual art?	the bas-reliefs of Persepolis
How far back can the first known examples of Iranian visual art be traced to?	c. 500 BC
What city was the ritual center of the Archaemenids?	Persepolis
In what era did Iranian visual art reach its peak?	the Sassanid Era
What decade was significant to Iranian film?	1960s
What Iranian film festival in 1954 was the progenitor of future film festivals in 1969 and 1973?	the Golrizan Festival
How many commercial films were produced yearly on average in the early 1960s in Iran?	25 commercial films
How many commercial films were produced yearly on average by the end of the 1960s in Iran?	65
What Iranian film festival was created in 1973?	Tehran World Festival
Which director led off a new age of Iranian film after the 1979 Revolution?	Khosrow Sinai
What was the name of Sinai's film that ushered in Iran's new era of film after the 1979 Revolution?	Viva...
Which Iranian director won the Palm d'Or at Cannes in 1997?	Abbas Kiarostami
What was the name of Kiarostami's film which won the Palm d'Or at Cannes in 1997?	Taste of Cherry
What year did 6 different Iranian films of six different styles represent at the Berlin International Film Festival?	2006
When did the Internet arrive in Iran?	1993
What percentage of Iran's population were internet users in 2014?	around 40%
What is Iran's most popular online social network?	Instagram
What percentage of cloud-based instant messaging platform Telegram's users are from Iran?	Over 80%
What site is responsible for around 90% of Iran's online e-commerce?	Digikala
In Iranian cuisine, what is habitually used with fruits?	Herbs
Iranians usually eat what diet staple with lunch and dinner?	plain yogurt
What delicacy is Iran famous for?	caviar
Why is Iranian cuisine so diverse besides being influenced by other cultures?	its variety of ethnic groups
Iran has the highest population of what group in the world?	Azerbaijanis
What is the percentage range of Iran's total population is seemingly comprised of Azerbaijanis?	between 21.6–30%
What is the majority of organizational estimations of Azerbaijanis' percentage of Iran's population?	25%
What melon is Iran a Top 5 producer in the world in 2012?	watermelons
What type of materials is Iran a leading manufacturer of in the Middle East?	construction materials
What type of chemicals is Iran a leading manufacturer of in the Middle East?	petrochemicals
How many agricultural products in 2012 was Iran a top 5 producer in the world? Answer: 12	apricots, cherries, sour cherries, cucumbers and gherkins, dates, eggplants, figs, pistachios, quinces, walnuts, and watermelons.
What type of appliances is Iran a leading manufacturer of in the Middle East?	home appliances
The Achaemind Empire along with what other group became the foundation for the art in later Iranian history?	The Median
A blend of Iranian and what other type of artwork were the Parthians' art comprised of?	Hellenistic
What Iranian art played a major role in the formation of medieval art from Europe and Asia?	Sassanid art
The Sassanid became a cornerstone of what type of learning?	Islamic learning
What is two islands that are part of the British Isles?	Great Britain, Ireland
Where are the British Isles located?	North Atlantic,
How many people live in the British Isles?	just under 70 million
What is one of the three Crown Dependencies of the British Isles?	Isle of Man
Where are the Bailiwick of Jersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey located?	in the Channel Islands
What is the age of the oldest rocks in the north western part of Scotland?	2,700 million years old
What is the elevation of Ben Nevis?	1,344 metres (4,409 ft
What type of climate does this area have?	temperate marine
Around 12,000 BC, Great Britain was still a peninsula on what continent?	European continent.
When is it believed that Ireland became inhabited?	after 8000 BC
Which is one of the tribes that spoke Insular Celtic?	Pictish (northern Britain)
When did the Pictish tribe start to inhabit the islands?	beginning of the 1st millennium AD
Who foreign group conquered Britain around AD 43?	Roman Empire
When did the Vikings invade Britain?	9th century
What are the six counties in Ireland called that are still part of the United Kingdom?	Northern Ireland
Why is the name the British Isles disputed in Ireland?	association of the word British
Does the Government of Ireland use the British Isle term?	does not recognise or use the term
What is the alternative name that Government of Ireland uses instead of British Isles?	Atlantic Archipelago
Does the Government of Ireland's London embassy use the name British Isles?	its embassy in London discourages its use
Where did the first known occurrence of the British Isle name appear in written material?	writings of sea-farers
What is one of the earliest surviving records that mention the name British Isles?	Massaliote Periplus (6th century BC)
When did the "P" sound of Pretannia change to the "B" sound of Britannia?	during the time of Julius Caesar
What language do most historians agree upon where the Greek names for the British Isles came from?	native Celtic-language
What did the ancient Greeks call the people that lived in the British Isles?	Πρεττανοί (Priteni or Pretani)
What did name did Claudius Ptolemy (Greco-Egyptian scientist) use for Ireland?	little Britain (μικρής Βρεττανίας - mikris Brettanias)
In later writings, what did Claudius Ptolemy called the British Isles?	Alwion, Iwernia, and Mona
After the Romans conqured the British Isles what became the more common name for the country?	Great Britain
What is the earliest English usage of the term Brytish Illes?	a work by John Dee
When was this Brytish Illes name used in the English language by John Dee?	1577
What is another name that is used for the British Isles?	Anglo-Celtic Isles
What is the common term that the Government of Ireland uses when documents are written jointly with the British?	"these islands
When did the Caledonian Orogeny occur?	c. 488–444 Ma and early Silurian period
What formed after the craton Baltica and the terrane Avalonia collision?	mountains and hills
What happened during the c. 488–444 Ma and early Silurian period?	craton Baltica collided with the terrane Avalonia
What formed the hills of Munster and the southern part of Wales?	Variscan orogeny
In which direction have the British Isles been drifting?	northwest
What was the most recent glaciation that has shaped the British Isles?	Devensian
What happened with the Devensian glaciation ended?	the English Channel flooded
When did sea levels reach their current highth?	4,000 to 5,000 years ago
What covered the sea between Ireland and Great Britian during the last glacier?	a single ice sheet
What is the longest river in Ireland?	the Shannon
Where are other mountain areas in the British Isles?	Wales and parts of Ireland
Where is the highest point in the British Isles?	Ben Nevis
What is the lowest elevation in the British Isles?	Holme, Cambridgeshire at −2.75 m
What is the weather like in the summer time in the British Isles?	mild and also wet
Which continent has similar plant and animal life as the British Isles?	European continent
In Ireland where does the native animal and plant species mostly come from?	Europe, and Great Britain
When did the land bridge between Ireland and Britain disappear?	about 8,000 years ago
When did the last Ice Age end in the British Isles?	about 12,000 years ago
When did the clearing of swamp land and forests begin in the British Isles?	around 6000 BC
When did the clearing of the swamp land and forest begain to rapidly increase?	medieval times
Why was Britain able to keep its ancient forests longer than Europe?	due to a small population
When did lumber shortages start to occur in Britain?	17th century
What are three of the most typical type of tress that can be found in Ireland?	oak, ash, wych elm
Which two animals became extinct in the British Isles?	wolf, bear
Which species of deer is protected in the British Isles?	red deer
How many bird species does the British Isles have?	Over 200 species of bird
What are three of the most common birds in the British Isles?	chaffinch, common blackbird, house sparrow
What kinds of fish are abundent in the British Isles?	salmon, trout, perch and pike
Which snakes are considered native to the British Isles but not Ireland?	European adder, the grass snake and the smooth snake
What is the name of the slug that is native to both Britain and Ireland?	Kerry slug
Is the grass nake or the smooth snake native to Ireland?	none are native to Ireland
What type of wild life are not native to Ireland but are in Britain?	water voles, roe deer and common toads
Which area in the British Isles is s the most populated?	England
What percentage of the population does England have compared to the other areas in the British Isles?	80%
What is the most populated city in Ireland?	Greater Dublin Area (1.1 million)
How many people live in the area of London?	9 million
What are two other major populated cities in England?	Greater Manchester Urban Area (2.4 million), West Midlands conurbation (2.4 million)
Which two areas in the British Isles hasn't experienced a large population growth in the last one hundred years?	Scotland and Wales
How does Ireland's population compare to the rest of the British Isles?	less than one tenth of the population of the British Isles
How long did the Great Irish Famine cause a population decline in Ireland?	century-long population decline
How large is the Irish diaspora that was caused by the Great Irish Famine?	fifteen times the current population of the island
How many groups do these languages belong to?	six groups
What are the three Insular Celtic languages?	Irish, Manx and Scottish Gaelic
What are the remaining Cetic languages that are still used today?	Cornish, Welsh and Breton
Which cant is often used by Irish Travellers?	Shelta
What mainland was the British Isles once connected to?	European mainland
When did the British Isles area become separated from the European continent?	two to four millennia
When sea levels rose what occured in the British Isles area?	separating Ireland from Great Britain
What happened to British Isles area when the ice melted after the last ice age?	sea levels rose
Did Britain become populated with people again before or after the ice came to an end?	before the ice age ended
The people that lived in the British Isles during the Roman Empire era spoke which language?	Celtic dialects of the Insular Celtic group
What was the name of the wall that the Romans built to mark their northern territory in the British Isles in 122AD?	Hadrian's Wall
During the Roman Empire occupation in the British Isles, what was the name of the people that lived in Ireland?	Hiberni
The northern area of Great Britain was populated by what native people during the Roman Empire occupation?	Picts
What was the name of the native people that lived in the southern parts of the British Isles during the Roman Empire occupation?	Britons
Which people arrived in the British Isles when the Roman Empire's power was diminishing?	Anglo-Saxons
What area did the Anglo-Saxons begin to dominate in the British Isles?	southern Great Britain
What happened to the British Isles and Europe after the Roman Empire ended?	the Dark Ages
What era did Ireland enter when the Roman Empire ended?	golden age
What did the Irish build during the Golden Age?	monasteries and universities
When did Viking invasions begin in the British Isles?	9th century
What is one area where the Vikings created a permanent settlement in the British Isles?	east coast of Ireland
England became a possession of which country when it became conquered after the first millennium?	Denmark
When did the Norman Conquest occur?	1066
In 1169, Ireland was invaded by which people?	Angevins
Since the Norman invasion who had feudal possession of Ireland?	the Pope
During the end of the Middle Ages which two kingdoms was Great Britain divided into?	Kingdoms of England and Scotland
What was the name of the church that King Henry VIII founded?	Church of England
Which king failed to receive a divorce from the Pope in 1534?	King Henry VIII
Which crown did the King of Scotland inherit in 1603?	Crown of England
Why did the King of England have issues with parliment in the 17th century?	his policy of tolerance towards Catholicism
What happened to Britain during the 17th century?	political upheaval, religious division and war
Who where the ruling class after the revolutionary republic was created?	Protestant and British
The English Civil War brought about what change to Britain?	revolutionary republic in England
In what year was the Kingdom of Great Britain founded?	1707
When did the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland unite?	1801
How large did the British Empire become by the beginning of the 20th century?	one third of the globe
What negative factor occurred as a result of the Industrial Revolution in England?	terrible condition for the working class
What was the result of the Anglo-Irish Treaty in 1919-1922?	Most of Ireland seceded from the United Kingdom
What are the names of the two states that are sovereign in the British Isles today?	Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
What is another name that Ireland is also called?	Republic of Ireland
Northern Ireland is part of which country?	United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
What is another name for the  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland?	United Kingdom
Which three states in the United Kingdom have devolved governements?	Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
Which state send members to the parliament in Edinburgh?	Scotland
What type of government does the United Kingdom and the Crown Dependencies have?	parliamentary democracies
Who shares power in Northern Ireland?	unionists and nationalists
Unionists in Northern Ireland want to remain part of which country?	United Kingdom
Nationalist in Northern Ireland want to join which country?	the rest of Ireland
The United Kingdom is part of what union?	European Union (EU)
What does the Schengen area allow in the European Union?	passport-free travel between EU members states
When was a free-travel area created betwen Northern Ireland and Ireland?	1997
This free-travel area in Ireland is now called what?	Common Travel Area
What are the two exceptions to the voting rights in United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Irelandand Britain?	presidential elections and constitutional referendums
In what elections are other Europeans who are living in the United Kingdom or Ireland, allowed to vote in?	local and European Parliament elections
Which ministry wants to end this type of voting of EU nationals?	UK Ministry of Justice
What type of arrangement let British and Irish citizens vote in each other's elections?	Reciprocal arrangements
What has caused several uncommon arrangements between the various states in the United Kingdom?	The Northern Ireland Peace Process
What type of citizenship can Northern Ireland people have?	choice of Irish or British citizenship or both
The Northern Ireland Executive meets with what other government to develop policies for the island of Ireland?	Government of Ireland
The 1998 Good Friday Agreement resulted in what arrangement?	policies common across the island of Ireland
What was one of organizations that was founded because of the Good Friday Agreement?	British–Irish Council
Which states belong to the British-Irish Council?	all of the states and territories of the British Isles
How many Oireachtas members where there in the original British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly?	25
How many members of the United Kingdom Parliament were in the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly originally?	25
The British-Irish Council has added representatives from which parliament?	Scottish Parliament
Does the Parliamentary Assembly had any kinds of legislative authority?	no
What does the British-Irish Council discuss?	issues of mutual importance
What does the British-Irish Council do?	investigates and collects witness evidence
How often does the British-Irish Council meet?	biannually
Who recommended that the British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Assembly should look very closely at the work that the British-Irish Council does?	Niall Blaney
What types of media give the people of Ireland information about what is going on in Britain?	British television, newspapers and magazines
What is available to the people in Northern Ireland so they have access to the media?	private television
What is one of the most popoular television shows in the United Kingdom?	The X Factor
Who can receive the Costa Book Award?	authors resident in the UK or Ireland
What are some of the minor sports in the United Kingdom?	croquet, bowls, pitch and putt
What is the most popular sport in the United Kingdom?	association football
How many national Ruby teams are there in the United Kingdom?	four
In which hemisphere do the rugby playing countries meet once every four years?	southern hemisphere
How often do the national rugby teams play for the Triple Crown?	each year
The Irish Sea tunnel was first purposed in what year?	1895
What is the name of the recent proposal of a tunnel between Rosslare and Fishguard ports?	Tusker Tunnel
Who proposed the Tusker Tunnel?	The Institute of Engineers of Ireland
What is the estimated cost to build the Tusker Tunnel?	£15 billion or €20 billion
In what year was a bridge proposed between County Antrim in Northern Ireland to Galloway, Scotland?	2007
What Museum has a vase with an image of an episkyros player?	National Archaeological Museum of Athens
What game did Athenaeus reference in 228 AD?	harpastum
What is the name of a similar, non-competitive game in Japan called?	kemari
What country is the game chuck-guk from?	Korea
What country is the game wogabaliri from?	Australia
What year did the Football Association arrange The Laws of the Game?	1863
Who Organizes the World Cups?	International Federation of Association Football
About how many years between World Cups?	four
What country did the Laws of the Game come from?	England
Who are the only players allowed to touch the ball with their hands?	goalkeepers
What century does football in England date back to?	eighth century AD
What organization has said that there is no historical connection to association football with any other game outside of Europe?	FIFA
In what century did the modern rules of association football come from?	mid-19th century
What country did kids play football in public schools in the 19th century?	England
Which rules were influential to the codes of association football?	Cambridge Rules
Which college where the Cambridge Rules written at?	Trinity College
In what year did John Charles Thring come up with rules that were influential?	1862
What year did the Sheffield FA form?	1867
What year were the Cambridge Rules first drawn up?	1848
What is the only position specified by the Laws of the Game	goalkeeper
The focus of strikers and forwards are to do what?	score goals
 A team players layout is a what?	formation
Who's job is to prevent the opponents from scoring?	defenders
Who's the most responsible for the teams tactics?	team's manager
What year did the Football Association form?	1863
At what establishment did the Football Association have their first Meeting?	Freemasons' Tavern
What year did the Rugby Football Union form?	1871
How many clubs ended up ratifying the original laws of the game?	eleven
Who played by their own rules till the 1870's?	The Sheffield FA
What is C.W. Alcock responsible for founding?	FA Cup
How long has the FA Cup been contested?	1872
Who founded the worlds first football league?	William McGregor
How many clubs where in the first football league?	12
What country is the home of the first football league?	England
What does the abbreviation IFAB stand for?	International Football Association Board
What year was the IFAB formed?	1886
What city was FIFA formed?	Paris
How many representatives did FIFA have in the IFAB?	four
How many different British associations where part of the IFAB?	four
In 2006, which team helps secure a truce during a civil war?	Côte d'Ivoire
What city did a peaceful match between two armies take place in 2007?	Bouaké
When did the Football War happen?	June 1969
Football made which wars more tense in the 1990's?	Yugoslav Wars
What decade is considered the "golden age" of women's football?	1920s
Since what year has women's football been an Olympic event?	1996
Who voted to ban women's football from its grounds in 1921?	England's Football Association
In 1971, who officially recognized women's football?	UEFA
What year was the FIFA Women's first World cup?	1991
What would you describe the shape of the football?	spherical
How many players are on each team?	eleven
What happens when both teams score the same amount of points?	a draw
What is the captain a part of before the start of the game?	the coin toss
What is another name for the football?	soccer ball
When is it okay for regular players to use their hands?	throw-in restart
A ball cannot be received in what type of position?	offside
throughout when can players move the ball in any direction?	the pitch
Who can only handle the ball with their hands or arms during play?	goalkeepers
Who guards the goal?	goalkeeper
Who is the only one who has the authority to stop the game when something is wron?	referee
what is allowed but restricted?	physical contact
Besides a referee interfering, when else is play stopped?	when the ball has left the field of play
How many laws are there in the official Laws of the Game?	17
Who maintains the Laws of the Game?	International Football Association Board (IFAB)
Broad terms in the laws allow for what?	flexibility
Who publishes the Laws of the Game?	FIFA
Out of the maximum amount of players allowed, one must be a what?	goalkeeper
The maximum amount of players exclude what?	substitutes
If there's a minimum amount of players it's usually what?	seven
Players are usually strategically placed by who?	coach
What is the maximum amount of players allowed?	eleven
The equipment a player wears is also called a what?	kit
What is highly recommended by medical experts for male players?	An athletic supporter and protective cup
Who wears clothing that easily sets them apart from everyone else on the field?	goalkeeper
wearing anything that could be dangerous is what?	forbidden
What is not required but can be chosen to protect a player from head injuries?	Headgear
Imperial units where once used to express the dimensions of a what?	football pitch
What unit of measurement is now expressed by the Laws?	metric
The use of imperial units is still popular in what kind of countries?	English-speaking
Laws were formulated in what country?	England
What is the range for the length for international matches in meters?	100–110 m
In what year did the IFAB initially approve a fixed size as a standard pitch dimension for international matches?	2008
When was the IFAB's decision on the fixed size of the pitch become implemented?	never
What is the range for the length of fields for non international matches in meters?	90–120 m
What is the range for the width for international matches in meters?	64–75 m
What is the penalty area marked by?	goal line
a penalty foul by the defending team can be punishable by a what?	penalty kick
how many meters from the goalpost does a penalty area extend?	16.5 m
Only who can handle the ball with his hands?	goalkeeper
How many periods are in a standard football match?	two
How long are each period in a standard football match?	45
What are the periods in a football match called?	halves
Who gets to decide how long stoppage time can go on for?	referee
In what year did an incident help introduce added time?	1891
Matches where a winner must be decided is called what type of competitions?	knockout
Extra time has two periods which each are how long in minutes?	15
What are penalty shootouts officially known as in the Laws of the Game?	kicks from the penalty mark
Which goals count to the final score of the game?	Goals scored during extra time
What is the golden goal?	the first goal in extra time
Who was the first team to win using the golden goal to their advantage?	France
Who experimented with creating winners without requiring penalty shootouts?	the IFAB
What team did France beat in 1998?	Paraguay
What year did the Czech Republic lose in the final of Euro?	1996
Which card does a referee use to signal a caution to a player?	yellow card
How many yellow cards lead to a red card?	A second
A referee gives out a yellow card and writes down the players name in his notebook which is called being what?	booked
Managers and support staff is considered what and thus cannot be shown a card?	Non-players
What does a red card mean?	dismissal
Players who are sent off in a game are often faced with what?	mandatory suspensions
Sometimes clubs can do what if they feel that a punishment was too harsh?	appeals
Football associations enforce what kind of conduct?	good
Which year was there not a Summer Olympic Game?	1932
In what year was a women's tournament added to the Summer Olympics?	1996
What year were professional players allowed to play in the  Summer Olympics?	1984
What is the age limit on the Olympic men's tournament?	Under-23
What was the first year that there was a football tournament at the Summer Olympics?	1900
What does UEFA Stand for?	European Championship
The FIFA Confederations Cups is usually considered a warm-up for what?	FIFA World Cup
What do winners of the continental competition get to do?	contest the FIFA Club World Cup
What does CAF stand for?	African Cup of Nations
What do teams gain for doing well throughout the season?	points
What is the name for the type of tournament teams play in regular season?	round-robin
What could happen to the top few teams at the end of the season?	promoted to a higher division
Who operate league systems?	governing bodies
What happens to the teams at the bottom of the ranks at the end of the season?	relegated to a lower division
What is one who replaces a player during a game called?	substitutes
What is the maximum number of substitutions during most professional games?	three
Who decides on who's rewarded points for abandoned games?	individual football associations
Who were the British monarchs of the House of Hanover from August 1714 to June 1830?	George I, George II, George III, and George IV
What was the 19th century revival of Georgian architecture in the United States referred to as?	Colonial Revival
Between what years was Georgian architecture in style?	between 1714 and 1830
What was the name given to the 20th century Great British revival Georgian architecture.	Neo-Georgian
What was the name of the house of the monarchs in power from 1714 and 1830?	House of Hanover
What classical architecture is Georgian architecture based on?	Greece and Rome
What type of architecture did Georgian replace?	English vernacular architecture
Where is ornament typically not found in Georgian architecture?	the exterior
During the period of Georgian architecture what did landowners turn into?	property developers
Where do many buildings constructed during the period of Georgian architecture still exist today?	London, Edinburgh, Dublin and Bristol
What benefit convinced many wealthy people to move into town during this time?	a square of garden
What part of the world was mostly dominated by Georgian architecture?	all over the English-speaking world
What quality were the buildings constructed during that time?	generally high
What high sounding title was adopted by anyone who could get away with it?	architect
How did most Georgian design styles disseminate?	pattern books and inexpensive suites of engravings
How did styles disseminate before Georgian architecture?	the apprenticeship system
Which American author received editions of Georgian architecture?	William Halfpenny
What years were William Halfpenny active?	1723–1755
What style did Georgian succeed?	English Baroque
Which architect was a transitional figure?	James Gibbs
What became very popular with wealthy patrons during this period?	The European Grand Tour
Which book did Colen Campbell write?	Vitruvius Britannicus
What Venetian spent most of his career in England?	Giacomo Leoni
What are the whimsical alternatives of Palladian architecture?	Gothic and Chinoiserie
Gothic and Chinoiserie were the English-speaking world's equivalent of what style?	European Rococo
John Nash was one of the most prolific architects of which style?	The Regency style
Around what year was the Greek Revival added to the repertory?	around 1750
Who were two leading exponent of the Greek Revival style?	William Wilkins and Robert Smirke
Georgian architecture is characterized by?	its proportion and balance
What was a desirable feature of Georgian town planning?	Regularity of housefronts
What was considered a deep flaw of Georgian architecture?	lack of symmetry
What decorative vocabulary did Georgian designs draw from?	ancient Rome or Greece
What revived style dominated English country house architecture?	Palladian
What was done to make houses look more impressive from a distance?	made wide and relatively shallow
Where was the height generally highest in Palladian architecture?	the centre
Where were areas such as kitchens, offices, and service areas generally found?	basement area
What floor were the main receptions rooms generally located?	mezzanine floor
What tax was in force throughout the United Kingdom during this time?	window tax
When was the sash window developed?	the 1670s
What plans became universal inside larger houses?	Corridor plans
What cannot be generally deduced from the outside?	the internal plan and function of the rooms
What aspect of windows generally varied between floors?	Their height
What was often used to hide functional parts of buildings?	trees
What was occasionally visible in grander buildings?	domes
What often topped pilasters of columns?	pediment
What designs did ornament use to avoid using the human figure?	geometrical or plant-based
What aspect of buildings became very rare?	Internal courtyards
Where could sometimes overwhelming ornament be found?	Inside ornament
What was the typical main focus of rooms?	chimneypiece
What type of ceilings became commonplace?	Plasterwork ceilings
What fell out of favor during this time?	Wood-panelling
Where was very expensive wallpaper imported from?	China
Most town people lived in what type of houses?	terraced houses
What was used to protect the "area"?	iron railings
Due to new entry styles what rooms were often moved down a floor?	main reception rooms
What shape and size did most town terraced houses take on?	tall and narrow
What year did The Albany convert?	1802
Well-off continental dwellings consisted of?	wide apartments occupying only one or two floors of a building
What was the only city where working class purpose built tenements common?	Edinburgh
What was popular for terraces where there was enough space?	A curving crescent
What cities contest to being the original home of the semi?	Blackheath, Chalk Farm and St John's Wood
A plan for a semi-detached houses was dated for what year?	1794
Who conferred primacy to the Eyre Estate of St John's Wood?	Sir John Summerson
What put an end to the scheme of semi-detached houses?	the French Wars
What act spurred to building of new churches in Britain?	Church Building Act of 1818
What were Anglican churches internally designed for?	maximum audibility, and visibility
The later years of the period saw the demand for which places of worship increase?	Non-conformist and Roman Catholic
What were common in new churches?	Galleries
Churches filled up with monuments to what?	monuments to the prosperous
Somerset House was designed by whom?	Sir William Chambers
In what year was Somerset House designed?	1776
Commercial projects in the late period tended to be "architectural" in what way?	"architectural in intention"
What was considered a lesser class of designers?	surveyors
American buildings in the Georgian period were frequently constructed of which materials?	wood with clapboards
What was difficult to obtain and transport during the Georgian period?	brick or stone
Which colleges are considered examples of Georgian architecture in America?	Dartmouth College, Harvard University, and the College of William and Mary
What style did was little represented in British colonies?	Baroque
Baroque style was mostly used for which buildings?	palaces and churches
What is considered to be the best remaining example of a house from the Georgian period and style?	Hammond-Harwood House
What year was the Hammond-Harwood House built?	1774
What building did William Buckland model the Hammon-Harwood House?	Villa Pisani at Montagnana, Italy
What year did Georgian architecture begin to be abandoned?	1840
What was the rivalry between Gothic Revival and Neoclassical referred to as?	the Battle of the Styles
When was the Battle of the Styles contested?	early Victorian period
What style from the United States used many elements of Georgian style but with revolutionary symbols?	Federalist Style
What was the revival of Georgian style in twentieth century United States called?	Colonial Revival
Which Canadian group embraced Georgian architecture as a sign of fealty to Britain?	United Empire Loyalists
What English born architect designed the Old Montreal Custom House?	John Ostell
What Toronto building was built in 1817?	The Grange
The British revival of Georgian architecture in the 20th century is generally referred to as?	Neo-Georgian
Which police headquarters was constructed in 1958?	Bradshaw Gass & Hope's Police Headquarters
Which architects in the US and Britain still employ the Georgian style for private residences?	Quinlan Terry Julian Bicknell and Fairfax and Sammons
Neo-Georgain style was common in Britain until the end of which decade?	1950s
How did the republic of liberia begin?	as a settlement of the American Colonization Society (ACS)
When did the Republic of Liberia declare it's independence?	July 26, 1847
When did the united states recognize the republic of Liberia's independence?	February 5, 1862. Between January 7, 182
How many slaves were freed in the american civil war?	more than 15,000
What was the Liberian flag and constitution modeled after?	the United States
How long did william tubman rule?	27 year
In what year did a military coupe overthrow leadership leading to william tubmans death?	1980
How long was the rule of the peoples redemption council?	five years
How long was the rule of the national democratic party?	five years
What did the liberian civil war result in?	the deaths and displacement of more than half a million people and devastated Liberia's economy.
What empire was o the decline on 1375?	Western Sudanic Mali Empire
What happened when regions underwent desertification?	inhabitants moved to the wetter coast
Who opposed the influx of vai forming an alliance with maine?	The ethnic Kru
Where did the people of the Mali empire immigrate to?	the Grand Cape Mount region.
What is "the american colonization society"?	a movement to resettle American free blacks and freed slaves in Africa.
When was the "american colonization society founded"?	1816
The "american colonization society" consisted mostly of whom"	people who supported abolition of slavery
What did slave holders want to do?	to get free people of color out of the South
rather than emigrate African Americans wanted to do what?	improve conditions in the United States
African  Americans were sent to the pepper coast to do what?	establish a colony for freed African Americans.
By 1837 the ACS had assisted in moving how many african americans to liberia?	13,000
What did African Americans who were moved to Liberia identify as?	Americo-Liberians
Who did Americo-Liberians not identify with?	indigenous natives of the tribes they encountered
What did African Americans moved to Liberia keep from America?	cultural tradition
The americo-liberians did not identify with who?	indigenous peoples they encountered,
What were americo-liberians encounters like with tribal Africans"	violent confrontations.
Who raided the colonial settlements?	the Kru and Grebo people from their inland chiefdoms.
What did Americo-liberians exclude tribes from?	citizenship in their own lands
Americo-Liberians set up missions and schools to do what?	to educate the indigenous peoples.
Who was responsible for the death of William R. Tolbert?	a military coup led by Master Sergeant Samuel Doe of the Krahn ethnic group
On what date was William R. Tolbert killed?	April 12, 1980
Who was also executed on the day of William R. Tolbert's death?	majority of Tolbert's cabinet and other Americo-Liberian government officials and True Whig Party members.
The coup leaders later became known as?	the People's Redemption Council
What was the PRC criticized for ?	corruption and political repression
What eventually happened to the rebels?	split into various factions fighting one another.
Who intervened in the rebel crisis?	The Economic Community Monitoring Group under the Economic Community of West African States
What did the economic community monitoring group do to intervene in the crisis?	organized a military task force
During what period did the African civil war last?	1989 to 1996
How many liberians died in the civil war?	200,000
What is "Movement For democracy in Liberia"?	a second rebel group,
Movement For democracy in Liberia launched attacks against who?	Taylor
where did peace talks begin between Movement For democracy in Liberia and Taylor?	Accra in June of that year
Why was Taylor indicted by a special court ?	for crimes against humanity
Who did the rebels launch an assault on in July, 2003?	Monrovia.
The 2005 elections were known as what?	the most free and fair in Liberian history
Who is ellen johnson sirleaf?	a Harvard-trained economist and former Minister of Finance
Who was elected the first female president of Africa?	Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
Movement For democracy in Liberia requested the extradition of whom"	Taylor from Nigeria
What was created to address the causes of civil war?	Truth and Reconciliation Commission
How many counties is liberia divided into?	fifteen
How many districts are the 15 counties of liberia divided into?	90
What is the oldest county in liberia?	Grand Bassa
When was Grand Bassa founded?	1839
What is Liberia's newest county?	Gbarpolu
What is the legislature composed of?	the Senate and the House of Representatives
How many members are in a house?	73
Who is the house led by?	a speaker
What are the 73 members of the house are appropriated among?	the 15 counties on the basis of the national census
What is the senate made up of?	two senators from each county for a total of 30 senators.
What is Liberia's highest judicial authority?	Supreme Court
How many members are in the Supreme court?	five
Who is the head of the supreme court?	the Chief Justice of Liberia
How are members chosen for the court?	Members are nominated to the court by the president and are confirmed by the Senate
How long do members of the supreme court serve?	until the age of 70
What was liberia's score on the 2010 Corruption Perceptions index?	3.3
What was Liberia's ranking compared to the other 176 countries?	87th
What did Liberia's score  and ranking  on the 2010 Corruption Perceptions index represent?	a significant improvement since 2007
What was Liberia's score and rank on the 2007 Corruption Perceptions index?	scored 2.1 and ranked 150th of 180 countries
In 2007, when seeking attention, selection or service . What percent of Liberians had to pay a bribe?	89%
What is the central bank of Liberia responsible for?	printing and maintaining the Liberian dollar
What is Liberia considered around the world economically?	one of the world's poorest countries
What is Liberia's employment rate?	15%
The GDP peaked in 1980 at what amount?	US$496
What does Liberia's economy heavily depends on?	foreign aid
When did the Liberian economy hit it's peak growth?	1979
By what percentage did Liberia's GDP reduced by during the civil war?	90%
Why did the Liberian economy decline after 1980?	economic mismanagement following the 1980 coup.
Why was Liberia's GDP growth stalled in 2007?	The global financial crisis
In 2011 Liberia's economy was considered what?	one of the 20 fastest growing in the world.
What were UN sanctions place placed on 2003?	Liberian timber exports
Why were sanctions place on Liberian timber exports?	were believed to be funding rebels in Sierra Leone.
When were the timber export sanctions lifted for Liberia?	in 2006
When was Liberia was granted observer status with the world trade organization>	2010
Liberia's account deficit peaked at what percentage in 2008?	60%
Liberia has the highest ratio of what?	of foreign direct investment to GDP in the world
How much money has the US invested in Liberia since 2006?	16 billion
What agreement did Liberia sign n 2006?	several multibillion-dollar concession agreements
How long has Firestone tire and rubber company ran a rubber plantation in Liberia?	since 1926
What is the largest ethnic group in liberia?	The Kpelle
What percentage of the population are the Kpelle?	20%
Where do the Kpelle reside?	mostly in Bong County and adjacent areas in central Liberia.
When did the decedents of the Congo and Afro-Caribbean arrive in liberia?	1825
Congo descendants and Afro-Caribbean make of what percentage of liberia's population?	2.5%
There is high percentage of interracial marriage between what two groups?	Liberians and the Lebanese
The interracial couples in Liberia result in what?	a significant mixed-race population
Where do Liberians of European decent live?	in the country
The Liberian constitution restricts citizenship of whom?	Black African descent.
What is Liberia's education system hampered by?	inadequate schools and supplies, as well as a lack of qualified teachers.
On average children attain how many years of education?	10 years
How intense is the enforcement of school attendance?	lax.
What was the literacy rate in Liberia in 2010?	60.8%
What is the name of the hospital in Monrova?	John F. Kennedy Medical Center
What is the life expectancy in Liberia?	57.4 years
What was the fertility rate of women in 2012?	5.9 births per woman
What was the maternal mortality rate in 2010?	990 per 100,000 births
What were the HIV infection rates in 2007?	2%
What arts does Liberia have a rich history of?	textile arts and quilting
In what years did Liberia host national fairs?	1857 and 1858
Who is Martha Ann Ricks?	the most well-known Liberian quilters
Who did Martha Ann Ricks present the famed Liberian coffee tree to?	Queen Victoria
What did President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf have installed in her presidential office?	Liberian-made quilt
Who are Windows main operating system competitors?	Android and iOS
What new security features does Windows 8 have?	built-in antivirus software, integration with Microsoft SmartScreen phishing filtering service and support for UEFI Secure Boot
What USB version is Windows 8 compatible with?	3.0
What services does the Windows Store provide?	an online store for downloading and purchasing new software
What can be found on the Start screen?	displays programs and dynamically updated content on a grid of tiles
What about Windows 8 was well received?	its performance improvements, security enhancements, and improved support for touchscreen devices
What were the perceived problems with the new Windows 8 user interface?	being potentially confusing and difficult to learn
How many Windows 8 licenses were purchased by January 2013?	60 million
Who is Windows division president?	Steven Sinofsky
When did Microsoft start creating Windows 8?	before Windows 7 had shipped in 2009
What is jupiter?	new application framework for Windows 8
Where were the Windows 8 plans initially announced?	Consumer Electronics Show
Who is Microsofts CEO?	Steve Ballmer
What does BSoD stand for?	Blue Screen of Death
When was Milestone 1 divulged?	April 12, 2011
What was special about Milestone 1?	It was the first build where the text of a window was written centered
When was Milestone 2 divulged?	April 25, 2011
When was Build 7959 divulged?	May 1, 2011
What 3 versions of the build did Microsoft first release?	standard 32-bit and 64-bit versions, plus a special 64-bit version which included SDKs and developer tools
What developer tools did the build have?	Visual Studio Express and Expression Blend
How many downloads occured in the first 12 hours?	535,000
When did the developer preview expire?	January 15, 2013
When was the Developer preview initially intended to expire?	March 11, 2012
When was the beta version of Windows 8 made available to the public?	February 29, 2012
Who is the Windows Manager?	Chaitanya Sareen
How many things were altered after developer version release?	100,000
How many times was the Consumer Preview downloaded in the first 24 hours?	over one million times
When was the Consumer Preview set to expire?	January 15, 2013
When was the Release Preview revealed to consumers?	May 31, 2012
When was the release preview set to expire?	January 15, 2013
What were the main components of the Release preview?	addition of Sports, Travel, and News apps, along with an integrated version of Adobe Flash Player
What was the build number of the Windows 8 Release Preview?	8400
When was the Windows 8 Release Preview accidentally revealed?	May 28, 2012
When did Windows 8 manufacturing begin?	August 1, 2012
When was Microsoft supposed to officially launch Windows 8?	October 25, 2012
What was the final build Microsoft decided to manufacture?	9200
When were Software Assurance consumers allowed access to Windows 8?	August 16, 2012
What version of Windows 8 is Enterprise N?	a version for European markets lacking bundled media players
How many things did Microsoft alter after Release Preview?	Relatively few
When was the General Availablity Cumulative Update provided?	October 9, 2012
How are system improvements released through Windows 8?	through Windows Update
What name did Windows Explorer change to?	File Explorer
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 8?	$1.5–1.8 billion
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 95?	$200 million
What is the name of the character Microsoft used to make Windows 8 seem more personable?	Allison Brown
When did Microsoft begin promoting Windows 8?	October 2012
How many pop up stores did Microsoft set up to help promote Windows 8?	34
When was the first game of the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals?	June 12, 2013
Who did Windows 8 mock in their television campaign?	the iPad
What was the name of the Windows 8 advertising campaign?	Windows Everywhere
What three things did the Windows Everywhere campaign emphasize on?	Windows 8, Windows Phone 8, and the company's suite of online services
What happens during Hybrid Boot mode?	hibernates the Windows kernel on shutdown to speed up the subsequent boot
What are the benefits of USB 3.0?	faster data transfers and improved power management
What is the point of near field communications?	to facilitate sharing and communication between devices
What is Windows to Go?	live USB versions of Windows
What features were added to the lock screen?	clock and notifications
What replaced the Windows Explorer comman bar?	a ribbon
What is the new name of Windows Explorer?	File Explorer
What does file history make possible?	allows incremental revisions of files to be backed up to and restored from a secondary storage device
What did the update of operation dalog boxes help with?	provide more detailed statistics, the ability to pause file transfers, and improvements in the ability to manage conflicts when copying files
What is the point of using different colors on a heat map?	indicating the level of resource usage
What changes were made to the BSoD?	a simpler and modern design with less technical information displayed
What are some of the process type groups Windows 8 implemented?	applications, background processes and Windows processes
How can users find out more about obscure Windows 8 processes?	search the web
What new security features did Windows 8 provide?	PINs and picture passwords
What were the new security features in Windows 8 geared at?	touchscreens
What options do Parental controls provide?	allows parents to monitor and manage their children's activities on a device with activity reports and safety controls
What new recovery options did Windows 8 implement?	"Refresh" and "Reset" functions, including system recovery from USB drive
When was the first Windows 8 patch sent out?	November 13, 2012
How does secure boot help avert boot process infections?	uses a public-key infrastructure to verify the integrity of the operating system
What requirements do Microsoft certified devices have?	must have secure boot enabled by default, and provide ways for users to disable or re-configure the feature
What must always be enable in ARM-based Windows RT devices?	secure boot
What is SkyDrive?	cloud storage service
When was Facebook support turned off?	June 8, 2015
What features does Xbox Live hub offer?	allows users to view their profile and gamerscore
What Xbox apps were bundled together?	Xbox Music, Xbox Video, and the Xbox SmartGlass
What service options does Windows online now offer?	can be used to access services and synchronize applications and settings between devices.
What forms is Internet Exploer 10 available as?	a desktop program and a touch-optimized app
What limitations were put on Adobe flash to begin with?	a "Compatibility View" whitelist
Where can Adobe Flash now be used?	most sites by default
What improvements were made to Internet Explorer?	increased support for HTML5, CSS3, and hardware acceleration
What does airplone mode do?	disable all wireless connectivity
Where can Carrier account management systems be found?	Windows Store apps
What are some connection settings in Windows 8?	APNs and carrier branding
What registers the insertion of a SIM card?	the operating system
Who is Jensen Harris?	Microsoft developer
What apps can one expect the People app to match with?	Facebook, Skype, and People service
What apps can one expect the Photos app to match with?	Facebook and Flickr
What makes Windows Store apps unique?	apps are to be optimized for touchscreen environments and are more specialized than current desktop applications.
What are contracts?	collection of hooks to provide common functionality that can integrate with other apps
What programming languages does Windows Runtime work with?	C, C++, Visual Basic .NET, C#, along with HTML5 and JavaScript
What makes Windows apps binary code compatible?	If written in some "high-level" languages
What does compiling components as Windows Runtime make possible?	permitting consumption by all compatible languages
What kind of environment provides Windows apps extra security?	sandboxed environment
Where can Windows 8 install apps from?	Windows Store
How do devices with Windows 8 Enterprise attain apps outside of the Windows Store?	sideload apps
What other devices can sideload apps?	Windows 8 Pro and Windows RT devices
What does immersive app stand for?	the apps prior to the first official presentation of Windows 8
What are apps after the introduction of Windows 8 called?	Metro-style apps
Who is Soma Somasegar?	vice president of Microsoft's development software division
When did Windows Store apps become the real term for the apps?	September 12, 2012
What code did Windows 8 change to?	API code instead of WinRT
What term did Microsoft give to its exception privilige for web browsing?	New experience enabled
What different options did the desktop version have?	able to permanently run in the background, use multiple background processes, and use Windows API code
Which two browsers promised to develop Metro-style versions of their browsers?	Chrome and Firefox
What does Chromes version for Windows 8 do?	uses a full-screen version of the existing desktop interface
What does Firefox's version for Windows 8 do?	uses a touch-optimized interface
When was Firefox's version of Windows 8 made accesible?	September 2013
What is found on the Start Screen?	a customizable array of tiles linking to various apps and desktop programs
What do live tiles do?	display constantly updated information and content
What is the primary function of the PC Settings app?	used for basic configuration and user settings
Where can advanced settings options be found?	Control Panel
What is the new System User interface built on?	Microsoft's Metro design language
What is charms?	A vertical toolbar
What is the purpose of charms?	provides access to system and app-related functions, such as search, sharing, device management, settings, and a Start button
How is an active list of apps accessed?	Pointing the cursor in the top-left corner of the screen and moving down
What does swiping from the left edge of the screen do?	allows one to switch between apps and Desktop
How is the traditional desktop evironment opened?	via a tile on the Start screen
Why was the ability to play DVD-Video taken off of Windows Media Player?	the cost of licensing the necessary decoders
What does the Pro Pack do?	upgrades the system to Windows 8 Pro
Which main feature was removed in Windows 8?	the traditional Start menu
What backup element is still found on Windows 8?	Backup and Restore
How is Backup and Restore opened?	through a Control Panel applet called "Windows 7 File Recovery"
What does :76 Shadow Copy do?	access previous versions of shared files stored on a Windows Server computer
What is :74 used for?	other software
Why did Microsoft decrease the required resoultion for tablets?	to allow "greater design flexibility" for future products
What is a convertible form factor?	a standalone device that combines the PC, display and rechargeable power source with a mechanically attached keyboard and pointing device in a single chassis
How does a convertible become a tablet?	attached input devices are hidden or removed leaving the display as the only input mechanism
What did Microsoft change the tablet resolution requirements on March 12, 2013?	1024×768
How many Windows 8 editions are there?	three
What extras does Windows 8 Pro have?	BitLocker, Hyper-V, the ability to join a domain, and the ability to install Windows Media Center as a paid add-on
What extras do Windows 8 Enterprise have?	features aimed towards business environments
How would one get Windows RT?	as pre-loaded software on devices specifically developed for it
During it's launch how much was a Windows 8 upgrade?	$39.99 online, or $69.99 for retail box
What is the Windows 8 price?	$119.99
What is the Windows 8 Pro price?	$199.99
Which PC owners could purchase a Windows 8 Pro uprgrade for $14.99?	PCs pre-loaded with Windows 7 Home Basic, Home Premium, Professional, or Ultimate
How much was the Windows Media Center add-on during the original Windows 8 promotion?	free
What restrictions do Windows upgrade licenses have?	require an existing version of Windows to install
What did Windows offer in place of a full version of the software?	specialized "System Builder" SKU
What did the System Builder SKU take the place of?	(OEM) SKU
What does OEM stand for?	original equipment manufacturer
What did the Personal Use License allow?	purchase and personal use by users on homebuilt computers
What replaced Windows 8?	Windows 8.1
What is the primary difference in Windows 8.1?	8.1 is available as "full version software"
What exemption was removed from Windows 8.1?	Personal Use License
What is Windows 8.1 with Bing?	a special OEM-specific SKU of Windows 8.1 subsidized by Microsoft's Bing search engine
What architecture types does Windows 8 support?	32-bit and 64-bit
What is 16-bit support intended for?	CPUs compatible with x86 2nd generation
When was x86 2nd generation created?	1978
How does the online Windows installer know which version to install?	automatically installs the version corresponding with the architecture of the system's existing Windows installation
What Windows version is compatible with ARM processors?	Windows RT
What apps work on Windows RT?	only supports applications included with the system
Why does Windows RT only work with apps included with the system?	to ensure that the system only runs applications that are optimized for the architecture
Who condemned Microsoft for requiring devices to have secure boot enabled by default?	free software supporters
What resolution did Microsoft come to in their certificiation guidelines?	vendors would be required to provide means for users to re-configure or disable secure boot
Who is Tony Mangefeste?	Microsoft developer
What ideology does Microsoft follow?	to provide customers with the best experience first, and allow them to make decisions themselves
Who criticized Microsofts closed platform Windows Store?	video game developers
Who created Minecraft?	Markus "Notch" Persson
Who developed Steam?	Gabe Newell
What company is Rob Pardo associated with?	Activision Blizzard
What was the main reasoning behind the creation of the Windows Store?	responding to the success of both Apple and Google in pursuing the "curated application store approach."
Who equated windos 8 as the first desktop operating system that understand what a computer is supposed to do?	David Pierce
Why did Pierce give the Start Screen such glowing reviews?	because it allows users to interact with dynamic information
Which improvements were most well regarded?	File History, Storage Spaces, and the updated Task Manager
Who else uses a closed distribution platform?	Apple
What makes the Windows 8 interface difficult to use?	the lack of instructions provided by the operating system on the functions accessed through the user interface
Who said the Windows 8 interface was clumsy and impractical?	Adrian Kingsley-Hughes
What kind of feedback has Windows 8 received?	mixed
What is IDC?	market research firm
What is the decline in PC sales attributed to?	consumers bought more mobile devices
How much of a decrease in sales have Windows devices experienced?	21 percent
While Windows sales went down, which company experienced an increase in sales?	Apple
What percent of tablets were running Windows in Q1 2013/	7.4
What was Androids market share in 2013?	43.4%
What was teh iOS market share in 2013?	48.2%
What does Strategy Analytics say Windows tablets are lacking?	top tier apps
When did Windows 8 surpass Windows Vistas market share?	July 2013
What changes did Microsoft make to its certification requirements in March 2013?	amended its certification requirements to allow tablets to use the 1024×768 resolution as a minimum
Why did Microsoft change the tablet resolution minimum?	to allow the production of certified Windows 8 tablets in smaller form factors
How many licenses did Microsoft sell in the first six months?	100 million
What controlled the small form tablet market at this time?	Android-based tablets
When did Microsoft make the existence of Windows 8.1 with Bing OEM SKU official?	May 23, 2014
When did Microsoft remove license fees on device screens less than 9 inches?	April 2, 2014
When did Windows 8 decrease the price of Windows 8 for devices that cost less than $250?	February 2014
What was the benefit of Windows 8.1 with Bing?	cheaper Windows 8 licenses to OEMs in exchange for setting Internet Explorer's default search engine to Bing
When did the Chinese government ban the purchase of Windows 8 products?	May 2014
Why did the Chinese government ban Windows 8 based products?	in protest of Microsoft's support lifecycle policy and the end of support for Windows XP
What market share did Windows XP have in Chine?	49%
Who claimed that the Windows 8 would allow the US Government to spy on its users?	Ni Guangnan
What does CCTV stand for?	China Central Television
What is the name of the Chinese social network?	Sina Weibo
Who claimed that the Window 8 OS could gather sensitive user information?	Ni Guangnan
Where did Yang Min practice as a computer scientiest?	Fudan University
When was Windows 8.1 introduced?	May 14, 2013
When did Microsoft release the beta version of Windows 8.1?	June 26, 2013
When did MSDN and TechNet users gain access to Windows 8.1?	September 9, 2013
What search engine was added in Windows 8.1?	Bing-based unified search system
How did the Windows 8.1 upgrade enhance desktop startup?	ability to boot to the desktop instead of the Start screen
What main feature was added back to the desktop?	a visible Start button
How many apps did the WIndows 8.1 update allow to be snapped onto a signular display?	up to four
How wide is Swaziland in miles??	81 mi
What is the primary language spoken by the people in Swaziland?	siSwati
In terms of size where does Swaziland rank within Africa in terms of country size?	one of the smallest
When did the ethnic Swazis establish a kingdom?	mid-18th century
Who was the leader of the 18th century Swazi kingdom?	Ngwane III
What is the per capita GDP of Swaziland?	$9,714
What is the SACU?	Southern African Customs Union
What is the lilangeni?	Swaziland's currency
What does the acronym COMESA represent?	Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
What form of currency is the lilangeni fixed to?	South African rand
What is the literal translation of Nkhosi?	king
What did Mswati II do to the land controlled by Swaziland during his reign?	greatly extended the area of the country
In terms of the most successful Swaziland kings in battle, who was the best?	Mswati II
What groups did Mswati attack in the mid 19th century?	Emakhandzambili clans
Where does the name Swaziland originate?	Mswati II. KaNgwane
In what year did the British take Swaziland on as a protectorate?	1903
What 1903 conflict involving the British caused Swaziland to become a protectorate?	Anglo-Boer war
In what year was Swaziland given self governance?	1906
How much of Swaziland did the European area contain after the portioning?	two-thirds of the total land
When was Sobhuza coronated?	December 1921
When did the Swaziland constitution come to be?	November 1963
What is another way to refer to the Swazi National Council?	liqoqo
When was the Legislative Council of Swaziland first created?	9 September 1964
When did elections that provided for a House of Assembly for Swaziland occur?	1967
In what year was the constitution of Swaziland suspended?	1973
Who ruled Swaziland in the late 1970s?	King Sobhuza II
When did King Sobhuza II die?	1982
Who was the head of state of Swaziland after King Sobhuza II	Queen Regent Dzeliwe Shongwe
Which monarch of Swaziland was crownd in April 1986?	Mswati III
Who appoints the prime minister of Swaziland?	The king
What is the parliament of Swaziland known as?	the Libandla
What part of the Swaziland parliament is appointed by the King?	a minority
Why is the king allowed to appoint members of parliament?	to balance views in parliament
How many seats are in the Senate of Swaziland?	30 seats
How many members are there in the Swazi House of Assembly?	65
When were the most recent elections in Swaziland?	20 September 2013
How many members of the Swazi House of Assembly are chosen by the king?	10
Which group looks over elections in Swaziland?	the elections and boundaries commission
When did people begin to disputre royal hegenomy in Swaziland?	the early seventies
What portion of Swaziland is said to support the monarchy of Swaziland?	the majority
What entity took submissions about whether or not Swazi citizens wanted to change support of the monarchy?	the constitutional draft committee
How does a nominee for parliament in Swaziland get decided?	a show of hand
What is the minimum number of members that must support a nominee to parliament in Swaziland?	at least ten
What is an Indvuna as it relates to the Parliament of Swaziland?	Constituency Headman
In the Swazi Parliament, what is the Bucopho?	Constituency Executive Committee
What is the minimum amount of nominees taken on the day of nomination in the Swazi Parliament?	four
How many representatives does each tinkhundla elect to the Swazi House of Assembly?	one
What is a single term of a Swazi development committee?	a five-year term
To whom do Bucopho take the decisions and concerns?	the chiefdoms
What is the chairman of the bucopho also called?	indvuna ye nkhundla
Where is the Bucopho chairman elected?	at the inkhundla
What nation is to the east of Swaziland?	Mozambique
How large in square kilometers is Swaziland?	17,364 km2
What nation is on the north, east, and western borders of Swaziland?	Republic of South Africa
How many geographical regions are within Swaziland?	four
In which region is there rain forest in Swaziland?	the northwest
What portion of the Swazi population are subsistence farmers?	About 75%
Outside of agriculture what provides to the Swazi economy?	textile manufacturing
In terms of Swaziland, what does SNL refer to?	Swazi Nation Land
What are the problems with Swazi Nation Land?	low productivity and investment
What has the Real growth in GDP since 2001 in Swaziland in percentage?	2.8%
How much lower is the Swazi Real GDP growth in comparison to other Southern African Customs Union members is Swaziland?	nearly 2 percentage points
When did the public finances in Swaziland decline?	the late 1990s
What led to Swazi budget cuts?	declining revenues and increased spending
What amount of total public spending in Swaziland is going to wages?	55%
What amount of government revenue in Swaziland is from the SACU?	60% of total government revenues
What has happened to debt external onus  in Swaziland in the past two decades?	declined markedly
What percentage of the GDP was represented by outside debt in Swaziland in 2006?	less than 20%
Which nations economy is Swaziland most linked with?	South Africa
What quantity of imports does Swaziland get from South Africa?	over 90%
What percentage of exported goods from Swaziland end up in South Africa?	70%
What happened to Swazi exports of textiles from 2000 to 2005?	exports grew by over 200%
Between 2000 and 2005 what percentage did Swazi sugar exports increase by?	more than 50%
What currency is Swaziland bound to?	South African Rand
Which nation does Swazi defer to when it comes to monetary policy?	South Africa
Duties from customs represent what amount of Swaziland government revenue?	as much as 70%
From where does Swaziland get customs revenue?	Southern African Customs Union
What percentage of the Swazi population are Christian?	83%
Which religious belief is most prevelant in Swaziland?	Christianity
What amount of Swazi Christians are Roman Catholic?	20%
Who is the Anglican Bishop of Swaziland?	Ellinah Wamukoya
How many Jewish families are there in Swaziland?	14
Of pregnant women, how many are believed to be infected with HIV?	38.8%
What does UNAIDS consider universal access to HIV/AIDS treatment?	80% coverage or greater
Who was the prime minister of Swaziland in 2004?	Themba Dlamini
What percentage of HIV/AIDS infected in Swaziland are believed to be treated?	70% to 80%
What is the rate of mortality for those with tuberculosis in Swaziland?	18%
What age attends pre-school in Swaziland?	5-year or younger
What percentage of children of age for preschool have access to education in Swaziland?	21.6%
In reference to education in Swaziland, hat is an NCP otherwise known as?	neighbourhood care points
What is does ECCE refer to in the Swazi educational system?	early childhood care and education
How many years does a student spend in secondary and high school in Swaziland?	five
For how many years is a Swazi student in junior secondary school?	three
What is the ECOS within the Swazi education system?	Examination Council of Swaziland
What do students finishing senior secondary school get?	Swaziland General Certificate of Secondary Education
What institution does the accreditation for the IGCSE in Swaziland?	Cambridge International Examination
The University of Swaziland, Southern Nazarene University, offer higher learning in Swaziland, what is one other University?	Swaziland Christian University
Where can one find the Limkoking University of Creative Technology?	Sidvwashini
What is the capital of Swaziland?	Mbabane
Where in Swaziland is The Good shepherd Hospital?	Siteki
What nursing school does The Good Shepherd Hospital contain?	College for Nursing Assistants
Which school is the main location for technical education in Swaziland?	Swaziland College of Technology
What types of education does the Swaziland College of Technology offer?	technology and business studies
What is the location of the Gwamile Vocational and Commercial Training Institute?	Matsapha
There is an educational facility in Manzini within Swaziland known by the acronym MITC, what does it stand for?	Manzini Industrial and Training Centre
In terms of education in Swaziland what does the acronym SIMPA represent?	Swaziland Institute of Management and Public Administration
In Swaziland, what is SIMPA?	a government owned management and development institute
In which locations is the Institute of Development Management?	Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland
What service does the IDM provide?	training, consultancy, and research in management
In what year was the Mananga Management Centre founded?	1972
In Swaziland, what is kwetfwasa?	training of the Sangoma
What is a Sangoma in Swaziland?	a traditional diviner
Why might one want to discover when consulting a sangoma in Swaziland?	the cause of sickness or even death
How does a sangoma in Swaziland communicate?	kubhula
What is kushaya ematsambo used for?	to determine the cause of the sickness
What is the most widely known event in Swazi culture?	Umhlanga Reed Dance.
How long is the Umhlanga Reed Dance?	eight
During what time of year is the Umhlanga Reed Dance?	late August or early September
What individuals can take part in the Umhlanga Reed Dance?	childless, unmarried girls
As it relates to girls, what is the purpose of the Umhlanga Reed Dance?	to preserve girls' chastity
Until what date was Swaziland bound by umchwasho?	19 August 2005
What occurs during the custom of umchwaso in Swaziland?	If any girl became pregnant outside of marriage, her family paid a fine
Who became bound by umchwaso in Swaziland?	all young girls
From where did the Reed Dance originate?	the old "umchwasho" custom
What would the end of umchwasho be marked with?	dancing and feasting
What Latin word does the English word translation come from?	translatio
What languages use equivalents of the English term "translation" that come from the same Latin source?	Romance
What does Latin's traducere mean in English?	"to lead across"
Slavic and Germanic languages also use a similar loanword from what source?	Latin
What does the Dutch word "vertaling" roughly translate to?	"re-language-ing"
How much has translation changed since antiquity?	hardly
What have general been prudent about?	seeking equivalents
For crucial values, what type of values do translators use where possible?	literal
What kind of diversity has the practice of translation had?	theoretical
When were there some extreme metaphrasers?	early Christian period and the Middle Ages
What have translators tried to preserve?	context itself
How do translators preserve context?	reproducing the original order of sememes
What is it sometimes necessary to reinterpret when translating?	grammatical structure
What is the active voice sometimes shifted to when needed?	passive
What are the syntax characteristics of a text's source language adjusted to for a target language?	syntactic requirements
A greater ratio of metaphrase to paraphrase can be used translating when there as been greater what between languages?	contact and exchange
What is a common etymology sometimes misleading as?	guide to current meaning
What does the French "actuel" mean in English?	present
How would you convey that something is "presently of importance" in Swedish?	aktuell
To indicate something is feasible in Polish, what word could be used?	aktualny
How long has a translator's part in bridging values between cultures been discussed?	at least since Terence
What did Terence adapt from the Greek's?	comedies
A translator's role is less like a robot and more like a what?	artist
Where was the concept of parallel creation found?	Cicero
Who remarked about Alexander Pope playing Homer on a flageolet?	Samuel Johnson
When it comes to translation, what is less commonly used today?	earlier approaches
When do earlier approaches to translation still have relevance for historians?	when historians view ancient or medieval records
What do historians try to piece together from pre-Western environments?	events
What do Chinese and related translations retain unique to their tradition?	theories and philosophies
When did translation of material into Arabic begin to increase?	5th century
What allowed the expansion of Arabic translations during the 5th century?	creation of Arabic script
What material was initial Arab translations primarily focused on?	politics
What cultures' classical works were later translated into Arabic?	Greek and Persian
What type of translation drew heavily on earlier Near Eastern traditions?	Arabic
Why are Arabic translation efforts important to Western translation traditions?	centuries of close contacts and exchanges
When did Europeans begin more intense studying of Arabic translations of classical works?	after the Renaissance
What did Arabic, and to a less extent Persian, become to Europeans?	important sources of material
What helped revitalize Western translation traditions from Arabic?	techniques
What would Western traditions eventually do?	overtake the Islamic and oriental traditions
What transformed Arabic languages?	movement to translate English and European texts
What came to be valued over previous convolutions?	new words, simplified syntax, and directness
Who expressed skepticism regarding the transformation of Arabic?	Educated Arabs and Turks
What was legitimate knowledge no longer defined by?	texts in the religious schools
What was a neologism expressing the introduction of new ideas via translation?	Darwinism
What two countries divvied up the Middle East's countries after WWI?	Britain and France
What was the dividing up of the Middle Eastern countries in violation of?	solemn wartime promises of postwar Arab autonomy
A reaction to Britain and France's actions was the emergence of what group in Egypt?	Muslim Brotherhood
de Bellaigne attributed the growth of Islamism and militarism to what Western catalyst?	empire-builders
What did the aspirations of the Muslim world's translators find themselves yielding to?	retrograde currents
Where do many non-transparent translation theories delve for concepts?	German Romanticism
What nationality was Friedrich Schleiermacher?	German
When did Schleiermacher publish his lecture "On the Different Methods of Translation"?	1813
Moving the writer toward the reader would be an example of what type of translation method?	transparency
What method of translation did Schleiermacher favor?	extreme fidelity to the foreignness of the source text
What is sometimes used to check the accuracy of a translation?	Comparison of a back-translation with the original text
How are mathematical operations checked?	by reversing the operation
What operations are results from not always completely reliable?	reverse-translation operations
What symbol set has a defining property of ambiguity?	linguistic
What symbol set has the property of being intentionally unequivocal?	mathematical
Who provided a humorous example of the unreliability of back-translation?	Mark Twain
When was Twain's back-translation published?	1903
For what language did Twain create a back-translation?	French
What include a synopsized adaptation of Twain's story?	"Private History of the 'Jumping Frog' Story"
What had been thought for a while to be an independent ancient Greek precursor to Twain's story?	"The Athenian and the Frog"
What do researchers use back-translation to try to reconstruct when a document survives only in translation?	the original text
Who was Jan Potocki?	Polish aristocrat
What language was The Saragossa Manuscript originally written in?	French
When had Edmund Chojecki translated portions of the Saragossa Manuscript into Polish from French?	1847
What fragments were the complete Saragossa Manuscripts now produced based on?	French-language
What has served as a school of writing for many authors?	Translation
Who spread Buddhist texts in East Asia?	monks
What did translators shape in the course of their work?	languages
What have translators acted as by conveying knowledge between cultures?	bridges
Where were idioms and vocabulary imported from?	source languages
What roles have interpreters occasionally played in history?	crucial
Where were the slave-traders La Malinche was sold or given to from?	Xicalango
What region did La Malinche hail from?	Mexican Gulf Coast
What was La Malinche essential to?	Spanish conquest of Mexico
In addition to being an interpreter and adviser, what function did La Malinche serve for Hernán Cortés?	lover
What type of translation is favored by those wanting more accurate translations?	Web-based human translation
What reputation does machine translations have?	frequent inaccuracy
What type of translation is still the most accurate and reliable?	human
Because of crowdsourcing, what type of translation are agencies able to provide?	on-demand human-translation services
Who purchases the services of translation agencies?	businesses, individuals, and enterprises
Unedited machine translation will miss what crucial aspect of human language?	context-embedded
What does it take a person to be able to do?	comprehend the context of the original text
What can even translations completely done by a human still be prone to?	error
How must machine translations be transformed by a human?	reviewed and edited
Where did Buddhism spread?	Asia
Buddhism's spread led to what large-scale effort?	translation
How long did the translation effort take?	well over a thousand years
What Empire was especially good at translation?	The Tangut Empire
What were the Tanguts able to do in only decades that took the Chinese centuries?	translate volumes
Who attempted a large-scale effort at translation?	Arabs
What did the Arabs create Arabic versions of?	philosophical and scientific works
When were some of the Arabic translations of earlier sentences translated into Latin?	Middle Ages
What is Schola Traductorum in English?	School of Translation
Latin translations indirectly advanced whose science and culture?	European
What was the first great English translation?	Wycliffe Bible
When was the Wycliffe Bible translated?	1382
When did the age of great English prose translation begin?	end of the 15th century
What adaptation of Arthurian romances took so many liberties with the source material that it could hardly be called a translation?	Le Morte Darthur
The Tyndale New Testament was one of the first great translations from what style?	Tudor
Whose court did Pletho arrive in and begin a new period of translation in Renaissance Italy?	Cosimo de' Medici
What title did Georgius Gemistus Pletho carry?	Byzantine scholar
When did Constantinople fall to the Turks?	1453
Who undertook translating Plato's works to Latin?	Marsilio Ficino
What did religious beliefs depend upon when it came to Plato, Aristotle and Jesus?	the exact words
What was the guiding ideal of translators throughout the 18th century?	ease of reading
If a translator didn't understand something in a text or thought it too boring to present to readers, what did they do with it?	omitted
What did translators of this time assume was better than the actual text they were translating?	their own style of expression
How much did the translators care about scholarship?	no more than had their predecessors
What did James Macpherson "translate" from?	own composition
What new standards of translation came with the 19th century?	accuracy and style
Who observed that the policy became "the text, the whole text, and nothing but the text"?	J.M. Cohen
What sort of passages were still left out of the supposed "whole" text?	bawdy
What did the Victorians aim to remind the reader of their translations?	that they were reading a foreign classic
How did the translation of Rubaiyat achieve an Oriental flavor?	by using Persian names and discreet Biblical echoes
What is the translation of text that is sung closely linked to?	poetry
What is most vocal music set to in Western tradition?	verse
What type of forms does popular music tend to retain?	stanzaic
What type of example an be found of translating poetry for singing?	church hymns
Who translated German chorales into English?	Catherine Winkworth
How is translation of sung texts different than translations of poetry?	more restrictive
Why is the translation of sung texts more restrictive?	little or no freedom to choose between a versified translation
What places a great challenge on someone trying to translate music from one language to another?	assignment of syllables to specific notes in the original musical
How can a syllable be added or deleted in prose sung texts?	by subdividing or combining notes
Who can translations of a sung text aid?	audiences, singers and conductors
What type of familiar translation may be seen during an opera?	subtitles or surtitles
What do professional and amateur singers often sing?	works in languages they do not know
Translations help singers unfamiliar with a language do what?	understand the meaning of the words they are singing.
What is one of the first known instances of translation in the West?	rendering of the Old Testament into Greek
When was the Old Testament translated into Greek?	3rd century BCE
Why is the translation of the Old Testament into Greek known as the Septuagint?	seventy translators
How did each translator of the Bible work in Alexandria?	in solitary confinement
According to myth, what property did all seventy versions of the bible have?	identical
During the Protestant Reformation, what local languages was the bible translated into?	European
Biblical translations have caused lasting effects on what?	religions, cultures and languages of their respective countries
Disparities between versions of crucial words and passages in versions of the bible contributed to what split?	Roman Catholicism and Protestantism
What does the fact of the King James Only movement demonstrate?	religious schism over different translations of religious texts remain to this day
Who translated the Bible to German?	Martin Luther
What is an aerodome with facilities for flights to take off and land?	airport
What is an aerially accessible open space that includes at least one active surface such as a runway or a helipad?	landing area
What is an airport?	aerodrome with facilities for flights to take off and land
What does ATC stand for?	air traffic control
What do airports use to assure smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft?	traffic pattern
What is an important concern in the operation of an airport?	Air safety
How many commercial airports did the British Airports Authority originally operate?	eight
What group took over the British Airports Authority in 2006?	Spanish Ferrovial consortium
What group manages the Frankfurt Airport?	Fraport
Who operates, through joint ventures, Indira Gandhi International Airport?	GMR Group
What do landside areas include?	parking lots, public transportation train stations and access roads
Airports are divided into what two areas?	landside and airside
What do airside areas include?	all areas accessible to aircraft, including runways, taxiways and aprons
Where can passengers purchase tickets?	terminals
What is the waiting area which provide passengers access to aircraft?	concourses
Most major airports provide commercial outlets for what?	products and services
Where are most of these companies located in an airport?	within the departure areas
Some of these companies include what type of businesses?	clothing boutiques and restaurants
Are prices at these outlets generally higher or lower than street prices?	higher
What are some services that are offered by VIP services?	express check-in and dedicated check-in counters
These services are usually reserved for what class of passengers?	First and Business class
What type of services are sometimes open to passengers who are members of a different airline's frequent flyer program?	Premium services
For seamless connection of multimodal transport, where are many large airports located?	near railway trunk routes
What does MBTA stand for?	Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
It is also common to connect an airport and a city with what?	rapid transit, light rail lines or other non-road public transport systems
It is common for airports to provide moving walkways and what?	buses
What airport has a tram that takes people through the concourses and baggage claim?	Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport
Name one airport that offers inter-terminal transportation.	Mexico City International Airport
What is generally agreed to be the world's oldest continually operating airfield?	College Park Airport
In what year was the College Park Airport established?	1909
Who established the College Park Airport?	Wilbur Wright
How many passengers does the Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport serve each year?	35,000,000
In what year did Rome Ciampino Airport open?	1916
Following the war, why did some military airfields add civil facilities?	for handling passenger traffic
Which airport near Paris was one of the first to add civil facilities for handling passenger traffic?	Le Bourget Airport
What was the first airport to operate scheduled international commercial services?	Hounslow Heath Aerodrome
When did the Hounslow Heath Aerodrome begin to operate scheduled international commercial services?	August 1919
What did airports use to permit night flying as well as landing heavier aircraft?	a paved "apron"
When was the first lighting used on an airport?	latter part of the 1920s
When did approach lighting come into use?	1930s
When was the slope-line approach system introduced?	1940s
What indicated the proper direction and angle of descent?	approach lighting
What consisted of two rows of lights that formed a funnel, indicating an aircraft's position on the glidescope?	slope-line approach system
Why did airport construction boom during the 1960s?	increase in jet aircraft traffic
How far were runways extended out?	9,800 ft
What was constructed out of reinforced concrete?	The fields
When were jet bridge systems introduced to modern airport terminals?	early 1960s
What does ATC stand for?	air traffic control
ATC responsibilities are usually divided into how many main areas?	two
What is responsible for directing all ground traffic in designated areas?	Ground Control
Who instructs vehicles on which taxiways to use?	Ground Control
When a plane is ready to take off, who takes over the direction of a plane?	Tower Control
When is control turned back over to ground control?	After a plane has landed
Who controls aircraft on the runway?	Tower Control
Tower controllers use what to locate an aircraft's position in three-dimensional space?	radar
Who controls aircraft in the controlled airspace immediately surrounding the airport?	Tower Control
Why should aircraft that is only passing through an airspace contact Tower Control?	in order to be sure that they remain clear of other traffic
What is a traffic pattern often called outside of the U.S.?	traffic pattern
What assures smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft?	traffic pattern
Due to this, the overall traffic planning tend to assure landing queues are avoided.	so-called SLOT-times
Traffic patterns are usually flown at what altitude above ground level?	800 or 1,000 ft
Are standard traffic patterns right-handed or left-handed?	left-handed
What does AGL stand for?	above ground level
What is one of the main reasons pilots sit on the left side of the airplane?	Standard traffic patterns are left-handed
At an extremely large airport, what is in place but not usually used?	a circuit
What is the frequency called that is used by departing aircraft for the purpose of requesting approach clearance?	Clearance Delivery
Which aircraft request approach clearance while they are still hours away from the airport?	commercial with long routes
What helps pilots fly the approach for landing?	visual approach slope indicator
What does VASI stand for?	visual approach slope indicator
What does VOR stand for?	VHF omnidirectional range
What helps pilots find the direction to the airport?	VHF omnidirectional range
What instruments do pilots use to find the runway and fly the correct approach, even if they cannot see the ground?	instrument landing system
On runways, what indicate the beginning of the runway for landing?	green lights
On runways, what indicate the end of the runway?	red lights
What indicates the edge of a runway?	white lights
What may low-traffic airports use to save electricity and staffing costs?	pilot controlled lighting
What does ALS stand for?	approach lighting system
What includes debris and nesting birds?	Hazards to aircraft
In adverse weather conditions, what can be used to improve traction on the landing strip?	ice and snow clearing equipment
What is one part of runway maintenance that helps maintain friction levels?	airfield rubber removal
What pulls the aircraft to one of the airbridges?	tow tractor
What keeps the electricity running in the plane when it stands at the terminal?	ground power unit
The passengers disembark using what?	airbridge
What can give the ground crew more clearance after the aircraft lands?	Mobile stairs
How long should it take for an aircraft to be off the airport and in the air?	90 minutes
An airfield is also referred to as what?	airbase
What provides basing and support of military aircraft?	airbase
Where is RAF Brize Norton located?	the UK
Where is Bardufoss Air Station located?	Norway
Where is Pune Airport located?	India
When was the movie Airport made?	1970
What is the title of the film where a man becomes permanently grounded in an airport terminal?	The Terminal
When was the movie Final Destination released?	2000
Landside, where can filming take place?	all public areas
What are the only airside locations where filming is allowed?	Departure Lounge and some outside areas
What can not be undertaken n Security, at Immigration/Customs or in Baggage Reclaim?	Filming
What year was Kievan Rus became a territory?	882
Who achieve the first major expansion of Kievan?	Kiev. Sviatoslav I
Who was the ruler at the begining of Kievan?	Prince Oleg
Which ruler introduced Christianity in Kievan Rus?	Vladimir the Great
What did Yaroslav sons achieve  during his time in Keivan Rus?	issued its first written legal code
When was the term Kievan Rus first coined?	19th century
When did the term Kievan Rus first appear in English?	1913
Who first translated the term Kievan Rus into english from russian?	Vasily Klyuchevsky
Who populated the area between the Baltic Sea and the Black sea before Kievan Rus?	Slavic tribes
Where were the Limen Slavs located before Kievan Rus?	Novgorod
Where was the Finnic Chud Tripe located curing this time period?	Ladoga and Karelia regions
Which tribe resided in the south?	Poliane
What controversy currently surrounds the Rus?	whether the Rus’ were Varangians (Vikings) or Slavs
What were the "Rus" accourding to the "Normanist"?	Scandinavians
What did the Russians beleive the Rus were?	Slavs
Which early traveler provided an early description of the Rus?	Ahmad ibn Fadlan
What did Ahmad say about the Rus when he described clothing?	garments that only cover half of his body
Which historian refered to the Rus as "Scythians"?	Leo the Deacon
Which two groups were divided inn the territories of the East Slavs?	Varangians and the Khazars
In what year did the Varangians impose tribute from the Slavic and Finnic?	859
In what year did the Slavic and Finnic tribes rebel againts the Varangians?	862
What were the names of the three brothers that rulled Novgotod, Beloozero, and Izborsk?	Rurik, Sineus, and Truvor
Whoch of the three brothers become the sole ruller over all three of the teritories?	Rurik
What was the name of the small city on the hill that was discovered by Rurik's men?	Kiev
Between what years did Askold and Dir continued to attack Kiev?	863–66
What did the attack between Rus and Byzantines lead to?	Patriarch to send missionaries north to engage
Wat was the purpose of the Patriarch when they were sent north?	to convert the Rus' and the Slavs.
When did Ruik past away?	879
Who declared Kiev "The mother of Rus citis'?	Prince Oleg
When Rurik past away, who took over?	Prince Oleg
What year did Oleg conquer the Drevlians?	883
Why did the Kievan state prosper?	abundant supply of furs, beeswax, honey, and slaves for export
How many trade routes did the Kievan state control?	three
What other means of pay when purchasing items may have been in place?	money-lending system
Which route was a central post in Kiev?	Dnieper route
What led to constant problems with the Khazars?	rapid expansion of the Rus' to the south
Which area did the Khazars rule over?	Black Sea steppe
Who were allies with the Khazars?	Byzantine Empire
Who were common enimies to both the Khazars and Byzantine Empire?	Persians and Arabs
What did the Byzantine empire use to expand its political influence?	turmoil
What teritory did the Byzantine empire hit first with their political beliefs?	Khazars
What did the Byzantines help the Khazars with?	build a fortress at Sarkel
What led to Khazar having to put more strain on its military?	expansion of the Rus
Who led the war on Dniester and Dnieper?	Oleg
What year were the Magyars and Pechenges drug into the war?	894
What year did the Rus raid Baku, Gilan,Mazandaran, and Caucasus?	913
Around what time did the Khazars unable to no longer command tribute from Volga?	10th century
Who did the Byzantium ally with against the Khazar's?	Pechenegs
What did the Pechenges trade with the Rus?	livestock
In what year did the Rus attack Constantinople?	860
What had Prince Rastislav requested?	provide teachers
What did Cyril and Mehodius come up with to help with the issue of the Slaves not having a written language?	devised the Glagolitic alphabet
In what year did the Rus accept a bishop?	867
When did the relations between the Rus and Byzantines start to become more complicated?	after Oleg took control over Kiev
What were the primary concerns the Rus and Byzantines had with oleg?	commercial, cultural, and military concerns
When did the Rus attack the Constantinole once again?	907
What known document tells of the death of Oleg?	The Chronicle
What was prophesised by a sorcerer involving Oleg's death?	certain horse
WHo succeeded Oleg in 913?	Prince Igor
What does Oleg do to his horse?	has the horse sequestered
What year did Igot led a Rus attack on Constantinople?	941
Why did the attack by the Rus go so well on the coast at the start?	Byzantine fleet was occupied with the Arabs
What did the emperor of Byzatine do to some of the old retired ships to help fight the Rus?	outfitted with Greek fire throwers
How large was the fleet that attacked the Bithynian coast along with the Pecheneg allies?	10,000 vessels
Where did Igor get warriors from after returning to Kiev after being drivin out by the Byzatines?	Slavs and Pecheneg allies
IN what year was the peace treaty signed between the Rus,  Byzantine and the Bulgarians.	945
When did the Rus return to Byzatine seeking revenge?	944
When did Prince Igor past away?	945
In what year did Sviatoslav take over as leader?	963
Who ruled in Prince Oleg's place following his death?	his wife Olga
Where did Sviatoslav move the capital to?	Pereyaslavets
What year did Sviatoslav pass away?	972
How long did the region of Kiev dominate the State of the Rus?	two centuries
What years did Vladimir the Great reign as leader?	980–1015
What territory was Vladimar Prince of before his father died?	Novgorod
In 976, where did Vladimir have to flee to?	Scandinavia
When did the Christianization of Kievan begin?	988
Who did Vladimir marry that was the sister of the Byzantine emperor?	Princess Anna
What was considered too be Kiev's most important route for trade?	Dnieper River
What language did the church write  the liturgy in?	Cyrillic
What did this literature help with that was written in Cyrillic?	facilitated the conversion to Christianity
What was Yaroslav also known as?	the Wise
Who was Yaroslav's father?	Vladimir the Great
In what year did Yaroslav become the prince of Kiev?	1019
What did the rota system do?	power was transferred to the eldest member
What was the name of the UN-conventional system that was implemented?	rota system
What was often deployed when trying to gain power?	Familicide
What country did the fleeing Grand Prince run off to?	Poland
What immediately occurred after Yarsolav the Wise past away?	conflict
Who was fighting for Tmutarakan following Yarsolav's death?	Rostislav Vladimirovich
Where did the first federal council of Rus take place in 1097?	city of Liubech
What played a major role in the decline of the Rus?	decline of Constantinople
Which terrirory was the main power in this trade relatinship?	Kiev
What terriroty did the trade from the Varangians to the Greeks route mainly go through?	Byzantine
Who was the last ruller to keep the region united?	Mstislav the Great
When did Mstislav die?	1169
When did the Kievan state break up into twelve seperate principalities?	12th century,
What helped speed up the decline of the Kievan Rus?	The Crusades
In what year did the Crusade sack Constantinople?	1204
What group was attacking the the Baltic Region in 1204?	Teutonic Knights
What happened to Novgorod when Kievan Rus began to decline?	became more independent
Why was the Republic of Novgorod doing so well while the Kievan Rus declined?	it controlled trade routes
In what year did Novgorod aquire its own archbishop?	1169
The Slavs from Kievan would eventually settle in the North East of the region, What would this region later become?	Grand Duchy of Moscow
What was the name of the oldest city in the north east?	Rostov
In what year did the mongol invasion begin?	In 1299
Who united the two previously separated principalities?	Prince Roman Mstislavich
Which neighbors did Halych develop trade relations with?	Polish, Hungarian and Lithuanian
In what year did Mstislavich defeat the Kiev?	1202
Who became metropolitan in 1370?	Cyprian
How did the leader of Kiev gain political control?	Due to the expansion of trade
From what did this new princedom emerge from?	from a coalition of traditional patriarchic family communes
What type of government came from the coalition of traditional patriachic family?	first notable form of self-government
Which two groups dominated the society of Kievan Rus?	mixture of Slavic and Scandinavian elites
What was severely lacking in Kievan in the 12th century?	class institutions and autonomous towns
What was the group called that owed labour duty to the princes?	tribute-paying peasants
What eventually led to the creation of the peasant/smerdy class?	change in political structure
When did wages on the manors develop?	1031
What were the smerdy initially given in the Kievian law code?	given equality
Despite being much smaller than wester europe, what they known for being?	the largest contemporary European state
What could you find in Novgorod that you couldn't in most other cities?	sewage system and wood paving
What were some of the rights women had during this time period?	property and inheritance rights
To which dynasty did Yarolav's step mother belong to?	Macedonian dynasty
Which three countried did Yaroslav's daughters become queens of?	Hungary, France and Norway
Who did Yaroslav's sons marry?	daughters of a Polish king and a Byzantine emperor
How early did the relationship begin between the Pecheneg and the Rus?	9th century
What did the Pecheneg frequesntly do over the span of two centuries?	sporadic raids into the lands of Rus
What year did the Pechenges attack the city of Kiev?	968
Whichgroup was known to support the Pecheneges in their military efforts?	Byzantine Empire
Although uncertian, who is considered to be the first head of Kiev?	Michael I
Who was considered to be the first bishop of the Church of the Titches?	Leontiy
When was the SNES released in the US?	1991
Where was the SNES first released?	Japan and South Korea
What was the SNES called in Japan?	Super Famicom
What was the SNES called in South Korea?	Super Comboy
When was the SNES released in Australia?	1992
What was NEC's competitor to the NES called in Japan?	PC Engine
What was Sega's competitor to the NES called in Japan?	Mega Drive
What was NEC's competitor to the NES called in the US?	TurboGrafx-16
What was Sega's competitor to the NES called in the US?	Genesis
What were the Genesis's advantages over the NES?	built on 16-bit architectures and offered improved graphics and sound
Who designed both the NES and SNES?	Masayuki Uemura
How much in yen did the Super Famicom cost in Japan?	¥25,000
How much in dollars did the Super Famicom cost in Japan?	US$210
How many Super Famicoms were produced in the first run?	300,000
What criminal group plotted to steal Super Famicoms?	the Yakuza
How much did the SNES cost in the US?	US$199
How much did the SNES cost in the UK?	GB£150
When was the SNES released in the UK?	April 1992
When was the SNES released in Brazil?	1993
Which company distributed the SNES in Brazil?	Playtronic
What market did the Genesis target?	older gamers
How much sooner than the Genesis did the Street Fighter II game come out for SNES?	over a year
How much of the US 16-bit console market did the Genesis have in summer 1992?	60%
What game was key to the SNES's success?	Donkey Kong Country
How many SNES units were sold in the US overall?	more than 20 million
What was Nintendo's limit on games per developer per year on the NES?	five
What alternate name did Konami use to get around Nintendo's yearly limit?	Ultra Games
For how many years did Nintendo require exclusivity on NES games?	two
Which competitor caused Nintendo to end its restrictions on game developers?	Sega
Which developer began releasing games for both NES and Sega in 1991?	Acclaim
How did Nintendo rank submitted games?	using a 40-point scale
What game first challenged Nintendo's anti-violence policy?	Mortal Kombat
When was Mortal Kombat released in arcades?	1992
Which game console had a full-gore version of Mortal Kombat?	Genesis
How much did the Genesis version of Mortal Kombat out-sell the SNES version?	three or four-to-one
Which senators held a hearing about video game violence in 1993?	Herb Kohl and Joe Lieberman
What was the focus of the hearing about video game violence in 1993?	the marketing of violent video games to children
What organizations did the hearing about video game violence in 1993 lead to?	the Interactive Digital Software Association and the Entertainment Software Rating Board
What regulatory change did the hearing about video game violence in 1993 lead to?	the inclusion of ratings on all video games
How did video game ratings affect Nintendo?	Nintendo decided its censorship policies were no longer needed
Which company developed Donkey Kong Country?	Rare
How many copies of Donkey Kong Country were sold in its first 45 days?	6.1 million
What kind of computers were Donkey Kong Country's graphics rendered on?	SGI workstations
How did Donkey Kong Country's quality compare to games on newer consoles?	detailed graphics, fluid animation and high-quality music
When was Donkey Kong Country released?	November 1994
How much did the SNS-101 cost in the US?	US$99
What game was bundled with the SNS-101?	Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island
What features were removed in the SNS-101?	S-Video and RGB output
What redesigned console was released in Japan at the time of the SNS-101?	Super Famicom Jr.
When was the SNS-101 released in the US?	October 1997
How were adapters used to get around PAL region restrictions?	by inserting the imported cartridge in one slot and a cartridge with the correct region chip in a second slot
How was hardware modification used to get around PAL region restrictions?	disconnecting one pin of the console's lockout chip
What problem did the hardware modification cause with later games?	hardware in later games can detect this situation, so it later became common to install a switch to reconnect the lockout chip as needed
What video frequency does NTSC use?	60 Hz
What video frequency does PAL use?	50 Hz
How much slower do games run on PAL consoles than NTSC due to frequency differences?	16.7% slower
What hardware modification could be made to the SNES to support game speed differences?	a switch can be added to place the SNES PPU into a 60 Hz mode supported by most newer PAL televisions
What color is the SNES?	predominantly gray
Who designed the North American SNES?	Lance Barr
What was Barr's job?	industrial designer
What color were the North American SNES's buttons?	purple
What color were the Japanese Super Famicom Jr.'s buttons?	gray
How is the SNES's slot positioned?	top-loading
What connection types did MULTI OUT support?	composite video, S-Video and RGB signals, as well as RF with an external RF modulator
How many pins did the SNES expansion port have?	28
What output type was the only one directly supported on the SNS-101?	composite
What other Nintendo systems used MULTI OUT?	Nintendo 64 and GameCube
What material is the SNES case made of?	ABS plastic
What chemical process turned some SNES cases yellow?	oxidization
What mixture error in the plastic caused some SNES cases to turn yellow?	an incorrect mixture of the stabilizing or flame retarding additives
How can SNES yellowing sometimes be reversed?	with UV light and a hydrogen peroxide solution
Why would some SNESes be only partly yellow?	if the sections of the casing came from different batches of plastic
What are SNES game cartridges officially called in the US?	Game Pak
What are SNES game cartridges officially called in Japan?	Cassette
How much data space can an SNES cartridge use?	117.75 Mbit
What were the largest SNES games?	Tales of Phantasia and Star Ocean
How much data do the smallest SNES games use?	2 Mbit
What face buttons do SNES controllers have that NES controllers didn't?	X and Y
How many shoulder buttons do SNES controllers have?	two
Who designed the SNES controllers?	Lance Barr
What color are the US SNES controllers' X and Y buttons?	lavender
What color are the US SNES controllers' A and B buttons?	purple
What game accessory was similar to the NES Zapper?	Super Scope
What game accessory was similar to the NES Advantage?	Super Advantage
What game used the SNES Mouse?	Mario Paint
What game came with a baseball bat controller?	BatterUP
What type of accessory was the Super Scope?	light gun
How did Nintendo say an NES and SNES could be used on the same TV?	either daisy chaining the RF switches or using AV outputs for one or both systems
Which other game system's cartridges could be adapted to the SNES?	Game Boy
What improvements did the Super Game Boy have over the Game Boy?	palette substitution, custom screen borders, and (for specially enhanced games) access to the SNES console
Where was the Super Game Boy 2 released?	Japan
What did the Super Game Boy 2 add?	a communication port to enable a second Game Boy to connect for multiplayer games
What modem was available for the Japanese SNES?	Satellaview
What service did the Satellaview connect to?	the St.GIGA satellite radio station
When did the Satellaview begin operation?	April 23, 1995
When did the Satellaview end operation?	June 30, 2000
What was the US equivalent of Satellaview?	XBAND
Which companies did Nintendo try to get to make a CD add-on for the SNES?	Sony and Philips
What was Philips' multimedia system?	CD-i
What competing console did Sony release after working with Nintendo?	PlayStation
What was Sega's CD add-on?	Mega-CD
What did Nintendo consider emulators?	flagrant software piracy
What is the term for a software product abandoned by its owners?	abandonware
What device allows backing up SNES games?	Retrode
What is the term for homemade software?	homebrew
What smartphones have SNES emulators?	Android devices, Apple's iPhone and iPad
What was Nintendo's first approved emulator?	Nintendo's Virtual Console service for the Wii
What portable game systems have SNES emulators?	Sony's PlayStation Portable (PSP), the Nintendo DS and Game Boy Advance, the Gizmondo, the Dingoo and the GP2X by GamePark Holdings
Which publication said Nintendo's best console ever was the SNES?	GameTrailers
Where did GameTrailers rank the SNES among all consoles?	second-best
Which writer said the SNES was the best console ever from any company?	Don Reisinger
Who said the SNES was "simply the most timeless system ever created"?	GamingExcellence
Where did IGN rank the SNES?	fourth best
Some scholars contest that there was only one what?	substrate language
Who do some scholars think the Sumerian language originally belonged to?	hunter and fisher peoples
Where did the original Sumerians live?	marshland
What culture did the peoples who would be called Sumerian have a part in?	Arabian bifacial
When were the earliest historical records of Sumer?	26th century BC
How long was there native Sumerian rule during the Third Dynasty of Ur?	about a century
When was the Third Dynasty of Ur?	approximately 2100-2000 BC
What language was in use in the Neo-Sumerian Empire?	Akkadian
What is considered to be the world's first city?	Eridu
How many cultures may have fused together in Eridu?	three
What is the common name given to the non-Semitic dwellers of Mesopotamia by the Akkadians?	Sumerian
What did the Sumerians refer to themselves as in their language?	"the black-headed people"
How did the Sumerians refer to their land?	"place of the noble lords"
Shumer, an Akkadian word, could reference what type of name?	geographical
What compass point of Mesopotamia did the Hebrew Shinar refer to?	southern
During what periods did the Sumerican city-states rise to power?	prehistoric Ubaid and Uruk
What is obscure until the Early Dynastic III period around the 23rd century BC?	Sumerian written history
What was developed that has allowed archaeologists to read contemporary records and inscriptions?	syllabary writing system
When does Classical Sumer end?	rise of the Akkadian Empire
What cut short the Sumerian Renaissance in the 21st century BC?	Semitic Amorite invasions
Fine quality painted pottery is a distinctive style of what period in Sumerian history?	Ubaid
Where could the pottery be found spread throughout?	Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf
During the Ubaid, where was the first settlement in southern Mesopotamia established?	Eridu
What type of agriculture did the farmers settling at Eridu bring with them?	irrigation
Who was the chief god of Eridu?	Enki
How were trade goods transported in southern Mesopotamia?	transported along the canals and rivers
What facilitated the rise of Sumerian cities?	trade goods
How many people lived in the cities?	over 10,000
During which period did Sumerian cities begin using slave labor?	Uruk
What have been found as far east as central Iran?	Artifacts
What is an "ensi"?	priest-king
What type of leadership did Sumerian cities during the Uruk period probably have?	theocratic
Who assisted the ensi?	a council of elders
What was the most urbanized city in the world at the time?	Uruk
Over how many people lived in Uruk?	50,000
Who is the earliest king that is authenticated by actual physical evidence and not just legend?	Enmebaragesi
What dynasty was Etana the 13th king of?	Kish
What is the name of the earliest dynastic Sumerian king?	Etana
What is the period of Enmebaragesi's reign associated with?	increased war
Where is Enmebaragesi's name mentioned?	Gilgamesh epic
What city-state was the rival of Lagash?	Umma
What did Eannatum annex?	practically all of Sumer
What is one of the first empires known in history?	Eannatum of Lagash,
What did Eannatum use to keep the people of the time in line?	terror
What happened to Eannatum's empire after his death?	collapsed
Where is the Semetic Akkadian language first found?	proper names of the kings of Kish
Where is the Semetic Akkadian language found preserved after 2800 BC?	king lists
During whose rule was the use of Old Akkadian at its peak?	Sargon the Great
What language did scribes use over Akkadian?	Sumerian
How long did Akkadian and Sumerian coexist as spoken languages?	about one thousand years
Which dynasty of Ur was the last great Sumerian renaissance?	3rd
Who guided Ur during the last gasp of power?	Ur-Nammu and Shulgi
Even during the 3rd dynasty, what was happening to the racial makeup of the region?	more Semitic than Sumerian
What was there an influx of waves of coming into Sumerian lands?	Amorites
How long did the Babylonians and Assyrians continue to teach the Sumerian language in their schools?	for as long as cuneiform was utilized.
What effect was rising salinity having on the agricultural productivity of the Sumerian lands?	compromised
The salinity of what in the region was long recognized as a major problem?	Soil
Poorly drained irrigated soils in an arid climate with a good deal of evaporation is responsible for leaving what?	dissolved salts
What did cultivation shift from to salt-tolerant barley during the Ur III phase?	wheat
How much did the population of the region decline due to the decrease in crop productivity?	by nearly three fifths
Who were a non-Semitic caucasoid people?	The Sumerians
What influences did the Sumerian language seem to retain?	earlier inhabitants
What do archaeological records clearly show about the Sumerian culture?	uninterrupted cultural continuity
When were settlements started in southern Mesopotamia?	early Ubaid period
Why were the lands in the region the Sumerian people settled fertile?	silt deposited by the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers
Where do some archaeologists speculate Sumerians originally moved from?	the north
What had the Sumerians perfected before coming south?	irrigation agriculture
Who were the first to practice a primitive form of irrigation agriculture?	the Samarra
How many levels of pre-Ubaid pottery were excavated by the French in the 1980s?	eight
What did the temple-centered social organization of the farming peoples allow them to mobilize?	labor
How were women protected in Sumerian society?	law
What gender dominated Sumerian culture?	male
Whose code reveals a bit about the societal structure through Sumerian law?	Ur-Nammu
Who was at the top of the power pyramid in Sumerian society?	the lu-gal
How many strata existed in Sumerian society?	two
What were the most important discoveries for archaeologists from Sumer?	tablets written in cuneiform
What is Sumerian writing considered to be in the development of man's ability to create literature?	milestone
What followed cuneiform in writing?	Ideograms
How many texts in the Sumerian language have survived to modern day?	hundreds of thousands
What was the Sumerian language used for long have their civilization had diminished?	religion and law in Mesopotamia
Akkadian's language can be traced to the Semitic branch of what languages?	Afroasiatic
Why is the Sumerian language usually thought of as a language isolate in linguistics?	belongs to no known language family
In Sumerian, what are morphemes added together to create?	words
What has been the result of attempts to connect Sumerian to other language groups?	failed
What are morphemes?	"units of meaning"
How many cosmogenic myths does the religion of the Sumerians appear to be founded upon?	two
What does one myth see creation as being the result of?	a series of hieros gami
In the Enuma Elish, what is creation seen as the union of?	fresh and salt water
What were the titles given to the gate keeps of the E-Abzu temple of Enki?	the muddy ones
Who was the Lady Sacred Mountain?	Ninhursag
What did the Sumerian deities form?	a core pantheon
Why did the gods create human beings from clay?	for the purpose of serving them
What could Sumerian gods be associated with?	different cities
What did the religious importance of city gods wax and wan with?	those cities' political power
How could a citizen avoid their labor duty to their local temple?	a payment of silver
What were Sumerian temples known as?	Ziggurats
What was the central pond in the forecourt of a Ziggurat for?	purification
Who were the rooms on either side of the aisles in the temple for?	the priests
What was the mudbrick table in the temple for?	animal and vegetable sacrifices
Where did the Sumerians usually locate their granaries and storehouses?	near the temples
What type of afterlife could Sumerians look forward to?	confined to a gloomy world
Where were dead Sumerians buried?	outside the city walls in graveyards
What realm was guarded by gateways containing various monsters?	Ereshkigal
Who was Queen Puabi accompanied in death by?	her servants
What type of instrument are the Sumerians thought to have invented to use at royal funerals?	oboe-like
When do the pictograms suggest Sumerians had domesticated livestock?	Uruk period
What might be found by the side of a Sumerian house?	enclosed garden planted with trees and other plants
What animal did Sumerians use primary to facilitate transportation?	donkeys
What was the primary purpose of oxen for Sumerians?	beasts of burden
Where were plants also grown besides the garden?	pots or vases
What was Sumerians one of the first societies known to consume?	beer
What was the key ingredient in early Sumerian brews?	Cereals
What kinds of beer did the Sumerians brew?	wheat, barley, and mixed grain
How important was beer brewing to Sumerians?	very important
What did Enkidu become and do after consuming seven jugs of beer?	expansive and sang with joy
Why did the Sumerian farmers make their oxen stomp the ground?	kill weeds
How do archaeologists know about Sumerian agricultural practices?	from the "Sumerian Farmer's Almanac"
How many times did Sumerian farmers plow, harrow and rake the ground?	three times
When would farmers flood their fields?	after the Spring Equinox and the Akitu
The the Ur III period, what crop had Sumerians switched to from wheat for their primary crop?	salt-tolerant barley
What does Archibald Sayce think early Sumerian pictograms suggest about the availability of stone?	was scarce
How did the Sumerians fashion the stone they cut?	into blocks and seals
What was the ordinary building material of Sumerians?	Brick
What were the foundation stones of Sumerian houses consecrated by?	objects that were deposited under them
What kind of appearance did Sumerian houses have?	tower-like
What is the most impressive and famous style of Sumerian buildings?	the ziggurats
Sumerians also built houses from reeds not very different from ones built by inhabitants in Iraq as recently as when?	400 CE
How did the Sumerians build their strong domes?	by constructing and linking several arches
What development by the Sumerians allowed them to make use of domes?	the arch
Where were the use of advanced materials and techniques on display in Sumer?	Sumerian temples and palaces
What did the Sumerians a complex system of around 4000 BC?	metrology
From the Sumerian metrology sprang forth the creation of what disciplines?	arithmetic, geometry, and algebra
Where did the Sumerians put their multiplication tables?	on clay tablets
When was the abacus first seen between?	2700 – 2300 BC
What were the Sumerians the first to do when it came to mathematics?	use a place value numeral system
What were the main types of loans in Sumerian society?	Commercial credit and agricultural consumer
How man shekel per mina was the interest rate for loans?	one
What was trade credit backed by when extended by temples?	silver
For how long was the interest rate of Sumerian loans consistent?	about two thousand years
What typically arose as a result of unpaid obligations?	Rural loans
What type of debt did "clean slate" decrees cancel?	rural
When did rulers typically proclaim "clean slate" decrees?	the first full year of their reign
Why were the clean slate decrees useful to the rulers of Sumer?	to prevent debts mounting to a degree that they threatened fighting force
What would happen if peasants couldn't repay their debts?	lost the subsistence land or became bondservants
Who made the first known clean slate decrees?	Enmetena and Urukagina
What contributed to developing military technology for Sumer?	almost constant wars
How many years were the Sumerian city-states at war?	2000 years
Who was the first war between in 2525 BC?	Lagash and Umma
What did the king of Lagash's army mostly consist of?	infantry
What shape were the shields of the infantry of Lagash?	rectangular
When did evidence of wheeled vehicles appear throughout the world?	mid 4th millennium BC
What form did wheels initially take?	potter's wheel
The writing system of the Sumerian's is the second oldest to have what done to it?	been deciphered
What did the Sumerians map stars into?	sets of constellations
How many planets were the Sumerians aware of?	five
Sumerians used number systems which included what alternating bases?	base 10 and base 6
What type of number system was standard in Sumer and Babylonia?	sexagesimal
What type of formations is it possible Sumerians invented?	military
What systems did the Sumerians develop which remain the first known these types to this day?	legal and administrative
In Sumerian society, who oversaw the operation of the first formal schools?	a city-state's primary temple
What is the previous name of Tuvalu?	Ellice Islands
In which ocean is Tuvalu found?	Pacific Ocean
Between what land areas is Tuvalu located?	Hawaii and Australia
According the the 2012 census, how many people live on the Tuvalu islands?	10,640
What originally formed the Tuvalu islands?	reef
In what year was Tuvalu discovered by a European?	1568
Who was the discoverer of Tuvalu?	Álvaro de Mendaña
What land mass was de Mendana actually seeking?	Terra Australis
What was Tuvalu named in 1819?	Ellice Islands
By what means did the British govern Tuvalu?	British protectorate
How many years ago did migrations of people happen in the Pacific area?	3000 years
By what means did locale people travel between Pacific islands?	canoe
How many islands are in the Tuvalu group?	nine islands
On how many of Tuvalu's islands did people live?	Eight
What is the native language meaning of Tuvalu?	eight standing together
What is the creation myth of Tuvalu?	te Pusi mo te Ali
What does the flounder of the Tuvalu myth represent?	flat atolls
What does the eel of the Tuvalu creation myth represent?	coconut palms
From what land did the people of Niutao believe they came?	Samoa
From where did the people of the island of Nanumea think they came?	Tonga
What explorer traveled through the Tuvalu islands in 1764?	Captain John Byron
What was Captain Byron doing when he visited Tuvalu?	circumnavigation of the globe
Which island of Tuvalu was identified as the one that Mourelle sailed past in 1781?	Niutao
How did Byron name the Tuvalu islands?	Lagoon Islands
When were chronometers available for accurate location charting?	late 18th
When did Arent Schuyler de Peyster visit Tuvalu?	May 1819
Which of the Tuvalu isalnds did de Peyster see?	Nukufetau and Funafuti
What name did de Peyster give the Tuvalu islands?	Ellice's Island
For whom did de Peyster name Ellice's Island?	Edward Ellice
After Findlay's charting how many islands of the group were named Ellice?	all nine islands
In what years did Peruvian ships seek laborers in the Polynesian islands?	1862–63
What was the name applied to the trade of dealing with labor hunters?	blackbirding
Who was the earliest missionary to Tuvalu?	Rev. A. W. Murray
By what means did Blackbirders often get islanders aboard their ships?	tricks
When did Murray report people missing because of Blackbirders?	1863
When did Christianity arrive in Tuvalu?	1861
What church deacon was washed ashore on Nukulaelae?	Elekana
What missionary was the first European missionary to come to Tuvalu?	Rev. A. W. Murray
Of what nationality were most of the ministers of the Church of Tuvalu?	Samoans
In what century did trading companies arrive in Tuvalu?	mid-19th
What type of traders did the trading companies employ on Tuvalu?	palagi traders
Who was the first European to permanently settle on Tuvalu?	John (also known as Jack) O'Brien
Which native did O'Brien marry?	Salai
What trader turned author established a post on Tuvalu?	Louis Becke
What sea captain reported on the Tuvalu trading in 1892?	Captain Davis
What was the name of Davis's ship?	HMS Royalist
What did palagi traders act as for the trading companies?	agents
How many traders did some islands have?	competing
What type of islands in the Tuvalu group have few traders?	dryer
What operational changes caused a decline in the numbers of palagi traders in Tuvalu?	structural changes
What type of traders did the Pacific trading companies cease to use?	resident
How did the trading companies begin to trade with islanders?	deal directly
By what year were there no more palagi traders on Tuvalu?	1909
What is the term for a ship's cargo manager?	supercargo
When did Robert Louis Stevenson sail on the ship Janet Nicoll?	1890
Who recorded the trip aboard the Janet Nicoll?	Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson
What type of ship was the Janet Nicoll?	trading steamer
What writer visited the Tuvalu Islands in 1890?	Robert Louis Stevenson
What was the title of the travel book written by Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson?	The Cruise of the Janet Nichol
What are the boreholes on Funafuti called?	Darwin's Drill
What group conducted a study of coral on Funafuti?	Royal Society of London
What formations was the Royal Society studying?	coral reefs
Who's basic work in the area of coral reefs did the Royal Society's investigations follow?	Charles Darwin
What was Darwin's work on coral reefs titled?	The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs
What naturalist was on the 1896 expedition to Funafuti?	Charles Hedley
What type of objects did Hedley collect on Funafuti	invertebrate and ethnological
For what purpose was Funafuti used during the Pacific War?	a base
What group occupied the Gilbert Islands?	Japanese forces
What action delayed the Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands?	Battle of the Coral Sea
From what time span were USN Torpedo Boats stationed at Funafuti?	2 November 1942 to 11 May 1944
On what islet did US forces build a seaplane ramp?	Fongafale
In what year was ministerial government started in the Gilbert and Ellice islands?	1974
When was a referendum held to determine the government of Ellice?	December 1974
What document was changed to cause a change in government?	Constitution
What was the determination of the referendum?	separation
What did the Tuvaluan Order 1976 recognize Tuvalu to be?	British dependency
When did Tuvalu acquire independence?	October 1978
What was formed in 1974?	British colony of Tuvalu
After independence, what was the Assembly on Tuvalu  named?	Parliament of Tuvalu
What type of parliament does Tuvalu have?	unicameral
In Tuvalu government, what group elect the Prime Minster?	members of parliament
How many courts are there on Tuvalu?	eight
What is the name of the superior court of Tuvalu?	High Court of Tuvalu
What is the High Court's right to determine?	Law of Tuvalu
What judge is the Chief Justice of the Tuvalu High Court?	Sir Gordon Ward
To where can judgments be appealed?	Court of Appeal of Tuvalu
In what group is Tuvalu involved?	Secretariat of the Pacific Community
In which forum group is Tuvalu a member?	Pacific Islands Forum
In which British group is Tuvalu a member?	Commonwealth of Nations
To what world organization does Tuvalu belong?	United Nations
On what date did Tuvalu join the Pacific Islands Development Forum?	18 February 2016
What crisis is a major concern for Tuvalu at the UN?	global warming
In concert with global warming, what is Tuvalu's other envirnmental priority?	sea level rising
What agreement does Tuvalu advocate ratification?	Kyoto Protocol
What did Tuvalu call for from other nations concerning reduction of carbon emissions?	binding deals
What does Tuvalu feel its position to be in climate change?	vulnerable
Of what alliance is Tuvalu a member?	Alliance of Small Island States
What is the AOSIS'S main concern?	climate change
To what agreement has Tuvalu committed?	Majuro Declaration
What type of energy does the Majuro Declaration advocate?	100% renewable
By what means does Tuvalu plan to produce 95% of its energy?	Solar PV
In what fishery group does Tuvalu participate?	Pacific Island Forum Fisheries Agency
Of what fishery treaty is Tuvalu a signatory?	South Pacific Tuna Treaty
What is the focus of the Nauru Agreement?	tuna purse seine fishing
Of what did Tuvalu agree to the extension ?	Multilateral Fisheries Treaty
What did Tuvalu refuse to sell in 2015?	fishing days
What trade agreement did Tuvalu sign in 2013?	Memorandum of Understanding
What does the Memorandum concern?	Pacific Regional Trade
What does the trade agreement encompass?	Economic Partnership Agreement
With what group does the  agreement form an alliance?	European Union
To whom does the Facility seek to deliver aid?	Pacific island countries
What is the Tuvalu high chief on each island called?	ulu-aliki
What is the name of the sub-chiefs in Tuvalu?	alikis
What is the Tuvaluan traditional assembly of elders?	Falekaupule
What was the caste of priests in the past on Tuvalu?	tofuga
With what group do the falekaupule share power on Tuvalu?	pule o kaupule
What was the argument against the deportation of a Tuvaluan family from new Zealand?	climate change refugees
By what reason was the Tuvaluan family allowed to immigrate?	humanitarian nature
What court ruled the claim of climate change refugee to be untenable?	New Zealand High Court
What feature was missing in the climate change claims?	persecution or serious harm
What document draws out the requirements of refugee status?	Refugee Convention
What is New Zealand's annual quota of Tuvaluan granted work permits?	75
What must a Tuvaluan have to be considered for a work permit in New Zealand?	job offer
How many Pacific islander seasonal workers are permitted?	5,000
What is the program that allows season employees work permits?	Australian Pacific Seasonal Worker Program
What program was introduced in 2007 for season workers in New Zealand?	Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) Work Policy
Besides English, what is the national language of Tuvalu?	Tuvaluan
What is the language group of the Tuvaluan language?	Ellicean group
What other languages is the Tuvaluan language related?	Polynesian
To what area's language is Tuvaluan closely related?	Micronesia
From what language does Tuvaluan borrow many linguistic traits?	Samoan
What is the only hospital in Tuvalu?	Princess Margaret Hospital
How many nurses does Princess Margaret have on staff?	13
On which island in Tuvalu is the hospital?	Funafuti
What kind of nursing services do outer islands nurses provide?	midwifery
How many nurses are provided to the outer islands?	nine or ten
Where is the Extension Centre for the USP?	Funafuti
What group funds the Augmented Foundation Programme?	government of Tuvalu
Where is the Augmented Programme required for further education?	outside of Tuvalu
Which students go into the Augmented Foundation Programme?	Sixth form
In what educational institution is the program found?	University of the South Pacific
What is the required education for males on Tuvalu?	10 years
How long are females required to go to school?	11 years
What was the literacy rate on Tuvalu in 2002?	99.0%
How many students were in Tuvalu schools in 2010?	1,918
What si the teacher-student ratio for Tuvalu schools?	1:18
What type of school has Tuvalu set up on each atoll?	Community Training Centres
For what have CTC students failed to qualify ?	secondary education
What from of education do Community Training Centres provide?	vocational training
Besides children, who can Take CTC  classes?	Adults
What kind of training classes are offered at CTC?	basic
What were the traditional building materials on Tuvalu?	plants and trees
What type of trees provided lumber for building on Tuvalu?	broadleaf forest
What building material did coconut provide?	fibre
What construction feature was lacking in Tuvaluan building?	nails
From what was rope made for tying buildings together?	dried coconut fibre
What sea creatures were used in traditional handicrafts?	shells
In what item has Tuvalu traditional design been produced?	clothing
What type of decorative items use traditional Tuvalu designs?	mats and fans
For what  have objects having traditional design been used?	everyday life
What traditional purpose are Tuvalu designs still used?	dance songs
What is the stable protein  of Tuvalu?	fish
What vegetable features in the Tuvalu diet?	coconut
What kind of milk has been replaced with coconut milk on Tuvalu?	animal
What type of meat is eaten on Tuvalu?	seabirds
At what event is pork traditionally eaten on Tuvalu?	fateles
What type of structure is the falekaupule?	meeting hall
Besides meetings, for what other use is the meeting hall used?	celebrations
Aside from being defined as a meeting hall, what other definition does falekaupule have?	council of elders
What is the traditional use of the falekaupule?	decision making body
What is the traditional customs and culture on Tuvalu?	Aganu
What is the traditional sport on Tuvalu?	kilikiti
What is the Tuvalu version of volley ball?	Ano
To what sport is kilikiti like?	cricket
What group disliked the traditional war-like sports of Tuvalu?	Christian missionaries
With what equipment is ano played?	two hard balls
What athlete won Tuvalu's first gold metal in competition?	Tuau Lapua Lapua
In which competition did Lapua win a metal for Tuvalu?	Pacific Mini Games
In what contests did Lapua win  metals for Tuvalu?	weightlifting
Who won a gold metal at the Pacific Games?	Telupe Iosefa
In what type of competition did Telupe losefa win in 2015?	powerlifting
What is a major annual sports event in Tuvalu?	Independence Day Sports Festival
What is the most important sports event held on Tuvalu?	Tuvalu Games
In what year did Tuvalu first appear in the Commonwealth Games?	1998
What type of competitor entered the commonwealth Games in 1998?	weightlifter
What competitions have Tuvalu athletes entered in the World Championships in Athletics?	100 metre sprints
What was Tuvalu's GDP rate from 1996 to 2002?	5.6%
 What has been the GDP of Tuvalu in 2008?	1.5%
What rises in cost have effected Tuvalu's domestic growth?	fuel and food
What has been the level of domestic growth in 2010 on Tuvalu?	zero growth
What does Tuvalu expect as a return in fishing licenses and foreign aid?	large revenues
What business provides banking services on Tuvalu?	National Bank of Tuvalu
Where are many of those who provide income to residents earning?	overseas
How do 15% of male Tuvaluans earn their income?	seamen
What percentage of the Tuvalu workforce is in the public sector?	65%
What are the traditional forms of living employed by Tuvaluans?	agriculture and fishing.
What school provides maritime education on Tuvalu?	Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute
What is the yearly number of cadets at the Maritime Training Institute?	120
What is the only trade union on Tuvalu?	Tuvalu Overseas Seamen's Union
On what does the Seaman'd Union represent workers?	on foreign ships
How many Tuvaluan men are active seafarers?	800
How much money does Tuvalu's tv domain name earn each year?	$2.2 million
What si Tuvalu's tv domain?	Top Level Domain
What company is managing Tuvalu's tv domain?	Verisign
How much of the total government revenue comes from the domain name?	ten per cent
What  income source does Tuvalu earn from shipping?	Tuvalu Ship Registry
What is the UN developmental designation for Tuvalu?	least developed
What did Tuvalu do in 2013 in regards to it least developed country status?	deferred its graduation
What organization sponsors an assistance program for least developed countries?	World Trade Organisation
What would Tuvalu have lost as a developed country?	funding assistance
What type of problem does the current developed country rating not take into enough consideration?	environmental
What is the radio station on Tuvalu?	Radio Tuvalu
From where does Radio Tuvalu broadcast?	Funafuti
Who gave financial support to Tuvalu to upgrade transmission equipment?	Japanese government
What did the new radio equipment replace with AM service?	FM radio
What service got more bandwidth from the transmission upgrade?	mobile
Where is Tuvalu's only port?	Funafuti
Where is there a deep water berth available on Tuvalu?	Nukufetau
Of how many ships does the merchant marine fleet consist?	two
What ship did Japan donate to Tuvalu in 2015?	Nivaga III
What do Tuvalu's merchant fleet carry?	cargo and passengers
How many reef islands does the Tuvalu group have?	three
What are the number of true atolls are in the Tuvalu islands?	six
What is the total land area of Tuvalu?	26 square kilometres
How does Tuvalu rank in country size as compared to other nations?	fourth smallest
What is the coverage of Tuvalu's economic zone?	900,000 km2
Which of Tuvalu's atolls is largest?	Funafuti
What type of island grouping is Tuvalu?	volcanic island chain
What are the map coordinates fro Tuvalu?	179°7'E and 8°30'S
How species of creatures inhabit the Tuvalu lagoon?	607
How many new species were were found in the Tuvalu area that had not been previously recorded?	66
What specific ocean temperature conditions effect Tuvalu?	El Niño and La Niña
Which effect causes increases in sea storms like cyclones?	El Niño
What temperature effect causes drought?	La Niña
What did a drought in 2011 cause on Funafuti?	rationing of fresh-water
What is the usual amount of rainfall per month on Tuvalu?	200 to 400 mm
What type of device did Australia and New Zealand offer to Tuvalu during the 2011 drought?	desalination plants
As aprt of what program did Japan fund a new desalination plant at Tuvalu?	Pacific Environment Community
What did aid from the European Union provide during the drought on Tuvalu?	water tanks
What did Tuvalu's new water tanks make possible to store?	fresh water
In what year had Japan previously donated a desalination plant to Tuvalu?	2006
What is the modern name for the air field built during WWII?	Funafuti International Airport
What was damaged by building of the war time air field?	Funafuti Lagoon
What has the pits from the Tuvalu air runways construction  impacted?	fresh-water aquifer
What government funded the restoration of the borrow pits on Tuvalu?	New Zealand Government
How much increase in land space did the filling of the borrow pits cause?	eight per cent
What percentage of the Tuvalu coral has become bleached?	80 per cent
What increase caused by the El Ninos is responsible for the coral bleaching?	water temperature
What has been investigated as a means of rebuilding the reefs at Tuvalu?	foraminifera
What is hoped will strengthen the Tuvalu coast against sea level rise?	ecosystem rehabilitation
What type of project has been started to rebuild the reefs at Tuvalu?	reef restoration
What has been formed to protect the fish stocks in Tuvalu Lagoon?	Funafuti Conservation Area
What factor has caused an increased demand for fish?	rising population
What has growth in population and poor sanitation caused?	pollution
What organization has funded a waste management control plan on Tuvalu?	European Union
What do imports produce on Tuvalu?	plastic waste
What type of desalination is used on Funafuti?	Reverse osmosis
How much water does the Funafuti plant produce?	40 m3 per day
At what storage  point is R/O water production meant to be used?	below 30%
What organization subsidizes the cost of water desalination?	government
What is the cost of R/O produced water?	A$3.50 per m3
When did the UN ask Tuvalu to come up with a plan to improve drinking water?	July 2012
What did Tuvalu develop as a safe water strategy?	National Water Resources Policy
What is the per person per day targeted use of water for Tuvalu?	50 and 100L
What organization called for Tuvalu to  improve its water and sanitation systems?	United Nations
What group ultimately sponsored the Tuvalu water resources policy?	Global Environment Fund
What geological situation makes Tuvalu prone to storm damage?	low elevation
To what climate change condition does Tuvalu's low elevation make it susceptible?	sea level rise
What is the highest elevation on Tuvalu?	4.6 metres
Where on Tuvalu is the highest elevation?	Niulakita
Where does Tuvalu rank among other countries as to lowest elevation?	second-lowest
What cyclone badly damaged Funafuti?	Cyclone Bebe
How many cyclones effected Tuvalu during the 1996-97  cyclone season?	three
What cyclone caused major damage to vegetation on all islands on Tuvalu?	Cyclone Ofa
What was the first cyclone to strike Tuvalu during the 1996-97 season?	Cyclone Gavin
What islet was damaged by Cyclone Meli in 1979?	Funafuti's Tepuka Vili Vili
What were the wave heights during Cyclone Pam on Tuvalu?	3 metres (9.8 ft) to 5 metres (16 ft)
In what year did Cyclone Pam strike Tuvalu?	March 2015
During Cyclone Pam which island had the most damage?	Nui
What percentage of Tuvalu crops were destroyed during  Cyclone Pam?	90%
The loss of what caused the Vasafua islet to become  a sand bar due to Cyclone Pam?	coconut palms
What did the Tuvalu government assess after Cyclone Pam?	damage
What event on Tuvalu made assistance to the population necessary?	Cyclone Pam
What assistance did many international groups give to Tuvalu?	recovery
For what action was government assistance necessary after the Tuvalu cyclone??	cleaning-up
What subject is arguable concerning Tuvalu?	sea level
What was the amount of sea level change on Tuvalu estimated by the 2011 report?	5 mm
What device was used to produce the measurements of sea level change on Tuvalu?	satellite
Prior to what year were the reports used to assess sea level rise?	pre-1993
What is assumed about the sea level reports and records of Tuvalu?	degree of uncertainty
What have the Tuvalu atolls displayed about sea level rise?	resilience
What does gradual sea level rise allow for coral to increase?	reefs
What sea level rise rate could cause more uncertainty to the welfare of coral reefs?	faster rate
What condition besides sea level rise can damage coral reefs?	ocean acidification
Where does sand and coral debris end up because of the action of cyclones?	on the islands
What do some people want to do with the people of Tuvalu?	relocation
What did the Tuvalu Prime Minster say was not enough of an immediate threat to cause evacuation of the population?	rising sea levels
When did Prime Minster Maatia Toafa make his comments about not evacuating Tuvalu?	2006
What did Enele Sopoaga think evacuation of the people should be?	never be an option
What is the Immaculate Conception a representation of the avoidance of ?	original sin only
What was Mary prevented from having to endure ?	Mary was preserved from any stain (in Latin, macula or labes
Who was believed to have prevented this from occurring to Mary ?	privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human race, was preserved free from all stain
What was the outcome of preventing Mary from having to endure such an injustice ?	Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of original sin."
What normally followed the delivery of a child by a woman in Mary time period ?	sanctifying grace that would normally come with baptism after birth.
Is it believed that Mary carried no transgression which would require blame ?	makes no declaration about the Church's belief that the Blessed Virgin was sinless in the sense of freedom from actual or personal sin
How did the Church view Mary in regards to her personal sins ?	the Church holds that Mary was also sinless personally, "free from all sin, original or personal
What important announcement was made by the ecumenical council in  regards to the decision on Mary ?	let him be anathema."
What was the name of the ecumenical council that made the decision ?	The Council of Trent
Is the view of the impregnation of Mary's pregnancy the same as the one held for the birth of her first child ?	doctrine of the immaculate conception (Mary being conceived free from original sin) is not to be confused with her virginal conception of her son Jesus
What is the view held at the Vatican regarding how Mary was actually given life into the world ?	Catholics believe that Mary was not the product of a virginal conception herself but was the daughter of a human father and mother
When did these contradictory views start to emerge ?	since the 4th century
When were contradictory views to  the belief of Mary's parentage struck down ?	1677, the Holy See condemned the belief that Mary was virginally conceived,
Who were the parents of Mary believed to be ?	Saint Joachim and Saint Anne
What was explained by the man  Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti who later became leader of the Holy Roman Church ?	dogma in Ineffabilis Deus, Pope Pius IX explicitly affirmed that Mary was redeemed in a manner more sublime
What did Mary supposedly not require that everyone else also required and why was this so ?	Another misunderstanding is that, by her immaculate conception, Mary did not need a saviour
According to the teaching of the Catholic religion is a savior for the world needed ?	Catholic Church has taught that even had man never sinned in the Garden of Eden and was sinless, he would still require God's grace to remain sinless.
What is the child of Mary known to be famous for according to  Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti ?	Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human race.
What Empire held  Grecian teachers of the virginity of Mary's conception ?	Greek theologians of Byzantium
Who gave a reason for the purging of evil for the Blessed Virgin and her first child ?	St. Gregory Nazianzen, his explanation of the "purification" of Jesus and Mary
What procedure was being performed while he gave his reasoning ?	the circumcision
Who was compelled to write of this instance that was also an author of one of the book of the Bible ?	Luke
What became associated with the celebration of Mary's inception in the womb ?	purification was eventually associated with the feast of Mary's very conception
What proof do some believe is offered as to proof of Mary being the ultimate concept of pure?	include original sin as well as actual. Thus in the first five centuries such epithets as "
What phrases were used to describe Mary ?	in every respect holy", "in all things unstained", "super-innocent", and "singularly holy" are applied to her
Who is often held as the model for all things holy and pure that is not Mary ?	Eve before the fall
Who refused to hear any contradictory views about Mary and her perceived inception ?	St. Augustine (d. 430) may be cited: "As regards the mother of God," he says, "I will not allow any question whatever of sin.
What did this person also state about all of mankind in regards to wayward transgressions  ?	his argument is that all men are sinners;
Where did the majority of the concepts of Mary's birth show themselves the most ?	Mary's Immaculate Conception appears only later among Latin (and particularly Frankish) theologians
In what way did this Ruler refer to Mary  in his writings ?	to call Mary "prepurified"
What Byzantine Ruler ho ruled from from 527 to 565 was also a well trained thinker of concepts ?	Emperor Justinian I,
What event happened to Theotokos that was of significant religious note ?	she was "purified" at the Annunciation
How did some view the the person whose name includes a Christian rite of passage from the Bible?	holier than all 'Men' born of woman
What was widely observed in the eastern portion of the Byzantine world ?	the feast of her conception was widely celebrated in the Byzantine East
What was the name of this festival ?	under the name of the Conception (active) of Saint Anne
Was there anything in similarity that happened in the Western portion of the Empire ? If so who was it supported by?	In the West it was known as the feast of the Conception (passive) of Mary, and was associated particularly with the Normans
Who was against all of the celebrations of Mary 's her birth ?	Critics included Saints Bernard of Clairvaux, Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.
According to some when is is possible for a Sanctified Mary to have emerged ?	out that sanctification could be conferred at the first moment of conception in view of the foreseen merits of Christ, a view held especially by Franciscans.
What happened on the final day of the month of love that was of significance was authorized by the Holy Roman Church leader ?	authorized those dioceses that wished to introduce the feast to do so, and introduced it to his own diocese of Rome in 1477
Who was the Holy Roman Church leader that authorized the change ?	Pope Sixtus IV, authorized those dioceses
What document made the authorization official ?	with a specially composed Mass and Office of the feast. With his bull Cum praeexcelsa of 28 February 1477
What word substitution did he use in the authorization to appease all of the worshipers and view points when speaking of the inception of Mary  ?	but applied instead the adjective "miraculous" to her conception.
What was the opposite of a sinner who committed a venial type? It would be the most grave type of all .	mortally sinful
What did a teacher of religion  from the college that was named after a Dominican friar do in 1839 of historical note ?	published Esame Critico sulla dottrina dell’ Angelico Dottore S. Tommaso di Aquino circa il Peccato originale, relativamente alla Beatissima Vergine Maria
What position was the teacher later given by the Holy Roman Church ?	appoint Spada Master of the Sacred Palace in 1867
Who gave the teacher the new job ?	Pope Pius IX
Who was the teacher who committed the act  ?	Mariano Spada
What  problem did the teacher's publication solve for the Holy Roman leader with act that was committed  to do in response to the actions of the teacher  ?	Pius IX was relieved of the problem of seeming to foster a doctrine not in agreement with the Aquinas' teaching.
Who began to query the position of the conception of Mary following the 11th century ?	St Bernard of Clairvaux
Who did the query starter lay blame upon for the festivals that surrounded Mary's inception ?	St Bernard blames the canons of the metropolitan church of Lyon for instituting such a festival without the permission of the Holy See.
What did the query starter believe to be the ultimate difficulty in accepting  the a virgin conception of Mary ?	How can there be absence of sin where there is concupiscence (libido)?
What did the query starter believe had been done by Mary's direct  maternal line that contradict the conception theory of immaculate for Mary ?	conception in the active sense of the mother's cooperation
Did the query starter believe that the festival for Mary's conception had authorization to be held ?	instituting such a festival without the permission of the Holy See
What did the the monk of minor believe to be true of Mary ?	that from a rational point of view it was certainly as little derogatory to the merits of Christ
What point did his argument attempt to bring to the masses ?	to assert that Mary was by him preserved from all taint of sin, as to say that she first contracted it and then was delivered.
What did the monk of minor believe could alleviate the tension in the matter of the	Proposing a solution to the theological problem of reconciling the doctrine with that of universal redemption in Christ
What consequences did he believe that this would have on Mary's reputation ?	immaculate conception did not remove her from redemption by Christ;
How did monk of minor explain how the change in reputation could be of benefit to Mary ?	rather it was the result of a more perfect redemption granted her because of her special role in salvation history.
Where did the mass majority stand in relation to having or not having the Mary inception festivals ?	Popular opinion remained firmly behind the celebration of Mary's conception.
How did the Holy Roman Church rule on the matter of the festivals ?	stated that belief in the immaculate conception of Mary is in accord with the Catholic faith.
Was the practce behind the meaning of the Mary inception festivals taught at Universities of theology ?	end of the 15th century the belief was widely professed and taught in many theological faculties
In what year was the famous friar named Tom given a position as a saint of the Holy Roman Catholic Church ?	Thomas Aquinas (who had been canonised in 1323
What happened to Tom at one of the 1567 that changed his title ?	declared "Doctor Angelicus" of the Church in 1567
What holy document takes the view of Mary back to the creation of man and woman ?	papal bull defining the dogma, Ineffabilis Deus
What specific part the Bible does this document reference for Mary ?	Genesis 3:15
According to the document what did the forebears already have knowledge of before Mary came about ?	the Fathers saw foreshadowings of Mary's "wondrous abundance of divine gifts and original innocence
Where was Mary represented (according to the Holy document ) on the vessel that wandered the sea for forty days and forty nights ?	in that ark of Noah, which was built by divine command and escaped entirely safe and sound from the common shipwreck of the whole world
What sect often stands in disagreement over the virginal inception of Mary ?	Contemporary Eastern Orthodox Christians often object to the dogmatic declaration of her immaculate conception
What does this group believe of the story of a Virgin mother for Mary and those who follow its teaching ?	dogmatic declaration of her immaculate conception as an "over-elaboration"
What in particular does the group feels is impossible to believe ?	because they see it as too closely connected with a particular interpretation of the doctrine of ancestral sin.
What did this theological study do to set itself apart from the other groups ?	took its historical point of departure from Sophronios, Damascene, and their imitators.
What is the theological study of Mary called ?	Mariology
Who is the person that started the religion that separated itself from the Catholic Church in the 17th century ?	Martin Luther
What did he do that sparked the separation from the Catholic Church  ?	Protestant Reformation
What did this leader of change believe of the conception of Mary ?	Mother Mary, like us, was born in sin of sinful parents, but the Holy Spirit covered her, sanctified and purified her
What did Mary's child avoid according to the leader of the separation ?	this child was born of flesh and blood, but not with sinful flesh and blood.
What particular sect is a patron of this belief ?	Some Lutherans, such as the members of the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, support the doctrine.
What was written by the a all inclusive group convened by the holy church centered in Rome ?	Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission
What document did this group create once it was convened ?	The report "Mary: Faith and Hope in Christ"
What was the final conclusion reached in the report by the group ?	Assumption and the Immaculate Conception can be said to be consonant with the teaching of the Scriptures and the ancient common traditions.
What type of interpretation did the group believe was of concern in regard to Mary ?	The question arises for Anglicans, however, as to whether these doctrines concerning Mary are revealed by God in a way which must be held
What did the document attempt to clarify ?	teaching about Mary in the two definitions
What  religion is credited by some authors from the west for initiating the story of the conceiving of Mary ?	claim that the immaculate conception of Mary is a teaching of Islam.
According to the teaching of this other religion what occurred to Mary during the birth of her first child ?	Mary and her son only excepted; between whom, and the evil spirit God placed a veil, so that his touch did not reach them.
What does this other religion also state  happens  to everyone besides Mary and her First born child  ?	every person that comes into the world, is touched at his birth by the devil
What does the event cause to happen to everyone but Mary and her first born child ?	every person that comes into the world, is touched at his birth by the devil, and therefore cries out,
What do these authors use in the form of proof for credit given to the other religion  ?	passage in the Qur'an, "I have called her Mary; and I commend her to thy protection, and also her issue, against Satan driven away with stones
Does everyone agree on the credit that should be given for the story of Mary's inception ?	Others have rejected that the doctrine of Immaculate Conception exists in Islam
What does the book of Muslim faith state in regards to how every person is born ?	in Islam every human child is born pure and immaculate
Does this view contradict the belief that Mary was also born to a virgin mother ?	her sinless birth is thus independent of the Christian docrtrine of original sin as no such doctrine exists in Islam
What view did the Qua-ran take on the sinful ways in which Mary could have been conceived ?	Muslim tradition or hadith, which states that the only children born without the "touch of Satan," were Mary and Jesus.
What is the name of the prayer that is listed in the Qua-ran  is used to enact a safeguard on kids from the  the devil ?	Hannah's prayer in the Quran for her child to remain protected from Satan
What did the writer of a 1788 multi-volumed text say concerning plagiarism and the Roman Catholic Church ?	The Latin Church has not disdained to borrow from the Koran the immaculate conception of his virgin mother
Who is the author of the texts entailed in the fifth part of the the collection about the Roman Catholic Church ?	Edward Gibbon
What was the group of volumes titled ?	Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
Where does the author state that the Roman Catholic Church received her facts and confirmations ?	Mohametan Bible
What color garment is used in traditional chants to represent the purity of Mary's conception ?	Your clothing is white as snow,
The rituals for the correct way to enjoy Mass is listed in what text ?	The Roman Missal
What type of  melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic changes have been made by composers but are based on the works that are monophonic and  unaccompanied sacred song?	polyphonic settings have been composed
What official writings give specific prayers for each hours of the day for Catholics ?	Roman Rite Liturgy of the Hours
What became very popular symbol among the who believed Mary had a Virgin for a mother ?	in a heavenly realm, moments after her creation, the spirit of Mary (in the form of a young woman) looks up in awe at (or bows her head to) God
What does Mary stand upon in this symbol?	moon is under her feet
What does Mary where atop her hair that twinkles in the symbol ?	a halo of twelve stars surround her head
What else can be found in the symbol with Mary that may vary in different versions ?	clouds, a golden light, and cherubs. In some paintings the cherubim are holding lilies and roses, flowers often associated with Mary.
What is the cost of primary and secondary education in Namibia?	free
How many Namibian students were recorded in 1998 in primary school?	400,325
How many Namibian students were recorded in 1998 in secondary schools?	115,237
What was the pupil-teacher ratio in Namibia in 1999?	32:1
What develops the curriculum as well as other educational resources in Namibia?	National Institute for Educational Development
What is the Afrikaans name for Namibia?	Namibië
Where in Africa is Namibia?	southern
When did Namibia gain independence from South Africa?	21 March 1990
What ocean borders Namibia?	Atlantic Ocean
How far away is Namibia to the Zambezi River?	200 metres
When did Bantu immigrate to Namibia?	14th century
When did Namibia become German Imperial protectorate?	1884
When did Namibia stop being a German colony?	end of World War I
What year did the League of Nations mandate Namibia to South Africa?	1920
When did South Africa impose the apartheid policy on Namibia?	1948
What does SWAPO stand for?	South West Africa People's Organisation
When was SWAPO designated as the representative of Namibian people?	1973
When Namibia was under South African administration, what was it called?	South-West Africa.
Why did South Africa install an interim administration in Namibia?	internal violence
When did Namibia obtain full independence?	1990
Orlam clans crossed which river to migrate to Namibia?	Orange River
What area of Namibia did Orlam clans settle in?	southern Namibia
When did Orlam clans settle in Namibia?	18th century
When did the Nama-Herero war begin?	1880
Who deployed troops to start the Nama-Herero war?	Imperial Germany
What nationality were the first navigators to explore Namibia come from?	Portuguese
When did Bartolomeu Dias explore Namibia?	1486
When did Diogo Cao explore Namibia?	1485
Settlers on their way to Angola settled in Namibia instead of going where?	Angola
Along with Swedish settlers, what other country's settlers inhabited in Namibia first?	Germany
Herero and what other group took action against German occupiers?	Namaqua
When did two clans take up action against the German occupiers?	1904 to 1907
What was the war against the German occupiers considered?	first genocide of the Twentieth Century
How many Herero's were killed in the war against German occupiers?	65,000
How many Nama's were killed in the war against German occupiers?	10,000
When did South Africa refuse to surrender Namibia?	1946
When did South Africa occupy Namibia?	1915
Which council submitted petitions for Namibia's independence?	Herero Chief's Council
When was the League replaced by the United Nations?	1946
When did European powers grant independence to their colonies in Africa?	1960s
Which guerrilla group fought for Namibia's independence?	People's Liberation Army of Namibia
When did a guerrilla group fight for Namibia's independence?	1966
When did South Africa end occupation of Namibia?	1988
Why did South Africa end occupation in Namibia?	UN peace plan
What is the central-southern area of Namibia known as?	Police Zone
What was Namibia previously called?	South West Africa
What date did Namibia get it's official name?	12 June 1968
What was the resolution that granted Namibia it's name?	Resolution 2372 (XXII)
How long did it take for South Africa to agree to the implantation of Namibia's new name?	1988
The diplomatic agreement between South Africa, Angola, and Cuba was observed by the USSR and what other country?	USA
What does UNTAG stand for?	United Nations Transition Assistance Group
Who was the diplomat for UNTAG?	Martti Ahtisaari
When was the diplomat for UNTAG deployed to supervise withdrawals from Namibia?	April 1989 to March 1990
What nationality was the diplomat in UNTAG?	Finnish
What was the official election slogan in the first Namibia election?	Free and Fair Elections
When was the Namibian Constitution adopted?	February 1990
Who was the first President of Namibia?	Sam Nujoma
When did the country of Namibia officially become a country?	21 March 1990
Who swore in the first President of Namibia?	Nelson Mandela
What was ceded to Namibia in 1994?	Walvis Bay
What did Namibia transition to after white minority apartheid rule?	parliamentary democracy
What type of independence was introduced in Namibia after independence?	Multiparty democracy
What party has won every election in Namibia?	Swapo Party
Who succeeded Sam Nujoma?	Hifikepunye Pohamba
How long did president Same Nujoma rule?	15-year
What Desert is shared between South Africa and Botswana?	Kalahari Desert
How many plants species are found in Succulent Karoo?	5,000
How many plants are endemic to the Succulent Karoo?	half
How many of the worlds succulents are found in Karoo?	10 percent
What is probably the reason there are so many unique plants in Karoo?	stable nature of precipitation
What is the climate range for Namibia?	17°S to 25°S
What is the overall climate description for Namibia?	arid
What is the mean rain above in Namibia?	500 mm
What is the semi-arid measurements in Namibia?	300 and 500 mm
What is the arid measurement in Namibia?	150 to 300 mm
What is the typical amount of sunshine days in Tropical high pressure belt?	300 days
What feature cuts Namibia in half?	the Tropic of Capricorn
What is the winter in Namibia like?	dry
When is the rainiest season in Namibia?	between February and April
What is humidity like in Namibia?	low
What current dominates the coastal area of Namibia?	Benguela
What direction does the current in the coastal area flow?	north
Which ocean is on the coastal area of Namibia?	Atlantic
What is the condition that happens in winter in Namibia?	Bergwind
What do hot dry winds blowing inland to the coast create?	sand storms
What is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa?	Namibia
What is the average rainfall in Namibia?	350 mm per annum
Where does the highest rainfall occur in Namibia?	Caprivi
How much of the country does dam water supply the rest of the country with?	80%
What does Namibia protect in it's constitution?	natural resources
What article in the Namibia constitution supports natural conservation?	Article 95
What do Namibians believe sustains them?	utilisation of living natural resources
When did Namibia receive funding from USAID?	1993
What does LIFE project stand for?	Living in a Finite Environment
What does CBNRM stand for?	Community Based Natural Resource Management
What does USAID stands for?	United States Agency for International Development
Who does Namibia have affiliation with in their foreign policy?	states that aided the independence
What ties does Namibia want to strengthen?	Southern African
Which number member is Namibia in the UN?	160th
When did Namibia join the UN?	23 April 1990
Which number member is Namibia in the Commonwealth of Nations?	fiftieth
What was the highest unemployment rate in Namibia?	36.7%
Who is the Labour and Social Welfare Minister?	Immanuel Ngatjizeko
When was the lowest unemployment rate in Namibia?	20.2%
What is Namibian's unemployment rate?	27.4%
What did Bloomberg name Namibia?	top emerging market economy in Africa
What rank did Bloomberg name Namibia's economy?	13th best in the world
How many African countries made the list for top Emerging Markets?	four
How much of the population depends on agriculture?	half
How much more is the per capita GDP in Namibia compared to the rest of Africa's countries?	five times
Namibia has one of the highest rates of what type of income problems in the world?	inequality
Where does a majority of Namibia's people live?	rural
How much of Namibia's land is arable?	1%
How much revenue does mining provide Namibia?	25%
Where does Namibia rank in the exportation of uranium?	fourth
What does rich alluvial diamond deposits make Namibia a source of?	gem-quality diamonds
Namibia was expected to become the largest exporter of what in 2015?	uranium
What accounts for almost 14% of total tourism in Namibia?	Sport hunting
How much economic assistance does Namibia get from tourism from hunting?	$19.6 million US dollars
What other types of sports are popular in Namibia?	extreme sports
What is the most visited city in Namibia?	Windhoek
What type of town is Swakopmund?	coastal
What is the capital of Namibia?	Windhoek
What is the airport in Namibia?	Hosea Kutako International Airport
What is the most popular hotel in Windhoek?	Windhoek Country Club Resort
Avani Hotels and resorts is a chain resort in Windhoek, what is another?	Hilton Hotels and Resorts
What does NTB stand for?	Namibia Tourism Board
What is act 21 of 2000 in Namibia?	Namibia Tourism Board Act, 2000
What does act 21 in Namibia regulate?	tourism industry
What market does Act 21 promote?	tourism
Most residential areas are insufficient in what area of Namibia?	sanitation
Besides installation cost, why are private flush toilets too expensive for most residents in Namibia?	water consumption
What do Namibian's use as a toilet?	flying toilets
Where do flying toilets end up after use?	bush
Urinating and defecating in public has been identified as what?	major health hazard
Whites make up how much of Namibia's population?	4.0 and 7.0%
What is the language of Namibia?	Afrikaans
Where do a large minority of whites trace their Namibian roots to?	German settlers
What was the population in South-West Africa in 1960?	526,004
How much of the population was white in South-West Africa in 1960?	73,464
When was the first Population and Housing Census in Namibia?	1991
How often does Namibia conduct a census?	every ten years
What is it called when the census counts every person wherever they are the night of the census?	de facto method
How many enumeration areas are there in Namibia?	4,042
The enumeration areas in Namibia do not overlap with what in order to get reliable data?	constituency boundaries
German, English, and Afrikaans were the official languages until when in Namibia?	1990
What is the primary language of Namibia, as SWAPO instituted?	English
SWAPO thought Namibia should have what type of official language?	monolingual
How many Namibian's speak English?	3%
There was a high rate of what due to monolingual instruction?	school drop-outs
What is the toughest footrace around the world?	Namibian ultra marathon
Which team participated in the 2008 FIRS World Championship?	Women's inline hockey National Team
What popular sport was first played in Namibia in 1995?	Inline hockey
Who is the most famous athlete from Namibia?	Frankie Fredericks
What sport does the most famous Namibian athlete participate in?	sprinter
What was the first Namibian newspaper?	Windhoeker Anzeiger
What was the language in which the first Namibian newspaper was printed in?	German
When was the first Namibian newspaper founded?	1898
When was radio introduced in Namibia?	1969
When was TV introduced in Namibia?	1981
What is a popular tabloid magazine in Namibia?	Windhoek Observer
What is the economical magazine in Namibia?	Namibia Economist
What is the regional magazine in Namibia?	Namib Times
What is the only sport newspaper in Namibia?	Namibia Sport
What is the most popular current affairs magazine in Namibia?	Insight Namibia
Compared to neighbouring countries, what freedom does Namibia have?	media
Namibia is on par with what country in terms of media and reporting?	Canada
Where was Namibia ranked on Press Freedom in 2009?	36
Where was Namibia ranked on Press Freedom in 2013?	19th
Where was Namibia ranked on Press Freedom in 2014?	22nd
What is the life expectancy in Namibia?	52.2
What epidemic is a large problem in Namibia?	AIDS
How much of the Namibian population is infected with HIV?	13.1%
How many people living in 2001 had HIV/AIDS in Namibia?	210,000
How many deaths were associated with HIV/AIDS in Namibia in 2003?	16,000.
What health issue is compounded by the AIDS epidemic in Namibia?	malaria
What is the risk of contracting malaria if an individual is already infected with HIV?	14.5% greater
The risk of death by malaria raises by how much with a concurrent HIV infection?	50%
How many physicians did Namibia have in 2002?	598
What language sub-family is Russian in?	East Slavic
Where is Russian an official language?	Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and many minor or unrecognised territories
Where is Russian popular but not an official language?	Ukraine, Latvia, Estonia
How many living East Slavic languages are there?	three
When was the earliest writing in Old East Slavonic?	10th century
What kind of phonemes are soft sounds?	consonant phonemes with palatal secondary articulation
What kind of accent can mark stress?	optional acute accent
What kind of words can acute accents distinguish?	homographic words
What word means both lock and castle, depending on its accent?	zamok
What language does Russian descend from?	the language used in Kievan Rus'
What are Russian's closest relatives?	Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Rusyn
Where is Surzhyk used?	eastern Ukraine
Where is Trasianka used?	Belarus
What was 'Little Russian'?	Ukrainian
What language does the Russian Orthodox Church use?	South Slavic Old Church Slavonic
What kind of words in Russian have been influenced by Church Slavonic?	mainly abstract and literary words
What word forms are used together in some cases?	East Slavic and the Church Slavonic
When did Russian language spread to the peasants?	the 20th century
Who spoke Russian before the 20th century?	the upper noble classes and urban population
When did the Soviets establish required education?	the mid-20th century
What nonstandard feature does Southern Russian use?	fricative
How much of Estonia is ethnic Russians?	25.5%
How much of Estonia speaks Russian?	67.8%
What is the ratio of young Estonians who speak Russian relative to those who speak English?	about one-third
How much of Estonia's native Estonians speaks Russian?	58.6%
When did Finland join the Russian Empire?	1809
When did Finland leave the Russian Empire?	1918
What percent of Finns speak Russian?	0.6%
How many Finns speak Russian?	33,400
How many Russian-speaking Finns are descended from early immigrants?	Five thousand
How many Ukrainians speak Russian natively as of 2004?	14,400,000
How many Ukrainians speak Russian actively as of 2004?	29 million
What percent of Ukraine is fluent in Russian as of 2006?	65%
What percent of Ukraine use Russian as their main language as of 2006?	38%
What is Russian's legal status in Ukraine?	minority language, under the 1996 Constitution of Ukraine
What pact contained many Russian-speaking countries?	Warsaw Pact
Where was Russian schooling mandatory in the 20th century?	Poland, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Albania, former East Germany and Cuba
Which countries speak other Slavic languages?	Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Bulgaria
In which European countries do many Russian immigrants live?	The United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Belgium, Greece, Brazil, Norway, and Austria
How much of Ireland's Russian speakers are Russian citizens?	13%
How many people in Ireland speak Russian?	21,639
How much of Ireland's Russian speakers are Irish citizens?	20%
How much of Ireland's Russian speakers are Latvian citizens?	27%
What convention recognizes Russian in Armenia?	Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
How many Armenians speak Russian natively?	15,000
How many Armenians speak Russian actively?	1 million
What percent of Armenia speaks Russian?	30%
What percent of Armenia uses Russian as their main language?	2%
How many Georgians speak Russian actively?	1.7 million
What convention recognizes Russian in Georgia?	Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
How many Georgians speak Russian natively?	130,000
What percent of Georgia is fluent in Russian?	27%
What percent of Georgia use Russian as their main language?	1%
What is the legal status of Russian in Kazakhstan?	according to article 7 of the Constitution of Kazakhstan its usage enjoys equal status to that of the Kazakh language in state and local administration
What percent of people in Kazakhstan speak Russian fluently?	63%
How many people in Kazakhstan speak Russian natively?	4,200,000
How many people in Kazakhstan speak Russian actively?	10 million
What percent of people in Kazakhstan use Russian as their main language?	46%
Where did Russian explorers first reach North America?	Alaska
When did Russian explorers first reach North America?	1700s
When did the US buy Alaska?	1867
What portion of Russian-speaking Americans are ethnic Russians?	about 25%
What is the term for Russian-speaking people?	Russophones
When did Apollo-Soyuz fly?	1975
For which mission did NASA astronauts first learn Russian?	Apollo-Soyuz
What math competition has Russian as an official language?	International Mathematical Olympiad
What are Russian astronauts called?	cosmonauts
What is the second-most-popular language online as of 2013?	Russian
What percent of all websites are in English?	54.7%
What percent of all websites are in Russian?	5.9%
What percent of all .ru websites are in Russian?	89.8%
What percent of Ukraine's websites are in Russian?	79.0%
What two regions do some linguists divide Russian into?	"Northern" and "Southern"
What three regions do some linguists divide Russian into?	Northern, Central (or Middle) and Southern
What distinguishes Russian dialects?	non-standard features of pronunciation and intonation, vocabulary and grammar
What is okanye?	pronounce unstressed /o/ clearly
What articles are similar to Bulgarian?	post-posed definite article -to, -ta, -te
What do some Russian dialects do about vowels?	absence of vowel reduction
What region of dialects is the Volga River area in?	Northern Russian
What is pronounced [ɪ] in Moscow's dialect?	unstressed /e/ and /a/ following palatalized consonants and preceding a stressed syllable
What is pronounced [a] in Southern Russian?	unstressed /e/ and /a/ following palatalized consonants and preceding a stressed syllable
What does Southern Russian have a linguistic continuum with?	modern Belarusian and some dialects of Ukrainian (Eastern Polesian)
Who made the first dialectal Russian dictionary?	Vladimir Dal
In what century was the first dialectal Russian dictionary published?	19th
When did Lomonosov study Russian dialects?	18th century
When were detailed maps of Russian dialects created?	turn of the 20th century
How long did it take to compile the Dialectological Atlas of the Russian Language?	four decades
What did the old letter ⟨ѣ⟩ become?	⟨е⟩
What did the old letters ⟨і⟩ and ⟨ѵ⟩ become?	⟨и⟩
What did the old letter ⟨ѳ⟩ become?	⟨ф⟩
What did the old letter ⟨ѫ⟩ become?	⟨у⟩
What did the old letter ⟨ѭ⟩ become?	⟨ю⟩
What is 'moroz' a transliteration of?	мороз
What is 'mysh' a transliteration of?	мышь
What does 'moroz' mean?	frost
What font technology has reduced the need for transliteration?	Unicode character encoding,
What does 'mysh' mean?	mouse
Who created KOI8-R encoding?	the Soviet government
What system used CP1251 encoding?	Microsoft Windows
What systems used IBM866 encoding?	MS-DOS and OS/2
What encoding did early Macs use?	ISO/IEC 8859-5
In what years was CP1251 encoding used in most Russian online usage?	1995–2005
What organization is the Institute of Russian Language part of?	Russian Academy of Sciences
What can optional acute accents indicate?	stress
What is distinguished from 'lock' only by an accent, in Russian?	castle
What is distinguished from 'this is odd' only by an accent, in Russian?	this is marvelous
What is distinguished from 'wothwhile' only by an accent, in Russian?	standing
Who says Russian has 6 vowels?	St. Petersburg Phonological School
When are Russian vowels written differently?	depending on whether or not the preceding consonant is palatalized
What dialect is standard Russian based on?	Moscow dialect
What language does Russian treat hard consonants similar to?	Irish
What is done to unstressed vowels?	reduced to near-close vowels or an unclear schwa
What might /kʲ/ be considered?	a phoneme
What is palatalization?	the center of the tongue is raised during and after the articulation of the consonant
How are 'dental' sounds pronounced?	with the tip of the tongue against the teeth rather than against the alveolar ridge
When did Eastern Slavs become the dominant group in the area of Ukraine?	approximately 1000 AD
When was Kievan Rus' formed?	about 880
What countries did Kievan Rus' become?	modern Russia, Ukraine and Belarus
What was the main language in Kievan Rus'?	Old East Slavic
When did Kievan Rus' adopt Christianity?	988
Where did Russian get specialized vocabulary from?	the languages of Western Europe
What second language was common among Russian nobles by 1800?	French
What third language was common among Russian nobles by 1800?	German
Who wrote 'War and Peace'?	Leo Tolstoy
What language often appeared in Russian novels without translation?	French
Who revolutionized modern Russian?	Alexander Pushkin
What did Pushkin reject from older Russian?	archaic grammar and vocabulary
What was 'high style'?	archaic grammar and vocabulary
What happened to some expressions in Pushkin's writing?	became proverbs or sayings which can be frequently found even in modern Russian colloquial speech
When did the USSR dissolve?	1991
When did the USSR make Russian the official language?	1990
What unofficial status did Russian have in the USSR before 1990?	the unifying role and superior status
What department is the Research Center for Sociological Research part of?	Ministry of Education and Science (Russia)
Who wrote "Russian language at the turn of the 20th-21st centuries"?	A. L. Arefyev
When was "Russian language at the turn of the 20th-21st centuries" published?	2012
What does Arefyev say is happening to Russian?	In the countries of the former Soviet Union the Russian language is gradually being replaced by local languages.
What is the USAF?	the aerial warfare service branch of the United States Armed Forces
How many uniformed services are there in the United States?	seven
When did the USAF split from the US Army?	18 September 1947
What act formed the USAF?	National Security Act of 1947
What is one of the functions of the USAF?	Nuclear Deterrence Operations
How many departments are there in the Department of Defense?	three
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force currently report to?	Secretary of Defense
What branch of the government must confirm the President's appointment of the Secretary of the Air Force?	Senate
Who serves as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff?	Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Who assigns combat missions to the Air Force?	Secretary of Defense
How many core functions did the Air Force reduce its duties down to recently?	twelve
What do these core functions of the Air Force express?	contribute to national security
What are not considered doctrinal constructs of the Air Force?	core functions
What is the mission set of the Air Force called that includes nuclear strike operations?	Assure/Dissuade/Deter
How does the Air Force promote security to its allies?	Dissuading others from acquiring or proliferating WMD
What is the US Air Force prepared to do to support its allies?	carry out the nuclear strike operations mission
What do potential adversaries threaten that the US Air Force prevents?	US national security
What is the definition of a nuclear strike?	the ability of nuclear forces to rapidly and accurately strike targets
What action by the US Air Force would deter adversaries from threatening US Security?	deployment of nuclear strike capabilities
Who has the authorization in the US to terminate a conflict?	President
What organization does the US Air Force support on its missions?	US NDO objectives
What is one of the areas where the US Air Force might operate its missions?	Continental United States
What ensures the safety of nuclear operations?	Nuclear surety
What is the mission of the NDO in regards to nuclear security?	precise and reliable nuclear operations
What is a Broken Arrow incident in nuclear security?	unauthorized or accidental use
What is one of the five functions of NDO support?	effective nuclear weapons security
What other US departments does the Air Force coordinate with for nuclear security?	Departments of Defense or Energy
What does the abbreviation OCA stand for?	Offensive Counterair
What is the function or definition of the OCA according to JP 1-02?	offensive operations to destroy, disrupt, or neutralize enemy aircraft, missiles, launch platforms
OCA is the preferred method of defeating what kind of attacks?	air and missile threats
What is one of the important functions of the OCA in dealing with attacks?	suppression/destruction of enemy air defense
What does the abbreviation DCA stand for?	Defensive Counterair
What sort of airspace is the DCA designed to protect?	friendly
What is active defense, according to the functions of the DCA?	employment of limited offensive action and counterattacks
What kind of missile defense does active defense protect against, according to the DCA?	ballistic
What is one of the many ways the DCA utilizes passive defense to protect from enemy attacks?	counter-measures
What is the dominance in space of one force over another?	Space superiority
What does Space Superiority encompass?	localized in time and space, or it may be broad and enduring
Who does space superiority ensure freedom of action in space for?	friendly forces
What areas does Space Superiority operate in?	land, sea, air, space
What is the definition of Space Control according to the US and its allies?	operations to ensure freedom of action in space
What is one of the areas of operation that space control serves to protect?	operations conducted to protect friendly space capabilities from attack
What is the operational environment that Space Control depends on?	space situational awareness
Who responds with the employment of capabilities where there is a threat?	Air Force
What is the definition of CND?	computer network defense
What does Cyberspace defense include?	CNE, computer network defense (CND), and CNA techniques
What is one of the things that Cyberspace defense highly dependent on?	fused all-source intelligence
What branch of the military is in charge of Cyberspace defense?	Air Force
What division ensures the Air Force's information integrity and availability?	Cyberspace Support
What is ability is critical in Cyberspace Supports mission?	sustain assigned networks and missions
What important networks is it the function of Cyberspace support to protect?	C2 networks/communications links and nuclear C2 networks
What techniques does the Cyberspace Support branch of the Air Force use?	CNE and CND
What is the definition of Command and Control in the Air Force operations?	exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces
Who is in charge of the Command and Control operations?	commander in planning
What is one of the C2 related functions that the Command and Control mission of the Air Force uses?	agile combat support operations
What are the main objectives of the Command and Control initiative?	achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives
What agency is in charge of intelligence requirements?	Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations
What is one of the ways that the Air Force uses Planning and Directing in its operations?	development of appropriate intelligence architecture
Who benefits from the process analysis and dissemination of this information?	national and military decision makers
What are Special Operations?	operations conducted in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments
What are the goals of Special Operations?	achieve military, diplomatic, informational, and/or economic objectives
What kind of forces can Special Operations missions employ?	indigenous or surrogate
What is one of the ways that Special Operations is different from conventional methods?	dependence on detailed operational intelligence
What is the definition of Airlift according to the Air Mobility Operations?	operations to transport and deliver forces and materiel through the air
What objectives does Airlift support?	strategic, operational, or tactical
What does this US presence represent during a humanitarian crisis?	resolve and compassion
How does the US employ the global reach capability of airlift?	delivering forces to crisis locations
Who coordinates the deployment of thee Aeromedical Evacuation?	Health Service Support
What is the movement of patients who need medical attention called?	Aeromedical Evacuation
Where does the Aeromedical Evacuation team transport casualties?	to and between medical treatment facilities
Who operates and is able to conduct airland missions?	Aeromedical evacuation forces
What does the abbreviation PR stand for in terms of the US military?	Personnel Recovery
What is the definition of a Personnel Recovery mission?	military, diplomatic, and civil efforts to prepare for and execute the recovery and reintegration of isolated personnel
What is one of the ways that PR uses its capabilities in a crisis?	deny an adversary's ability to exploit a nation through propaganda
What are the types of international duties of the PR mission?	crisis response and regional stability
What are programs that are designed to help with natural or manmade disaters?	Humanitarian Assistance Operations
What kind of Humanitarian assistance is supplied by the US Forces?	limited
What kinds of endemic conditions do the Human Assistance Operations entail?	human pain, disease, hunger, or privation that might present a serious threat to life
Who is the Humanitarian support intended to help?	host nation civil authorities or agencies
What does Building Partnerships relate to in the Air Force?	airmen interacting with international airmen and other relevant actors
What are the goals of the Building Partnership interactions?	develop, guide, and sustain relationships for mutual benefit and security
What sort of inter-personal relationships does Building Partnerships encourage?	cross-cultural
What is the major goal of Building Partnerships in these deeds and actions?	building trust-based relationships for mutual benefit
What are Airmen expected to be competent in for these Building Partnerships missions?	relevant language, region, and culture
Who created the first version of the US Air Force in 1907?	U.S. War Department
When did the US Air Force separate from the War Department?	40 years later
How many causalities did the US Air Force suffer during WWII?	68,000
What does the USAAF stand for?	U.S. Army Air Forces
Who signed the National Security Act of 1947?	President Harry S Truman
What was the National Military Establishment renamed in 1949?	Department of Defense
How many subordinate divisions did the National Military Establishment contain?	three
What does the US Navy's responsibilities include?	sea-based operations from aircraft carriers and amphibious aircraft
Who is in charge of closed air support of infantry operations?	Marine Corps
What American broke the sound barrier in 1947?	Captain Chuck Yeager
When did the USAF have several missteps of aircraft procurement projects?	early 2000s
Who wrote that these aircraft procurement projects were a failure of intellect and ethics?	Winslow Wheeler
When were the military leaders replaced after a scandal over failure to maintain its nuclear arsenal?	2008
What did the USAF strive to improve since 2005?	Basic Military Training
What is the deployment phase of BMT called?	BEAST
What other training do the US Air force Personnel get during BMT?	directing search and recovery
Who acts as a mentor during this deployment phase of the BMT?	Military Training Instructors
What year did the USAF take a Reduction-in-force?	2007
Why did the USAF plan to take a reduction-in-force?	budget constraints
How many USAF personnel did the reduction end in during 2008?	330,000
What has there been a sharp reduction in during the years following 2005 in the USAF?	flight hours for crew training
Who was Robert Gates?	Secretary of Defense
What Secretary of the Air Force resigned in 2008?	Michael Wynne
Where did the US Air Force accidentally ship a component of Nuclear Weapons?	Taiwan
What US Chief of Staff of the US Air Force also resigned in June of 2008?	General T. Michael Moseley
When was the Air Force Global Strike Command formed?	24 October 2008
Why was the USAF forced to ground some of its squadrons in 2013?	Budget sequestration
Who was the Commander of Air Combat Command in 2013?	General Mike Hostage
Why have many US Air Force pilots opted to resign from active service?	squadron groundings and flight time reductions
Where have many of these US Air Force pilots chosen to find employment instead?	careers in the commercial airlines
What is one of the concerns of the Air Force?	replace its aging fleet
How did the USAF try to make these adjustments to help with strength and readiness of its fleet?	cutting the Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve aircraft fleets
How much money did Congress give to the USAF to enable them to replace some of the grounded fleet?	$208 million
Who is the Department of the Air Force managed by?	Secretary of the Air Force
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force report to?	Secretary of Defense
Who appoints the top positions in the USAF, including the Assistant Secretaries and General Council?	President
Upon whom does the President call on for support in his appointments to the USAF?	Senate
Who does the senior leadership roles in the USAF include?	Chief of Staff of the Air Force and the Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Who directs the Secretary of the Air Force during operational missions?	Secretary of Defense
What does the abbreviation CHOP stand for?	Change in Operational Control
Who does the AMC forces usually retain their componency to?	USTRANSCOM
Who is in charge of these Change in Operational Control missions?	Regional Combatant Commander
What are "Chopped" units called in the USAF?	forces
What is the top level structure of these Chopped forces in the USAF?	Air and Space Expeditionary Task Force
What does the C-NAF provide support to?	planning and execution of aerospace forces
Who does the C-NAFF coordinate with on ACEE missions?	JFC
What kind of AFSC is a JAG?	judge advocate general
What is one of the many types of AFSC employed by the USAF?	missile launch officer
What is an example of an occupational field position in the USAF?	computer specialties
What does the abbreviation EOD stand for in the USAF?	Explosive Ordnance Disposal
What is one of the most dangerous jobs for USAF personnel?	Tactical Air Control Party
What do some of these special missions in the USAF who deploy with the infantry do?	rescue downed or isolated personnel
What are these enlisted positions in the USAF complimented by?	commissioned officers
What other career fields have seen an increase in active combat missions?	Air Force Office of Special Investigations
How long is the training for Explosive Ordnance Disposal in the USAF?	one year of training with a preliminary school
What USAF tech school has 31 days of training?	3M0X1 (Services)
Who conducts the training for Technical Officers in the USAF?	Second Air Force
How long does the flight training for the AETC's Nineteenth Air Force last?	excess of one year
What groups is the USAF rank divided amoung?	enlisted airmen, non-commissioned officers, and commissioned officers
How are Enlisted promotions in the USAF decided?	based on a combination of test scores, years of experience, and selection board approval
How are Officer promotions within the USAF decided?	based on time-in-grade and a promotion selection board
How is a Commissioned Officer's rank shown?	designated by bars, oak leaves, a silver eagle, and anywhere from one to four stars
Was does ROPMA stand for in the USAF?	Reserve Officer Personnel Management Act
What are Air Force Officer promotions overseen by?	Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980
How long does it usually take to be promoted from second to first lieutenant in the USAF?	virtually guaranteed after two years
Who establishes limits on the amount of Air Force officers?	DOPMA
What promotion in the USAF is governed by a formal selection process?	Promotion to major through major general
Where is an officer's record in the USAF reviewed for a promotion?	Air Force Personnel Center at Randolph Air Force Base
What state is the Randolph Air Force Base located in?	Texas
When does promotion from major to lieutenant colonel in the USAF typically occur?	thirteen year
The promotion process repeats when for officers promoted early in the USAF?	16 year mark
What section in the US Code for the Secretary of the Air Force allows for the appointment of warrant officers?	Title 10
When did the USAF inherit warrant officer ranks from the Army?	1947
When did Congress authorize the creation of two new senior officer grades?	1958
When did the USAF stop appointing warrant officers?	1959
What is the newest top enlisted grade in the USAF?	Chief Master Sergeant
What is the lowest pay grade in the USAF?	E-1 (entry level)
What is the highest pay grade in the USAF?	E-9 (senior enlisted)
What pay grades are included in the USAF for Senior NCOs?	pay grades E-7 through E-9
What does junior NCO refer to in the USAF pay grade system?	staff sergeants and technical sergeants
When does NCO status happen in all other branches of the US Military?	pay grade of E-4
When does NCO status occur in the USAF?	when an enlisted person reaches the pay grade of E-5
What must a Senior Airman do to become a supervisor in the USAF?	completed Airman Leadership School
What rank is NCO status achieved in the US Army?	Corporal
Where was the Uxbridge Blue dress uniform developed?	former Bachman-Uxbridge Worsted Company
When was the first USAF dress uniform introduced?	1947
When was the current USAF dress uniform standardized?	1995
Where does an officer in the USAF wear their rank insignia?	pinned onto the coat
What is worn by USAF members to indicate a billet assignment?	various badges
What else can Badges be used to designate in the USAF?	merit-based or service-based awards
What is one of the types of Authorized Badges in the USAF?	Shields of USAF Fire Protection
When is the special "pocket rocket" badge given to USAF personnel working in a missile system operation?	at least one year
USAF Officers can be commissioned after graduation from what school?	United States Air Force Academy
What is another program that allows officers to become commissioned in the USAF?	Air Force Officer Training School
Where is the OTS in the US currently located?	Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Alabama
What is a line officer in the USAF?	concept of the line of battle and refers to an officer whose role falls somewhere within the "Line of the Air"
How many commissioning programs does the OTS offer the USAF?	two
What does the Air Force provide for officers of direct to non-line positions?	Commissioned Officer Training
What fields of study in the COT are included in this area of the USAF?	medicine, law, religion, biological sciences, or healthcare administration
What is an example of the coursework now offered in the COT in the USAF?	deployed-environment operations
What is the more strict program that the USAF adopted in 2010 called?	Fit to Fight program
What test is designed to test the fitness of airmen in the USAF?	US Air Force Fitness Test
How long is the run that the USAF airmen are tested on for the fitness program?	1.5-mile
What is a passing score on the US Air Force Fitness Test?	75 points
What score must an airman get on the US Air Force Fitness test to be able to opt out of one of the mandatory twice a year retests?	90%
What are the ground-attack aircraft in the USAF usually deployed in support for?	U.S. ground forces
What does the closeness to friendly troops require of these US Air Force aircraft?	precision strikes
What part of a battle line are the precision strike aircraft of the USAF deployed?	front of the battle
What type of aircraft is not appropriate to be used in close proximity of US ground troops?	bomber aircraft
What are most attack aircraft in the US Air Force designed to do?	drop bombs
What type of USAF aircraft is designed for long range airstrike attacks?	bomber
What types of aircraft are typically limited to close proximity of battlefield conflict by the USAF?	fighter bombers and attack aircraft
What increases the radius of combat missions by the US Air Force?	aerial refueling
What countries utilize strategic bomber aircraft in their missions?	US, Russia, and the People's Republic of China
When did the B-2A aircraft enter into service of the US Air Force?	1990s
When did the USAF introduce the B-1B aircraft?	1980s
What aircraft in the USAF was introduced in the 1960s?	B-52H
How long is the B-52H scheduled to remain in service of the USAF?	30 years
What aircraft is scheduled to replace the B-52 in the USAF?	B-21
What type of aircraft is used to deliver troops and weapons to military operations?	Cargo and transport
What aircraft are considered the workhorses of the US Air Force?	C-130 Hercules, C-17 Globemaster III, and C-5 Galaxy
The CV-22 aircraft is used by what section of the USAF?	U.S. Special Operations Command
What aircraft offers Antarctic Support to the US Air Force?	LC-130H
What did the USAF use the WC-130H aircraft for before they converted them for transport missions?	weather reconnaissance aircraft
What is the purpose of electronic warfare?	deny the opponent an advantage in the EMS
What nickname is given to Electronic warfare aircraft?	The Eye in the Sky
What does the USAF use Electronic warfare aircraft for?	to keep airspaces friendly, and send critical information to anyone who needs it
What is the EC-130H used for by the US Air Force?	Electronic Warfare/Jamming
What does the USAF use the E-4B aircraft for?	Airborne Command Post
What is the primary function of the USAF fighter aircraft?	air-to-air combat
What is the name of a type of dual purpose fighter-bomber aircraft used by the US Air Force?	F-16 Fighting Falcon
What aircraft is used by the US Air Demonstration group The Thunderbirds?	F-16
What kind of aircraft is utilized by the USAF in Full Scale Aerial Targets?	F-4 Phantom II
What are the QF-4 aircraft being replaced by the US Air Force?	early model F-16 aircraft converted to QF-16 configuration
What kind of aircraft is the USAF's KC-135?	aerial refueling aircraft
How does the aerial refueling aircraft supply fuel during flight?	tail-mounted refueling boom
When is air-to-air refueling primarily used by the US Air Force?	large-scale operations
What aircraft will be available for use by the US Air Force in 2017?	KC-46A Pegasus
What US Secretary of Defense accepted resignations of top US Air Force officials in June of 2009?	Robert Gates
What US Secretary of the Air Force resigned following a nuclear weapons problem ?	Michael Wynne
Who was appointed to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force following Mosley's resignation?	General Norton A. Schwartz
What newspaper reported on Schwartz's dismantlement of the US Air Force's class system?	The Washington Post
What author wrote about the US Air Force egalitarian culture?	Major General Charles J. Dunlap, Jr.
How does the US Air Force differ from other branches of the military?	an organization in which mostly its officers fought
How have the enlisted forces of the US Air Force been seen?	primarily a rear echelon support force
What is the reason for the shortage of UAV operators in the US Air Force?	Cultural and career issues
During what war the the USAF establish a new career field for piloting UAVs and drones?	Iraq War
Why did the USAF change its training methods on UAVs in 2014?	large aircraft losses in training
What branch of the US Military does a cultural divide prevent the US Air Force from adopting their drone protocols?	US Army
Where did some of the US Air Force traditions come from?	Royal Air Force
What traditions does the US Air Force have?	"Friday Name Tags" in flying units
What organization did the US Air Force adopt "Challenge Coins" from?	U.S. Army
What does the roof stomp tradition signify in the US Air Force?	welcome a new commander or to commemorate another event, such as a retirement
What was a recent US Air Force recruiting slogan?	"No One Comes Close"
What does the USAF slogan Uno Ab Alto mean?	"One From On High"
What is the most recent US Air Force recruitment slogan in October 2010?	"Aim high" followed with the response, "Fly-Fight-Win"
Where can individual each USAF wing, group or squadrons individual motto be found?	wing, group, or squadron websites
What type of atmosphere can LED lighting be used?	environmental
What is an advantage to using LED lighting over the normal light sources?	longer lifetime
What does LED stand for?	Light-emitting diodes
Why are some people hesitant to use LED lighting?	more expensive
What is a popular use for LED lighting?	traffic signals
What was the nationality of the man who discovered Electroluminescence?	British
LED lighting is the end result of what phenomenon?	Electroluminescence
When was Electroluminescence discovered?	1907
Who is the Soviet man that created the first LED?	Oleg Losev
What type of detector did H.J. Round use to help him in his discovery?	cat's-whisker
What year was it discovered that early LED instruments could be used for non-radio communication?	1957
Who discovered non-radio uses for early LED devices?	Kroemer Braunstein
The current in non-radio communication had to go through what type of component?	a GaAs diode
What other component was needed to detect the first current of a non-radio signal?	a PbS diode
What final device was needed to hear the signal from the initial GaAs diode?	audio amplifier
In what state what near-infrared light emission discovered?	Texas
What type of diode was used to help discover near-infrared light emission?	tunnel
In what year was the patent filed for the Semiconductor Radiant Diode?	1962
What was the first practical LED?	GaAs infrared (IR) light-emitting diode
The two inventors of the first practical diode were employed by what famous company?	Texas Instruments (TI)
At what global company was the first visible-spectrum LED developed?	General Electric Company
What GE employee developed the visible-spectrum LED?	Nick Holonyak, Jr.
What color is associated with the visible-spectrum LED?	red
What color LED was later created in 1972?	yellow
What graduate student of Holonyak created the yellow LED?	M. George Craford
What was the first commercial uses of LEDs?	replacements for incandescent and neon indicator lamps
How much did the early LEDs cost?	US$200 per unit
What was one use of early LED light in products?	calculators
What modern company introduced LEDs in 1968?	Hewlett Packard (HP)
In what decade were production costs greatly reduced for LEDs to enable successful commercial uses?	1970s
What color LED was demonstrated in 1994?	blue
Who demonstrated the first blue LED?	Shuji Nakamura
What did Nakamura, Akasaki, and Amano receive for their work?	2014 Nobel prize in physics
Who investigated the efficiency of high-brightness LED at Cardiff University in 1995?	Alberto Barbieri
What substance did Barbieri use in his work with high-brightness LED?	indium tin oxide
What LED quickly followed the blue LEDs?	white
What does the YAG phosphor coating produce?	yellow light
What converts absorbed light energy into an electric current?	P-N junction
What is the phenomenon where a P-N junction emits light when an electrical current is applied to it?	electroluminescence
Where are the free electrons located in the production of electroluminescence?	the conduction band
Whose energy levels are lower than the electrons in the electroluminescence process?	holes existing in the P-region
Why is some energy in the electroluminescence process emitted as heat and light?	to recombine the electrons and the holes
In what year was a new type of blue LED produced?	2003
Who demonstrated in 2003 the new type of blue LED?	Cree
How much more efficient as standard incandescents was the white LED commercially available in 2003?	four times
What is the typical operating current for high-power LEDs?	350 mA
What is a symptom of LED failure?	loss of efficiency
What is rare in LED lighting?	Sudden failures
What was notable in early red LEDs?	their short service life
What could cause early light-output degradation in LEDs?	higher junction temperatures
What is a classification used in LED lighting to describe how much usefulness it will receive?	L70 or L50
LED efficacy is inversely proportional to what?	operating temperature
Where is LED lighting very well suited?	supermarket freezer
LEDs produce less waste heat than what other device?	incandescent lamps
What is LED lighting more susceptible to than incandescent light?	frost
What students developed the first blue-violet LED?	Herb Maruska and Wally Rhines
The first blue-violet LED was developed at what University?	Stanford
When was the first blue-violet LED developed?	1972
What substance helped demonstrate the first blue electroluminescence?	zinc-doped gallium nitride
In what decade were breakthroughs made that brought in the modern era of GaN-based optoelectronic devices?	1980s
Who first patented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?	Shuji Nakamura
Who first invented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?	Dr. Moustakas
What technology was made possible by high-power blue light sources?	BlueRay
What is one modern gadget that benefits from high-power blue LED lighting?	tablets
What Nobel Prize did Nakamura, Amano, and Akasaki receive in 2014?	Physics
What award did Nakamura receive in 2006 for his invention?	Millennium Technology Prize
How many companies did a judge say infringed on Dr. Moustakas's prior blue light patent in 2015?	three
What was the fine given to the three companies?	not less than 13 million USD
What are cladding layers?	active region consisting of one or more InGaN quantum wells sandwiched between thicker layers of GaN
How can light emission be varied from violet to amber?	By varying the relative In/Ga fraction in the InGaN quantum wells
What does AlGaN stand for?	Aluminium gallium nitride
What LEDs are more efficient when produced from the InGaN/GaN systems than without?	Green
What substance does nitrides contain?	aluminium
What sort of LEDs are becoming more available on the market?	Ultraviolet
What is the range of wavelengths for cheap UV LEDs?	375–395 nm
Shorter wavelength diodes provide wavelengths as low as what?	240 nm
What UV wavelengths are found in sterilization devices?	250–270 nm
What colors are used to form white light?	red, green, and blue
What is the method called that mixes red, green, and blue colors to form white light?	multi-color white LEDs
What does the multi-color white LED method need to produce the end result?	electronic circuits
What is another name to reference the multi-color white LED method?	RGB LEDs
What is a factor that may be different in the various types of multi-color white LEDs?	luminous efficacy
Higher efficiency in multi-color white LEDs may mean what?	lower color rendering
What is one type of multi-color white LED?	tetrachromatic
What type has the best luminous efficacy?	dichromatic white LEDs
What luminous efficacy does trichromatic white LEDs have?	>70 lm/W
Multi-color LEDs offer what else besides the formation of white light?	to form light of different colors
What problem must be solved before multi-color LEDs can play a role in the market?	power decays exponentially with rising temperature
What problem results when rising temperatures decays power?	substantial change in color stability
What method involves coating LEDs of one color with phosphors of different colors?	phosphor-converted white LEDs (pcLEDs)
In pcLEDs method, a fraction of what light is used?	blue
What shift does blue light undergo in the pcLEDs method?	Stokes
The different colors of phosphors that can be used is based on what?	the color of the original LED
What broadens the emitted spectrum in a pcLEDs method?	If several phosphor layers of distinct colors are applied
What do phosphor-based LEDs luminous efficacies depend on?	the spectral distribution of the resultant light output
What is the most popular method for making high-intensity white LEDs?	phosphor method
Why is efficiency sometimes lost in phosphor-based LEDs?	heat loss from the Stokes shift
What are some of the luminous efficacies of yellow phosphor based white LED compared to blue?	3 to 5 times the luminous efficacy
What type of emitter is used in phosphor-based white LED methods?	monochrome
What can improve the efficiency of LED-based white light?	more efficient phosphors
What is the most efficient yellow phosphor?	YAG phosphor
What is the percentage of stoke shift loss in YAG phosphor?	less than 10%
What area are scientists looking into regarding phosphor LED development?	higher operation temperatures
What is one method that can raise the efficiency of phosphor-based LEDs?	adapting better package design
White LEDs can be made by coating what?	near-ultraviolet (NUV) LEDs
What are near-ultraviolet LEDs coated with to create white LED?	copper and aluminium-doped zinc sulfide (ZnS:Cu, Al)
What device also works in a similar way as NUV LEDs?	fluorescent lamps
The method of coating NUVs less efficient than what other LEDs?	blue
What light can harm human eyes or skin?	UV light
What is being used to produce white LEDs?	wafers composed of gallium-nitride-on-silicon
What size are the wafers used to create white LEDs?	200-mm
By using silicon wafers, what is being avoided?	costly sapphire substrate
What needs to be used to reflect light that would otherwise be wasted?	mirror-like collector
By what year will% of all GaN LEDs be made with gallium-nitride-on-silicon wafers?	2020
What nanocrystals possess unique optical properties?	Quantum dots
Quantum Dot LEDs can do what special skill?	create almost any color on the CIE diagram
The narrowing of the emission spectrum in Quantum Dot LEDs allows them to do what?	better color rendering
How many types of schemes are there in Quantum Dot LED excitation?	two
What is one scheme of Quantum Dot excitation?	electrical-excitation
What is one material used in electrical-excitation?	hole-transporting materials
During the electrical-excitation scheme, what moves into the quantum dot layer?	electrons and holes
A Quantum Dot LED has been used in what?	near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)
How many lumens can some high-power LEDs emit?	over a thousand
Up to how many densities have been achieved with LED power?	300 W/cm2
Why must High-power LEDs be mounted on a heat sink?	to allow for heat dissipation
What will happen if the heat from a high-power LED is not removed?	the device will fail in seconds
What can one high-power LED replace?	incandescent bulb in a flashlight
What company has developed LEDs that can operate on AC power?	Seoul Semiconductor
What is the efficacy of an AC powered HP-LED?	40 lm/W
When did Seoul Semiconductor release the first high DC voltage LED?	2009
What is so good about ac powered HP-LEDs?	more flexibility
What did Seoul Semiconductor name their ac powered HP-LED?	Acrich MJT
What type of LEDs are available in seven-segment format?	Alphanumeric
What is another format that Alphanumeric LEDs are available in?	dot-matrix
Which alphanumeric LED display can display all letters?	Starburst
What type of pixels does a dot matrix display use?	5x7
What has reduced the popularity of numeric LED displays?	liquid crystal displays
What makes RGB LEDs different?	contain their own "smart" control electronics
How are Digital-RGB LED strobe signals connected?	in a daisy chain
What object sources the data in of the first LED of a digital rgb LED?	microprocessor
The microprocessor does what in a digital RGB LED?	control the brightness and color of each LED independently of the others
What is one example of where Digital RGB LED lights are used?	Christmas
What does an LED filament consist of?	multiple LED dice
How are LED filaments used?	a low cost decorative alternative for traditional light bulbs
What type of voltage is needed for LED filaments?	high
What helps LED filaments remain low cost?	a simple rectifier
Single die LEDs require what?	high current converter
How are LEDs similar to other diodes?	the current is dependent exponentially on the voltage
What is a solution to preventing an LED failure?	use constant-current power supplies
What can cause a large change in current in LEDs?	a small change in voltage
What is a constant-voltage source?	batteries
What feature do most LED fixtures need to have?	a power converter
How are most LEDs classified?	Class 1 LED product
What does being a Class 1 LED product mean?	safe under all conditions of normal use
What type of LED can possibly cause blindness?	extremely bright LEDs
Which government advocated the banning of Class 2 LEDs?	French
What class are extremely bright LEDs listed as?	Class 2
What dangerous metal can LEDs contain?	arsenic
What substance does fluorescent lamps contain?	mercury
Which LEDs are considered dangerous by a 2011 study?	low-intensity red
According to a California study, what harmful metal is in most LEDs?	lead
What LEDs are considered safer than any other?	low-intensity yellow LEDs
What type of light is ideal for traffic signals?	One-color light
In what year were luminescence standards set?	1972
What color LEDs are used when night vision is important?	Red or yellow
What is an example of a night vision needed area?	astronomy observatories
What is another use for one-color light?	exit signs
Because of their high output, LED lights are very useful where?	brake lights for cars
Why are LED lights sought after for various applications?	their long life
LED brake lights are how many times faster than incandescent ones?	0.5 second
What color LEDs are now starting to be used more?	White
What types of light can LEDs form better than incandescent?	thinner
Where are infrared LEDs used in everday life?	theaters
How are LEDs used in theaters?	to send sound to listeners' receivers
LEDs can send data over what type of cable?	fiber optic
What type of fiber forms the backbone of the internet?	very high bandwidth
In what country does one kilowatt-hour of electricity causes 1.34 pounds of CO 2 emission?	US
How much CO2 emission would a 40-watt light bulb produce after 10 hours?	196 pounds
A 6-watt LED left on for 10 hours a day will emit how much CO 2?	30 pounds
How much can a building's carbon footprint be reduced by switching to LEDs?	85%
LEDs are often used for what type of systems?	Machine vision
Why are LEDs preferred for machine vision systems?	so features of interest are easier to process
What can help make LEDs more widely used?	price drops
What is the most common example of a machine vision system?	Barcode scanners
Where are some LEDs in machine vision systems found?	Optical computer mice
Where are LEDs often used?	free space optics communications
Where are opto-isolators found?	medical equipment
What is an example of a device that uses free space optic communications?	remote controls
What does an optoisolator do?	allows information to be transferred between circuits not sharing a common ground potential
In what common household item can you find infrared LEDs?	LED Computers
What video game console uses infrared LEDs?	Nintendo Wii
What device uses infrared LEDs to measure oxygen saturation?	Pulse oximeters
Some flatbed scanners use what type of LED?	RGB LEDs
By using LEDs, scanners do not have to what?	warm-up
Grow lights use LEDs for what process?	increase photosynthesis in plants
What quality has LEDs been used as?	medium-quality
What LED has the flattest I/V curve above the knee?	Red
What LEDs have a very steep I/V curve?	Nitride-based LEDs
LED forward voltage is more current-dependent than what diode?	Zener
Zener diodes below what voltage are not widely available?	3 V
What is a group of endothermic vertebrates characterised by feathers and toothless beaked jaws?	Birds
What is the smallest bird?	bee hummingbird
What is the largest bird?	ostrich
What is the size of the smallest bird?	5 cm (2 in)
What is the size of the largest bird?	2.75 m (9 ft)
What are the last surviving dinosaurs, according o the fossil record?	birds
When did true birds first appear?	Cretaceous period
Name an example of an early stem-bird.	Archaeopteryx
What makes birds uniquely adapted for flight?	digestive and respiratory systems
What type of bird particularly played an important part in the inception of Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection?	Darwin's finches
Which part of the bird developed from forelimbs?	Wings
Which type of birds are among the most intelligent animals?	corvids and parrots
How to birds produce offspring?	by laying eggs which are fertilized through sexual reproduction
Where are eggs usually laid?	nest
Which birds are popular as pets?	Songbirds, parrots
What is guano?	bird excrement
What is the name of bird excrement?	Guano
What is harvested for use as fertilizer?	Guano
How many species of birds have become extinct as a result of human activity?	120–130
Besides Aves, what group contains the only living representatives of the reptile clade Archosauria?	clade Crocodilia
Who defined Aves to include only the crown group of the set of modern birds?	Gauthier
What is a sister group to Aves?	clade Crocodilia
What evidence leads most scientists to accept that birds are a specialized subgroup of theropod dinosaurs?	fossil and biological evidence
What is a group of theropods which include dromaeosaurs and oviraptorids?	Maniraptora
Recent discoveries in what country demonstrate many small theropod feathered dinosaurs.	China
What are the closest relatives of the deinonychosaurs?	flying theropods
What are the closest relatives of flying theropods?	deinonychosaurs
Dromaeosaurids and troodontids are members of what group?	deinonychosaurs
What is known as one of the first transitional fossils to be found?	Late Jurassic Archaeopteryx
What was the first fossil to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics?	Archaeopteryx
Fossils with teeth, clawed fingers and a long lizard-like tail have what type of characteristics?	reptilian
The Oxfordian stage is also known as what?	late Jurassic period
How long ago was the late Jurassic period?	about 160 million years ago
What may have been used in aerial maneuvering?	hind wings
Avian species such as Anchiornis huxleyi and Xiaotingia zhengi are from which time period?	late Jurassic period
During which time period did avialans diversify into a wide variety of forms?	Cretaceous Period
Which forms retained the long bony tails of their ancestors?	Archaeopteryx and Jeholornis
When did the ancestor of all modern birds evolve a better sense of smell?	late Cretaceous
How long ago was the late Cretaceous period?	around 95 million years ago
What were the first large, diverse lineage of short-tailed avialans to evolve?	enantiornithes
Because of the construction of their shoulder bones, what were the enantiornithes called?	opposite birds
What was the dominant group of avialans during the Cretaceous period?	enantiornithes
When did enantiornithes become extinct?	end of the Mesozoic era
What group became the first avialans to develop true pygostyle and a fully mobile fan of tail feathers?	Euornithes
What does Euornithes mean?	true birds
Why does Euornithes mean "true birds?"	because they include the ancestors of modern birds
What may have replaced the "hind wing" as the primary mode of aerial maneuverability?	fully mobile fan of tail feathers
All modern birds lie within which crown group?	Aves
What is another name for Aves?	Neornithes
The two subdivisions of what group include Palaeognathae and Neognathae?	Aves
What is the number range of living bird species?	9,800 to 10,050
What was the earliest divergence within the Neognathes?	Galloanserae
What is the superorder containing the Anseriformes?	Galloanserae
Ducks, geese, swans and screamers are part of which group?	Anseriformes
The pheasants, grouse and their allies form which group?	Galliformes
Sibley and Ahlquist' Phylogeny and Classification of Birds is a landmark work on the classification of what animals?	birds
What do scientists disagree about?	relationships between the orders themselves
What do scientists tend to agree on?	the assignment of orders is accurate
Birds live on how many continents?	seven
Highest bird diversity occurs in which regions?	tropical
Some penguins have been recording diving up to how many feet?	980
Some seabird species only come ashore for what purpose?	to breed
The ring-necked pheasant has been introduced as what kind of bird?	game bird
Why have some species spread naturally far beyond their original ranges?	agricultural practices created suitable new habitat
Where have many birds established breeding populations?	in areas to which they have been introduced by humans
What consists of very lightweight bones?	The skeleton
What does the skeleton consist of?	very lightweight bones
What are pneumatic cavities?	large air-filled cavities
What are large air-filled cavities that connect to the respiratory system?	pneumatic cavities
What is formed when vertebrae are fused with the pelvis?	synsacrum
What is it called when a bird's kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their bloodstream and secrete it as uric acid?	uricotelic
Which bid has a urinary bladder or external urethral opening?	ostrich
What is a multi-purpose opening on birds?	cloaca
How do most birds mate?	by joining cloaca
What aids birds with flight?	rapid digestion
Upon inhalation, what percentage of fresh air bypasses the lungs and flows directly into a posterior air sac?	75%
Where does the other 25 percent of fresh air go?	directly into the lungs
What is the syrinx?	a muscular chamber incorporating multiple tympanic membranes
Sound production is achieved using what muscular chamber?	syrinx
Which animal has one of the most complex respiratory system of all animal groups?	Birds
The avian circulatory system is driven by what?	four-chambered, myogenic heart
Where is the heart contained in the avian circulatory system?	fibrous pericardial sac
What lubricates the pericardial sac?	serous fluid
Why are Avian hearts larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass?	allows more blood to be pumped
Why are birds' arteries composed of thick elastic muscles?	to withstand the pressure of the ventricular constriction
What moves through the arteries?	Blood
What is organized into capillary beds in tissues?	Capillaries
What is the funneling that occurs that brings blood back to the heart?	vasodilation
Which bird system is large relative to a bird's size?	nervous system
What is tetrachromatic?	possessing ultraviolet (UV) sensitive cone cells in the eye as well as green, red and blue ones
Why do birds need to perceive ultraviolet light?	courtship
What regulates breeding activities?	photo-receptive cells in
What covers the eye and acts as a contact lens in many aquatic birds?	nictitating membrane
What is the fan shaped blood supply system in a bird's retina?	pecten
Which birds have a wide visual field?	Birds with eyes on the sides of their heads
What kind of vision do owls have?	binocular vision
Where is a bird's cochlea located?	inner ear
What is known to sometimes result in injury or death?	intraspecific conflicts
What is another name for steamer ducks?	Tachyeres
What is another name for Anhimidae?	screamers
What do stone curlews use to punch and hammer opponents?	bony knob on the alular metacarpal
What is a feature characteristic of birds?	Feathers
What feature of a bird facilitate flight?	Feathers
What is pterylae?	specific tracts of skin
What is regularly moulted?	Plumage
What is the standard plumage of a bird that has moulted after breeding?	"non-breeding" plumage
How often does moulting occur in most species?	annual
What type of birds may moult only once every few years?	large birds of prey
How often do birds groom their feathers?	daily
What percentage of their day do birds groom their feathers?	9%
What do birds use to brush away foreign particles?	The bill
What is the process of removing feather parasites?	anting
What distinguishes birds from almost all other vertebrate classes?	Most birds can fly,
What is the primary means of locomotion for most bird species?	Flight
How many large flight muscles do birds have?	two
Pectoralis account for what percentage of total mass of a bird?	15%
Approximately how many extant bird species are flightless?	60
What is the term used for birds that employ many strategies to obtain food?	generalists
What is the term used for birds that concentrate time and effort on specific food items?	specialists
What type of birds have specially adapted brushy tongues?	Nectar feeders
What is the term for stealing food items from other birds?	kleptoparasitism
What is kleptoparasitism?	stealing food items from other birds
A vulture is what type of bird?	scavengers
How do nesting sandgrouse carry water to their young?	wetting their belly feathers
What is one family of birds have adaptations to produce a nutritive fluid to their chicks?	The pigeon family
What is a nutritive fluid that some birds provide to their chicks?	crop milk
What is crop milk?	a nutritive fluid
Birds preen often with the application of secretions from which gland?	preen gland
What do birds bathe in?	water or dust
What is anting?	bird encourages ants to run through their plumage
What is it called when birds encourage ants to run through their plumage?	anting
When do birds substantially increase body fats and reduce the size of some of their organs?	Before migration
What is the flight range of landbirds?	2,500 km (1,600 mi)
What is the flight range of shoebirds?	4,000 km (2,500 mi)
Which bird is capable of non-stop flights of up to 6,300 miles?	bar-tailed godwit
Which birds often undertake circumpolar trips between breeding seasons?	Albatrosses nesting in the Southern Ocean
In Australia, what percentage of non-passerine birds were partially migratory	44%
In Australia, what percentage of passerine birds were partially migratory	32%
What is most often triggered by temperature changes?	Altitudinal migration
Which family of birds are neither migratory or sedentary but considered to be dispersive, irruptive or nomadic?	Parrots
In which type of migration do birds use the sun to navigate by day and a stellar compass at night?	diurnal migrants
Some species use specialised photoreceptors to sense what?	the Earth's geomagnetism
What do birds to compensate for the changing position of the sun during the day?	internal clock
What allows for the identification of birds, particularly between species?	Variation in plumage
What do birds sometimes use to assess and assert social dominance?	plumage
Visual communication among birds may involve what kind of displays?	ritualised displays
What do some birds use for auditory communication?	mechanical sounds
What do birds use for evaluation of potential mates and mate attraction?	Calls
Which birds drum territorially?	woodpeckers
Which type of birds use tools to drum?	palm
What are the principal benefits of flocking?	safety in numbers and increased foraging efficiency
What is a cost of flocking?	bullying of socially subordinate birds by more dominant birds
What is particularly important in closed habitats like forests?	Defence against predators
Sleeping birds often use a type of sleep known as what?	vigilant sleep
What are believed to be able to sleep in flight?	Swifts
Why is communal roosting common?	because it lowers the loss of body heat
These types of birds have a tendon locking mechanism.	Perching birds
Where do many ground birds, such as quails and pheasants, roost?	in trees
A few parrots of what genus roost hanging upside down?	Loriculus
What type of birds go into a nightly state of torpor?	Some hummingbirds
Birds do not have what type of glands:?	sweat
What percent of bird species are socially monogamous?	Ninety-five percent
What do female birds have that allow sperm from males to remain viable long after copulation?	sperm storage mechanisms
What is extra-pair copulation?	infidelity
Why do males that engage in extra-pair copulation closely guard their mates?	to ensure the parentage of the offspring that they raise
Which gender typically performs some form of courtship display?	male
Most courtship displays involve some type of what?	song
Which gender generally drive partner selection?:	Females
Generally, when is courtship feeding and billing performed between partners?	after the birds have paired and mated
What kind of eggs to all birds lay?	amniotic eggs
All birds lay eggs with hard shells made mostly out of what?	calcium carbonate
What type of birds lay white or pale eggs?	Hole and burrow nesting species
What kind of eggs do open nesters lay?	camouflaged eggs
Where do birds usually lay their eggs?	nest
What type of birds lay its eggs on bare rock?	cliff-nesting common guillemot
Where do male emporer penguins keep eggs?	between their body and feet
Which type of bird nests are no more than a scrape on the ground?	albatross
What process optimises temperature for chick development?	Incubation
When does incubation begin?	after the last egg has been laid
What are areas of bare skin on the abdomen or breast of incubating birds?	brood patches
How many days is the incubation period for woodpeckers?	10 days
How many days is the incubation period for kiwis?	over 80 days
When does parental care end in megapodes?	at hatching
What type of seabird has the longest period of parental care?	frigatebird
What is the period of breeding during which one of the adult birds is always present at the nest?	chick guard stage
Alloparenting is particulary common with what species?	Corvida
True crows belong to what group?	Corvida
What is more common in birds than any other vertebrate class?	male parental care
Which chicks leave the nest the night after they hatch?	chicks of the Synthliboramphus murrelets
Name a species which move their chicks away from the nest at an early age.	ducks
When do most species of chicks leave the nest?	just before, or soon after, they are able to fly
What is it called when an egg-layer leaves her eggs with another individual's brood?	Brood parasitism
How many bird species are obligate parasites?	One hundred
What type of birds lay eggs in the nests of conspecifics to increase their reproductive output?	non-obligate brood parasites
What is the most famous example of sexual selection?	peacock tail
What is intersexual selection also known as?	female choice
What is it called when individuals of the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate?	intrasexual competition
What is it called when there is greater than 30 percent reduction in hatchability of eggs?	inbreeding depression
What can reduce the negative effects of inbreeding?	Females paired with related males may undertake extra pair matings
What percentage of broods produced by incestuously paired females contained extra pair of young?	43%
What occurs when offspring delay dispersal from their natal group?	Cooperative breeding
What leads to the masking of deleterious recesive alleles in progeny?	Cross-fertilization between unrelated individuals
Why is inbreeding avoided?	because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness
What type of birds generally feed by fishing, plant eating or piracy?	Aquatic birds
What type of birds may be either insectivores, frugivores and nectarivores?	Forest birds
What type of birds specialise in hunting mammals or other birds?	Birds of prey
What are often important to island ecology?	Birds
In New Zealand, what were important browsers, as the kereru and kokako are today?	moas
What type of birds may also affect the ecology of islands and surrounding areas?	Nesting seabirds
What is it called when the house sparrow has benefited from human activity?	commensal
What have threatened numerous bird species with extinction?	Human activities
Why have humans had a relationship with birds since the dawn of man?	Since birds are highly visible and common animals
What are domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs?	poultry
What is the largest source of animal protein eaten by humans?	poultry
In 2003, how many tons of poultry were produced worldwide?	76 million tons
What is primarily a recreational activity except in extremely underdeveloped areas?	Bird hunting
Why have birds been domesticated by humans?	both as pets and for practical purposes
What type of birds are bred in captivity or kept as pets?	Colourful birds
How long have messenger pigeons been used?	since at least 1 AD
What play prominent roles in religion and mythology?	Birds
The word auspicious is derived from which word?	auspex
What is said to mark the existence of a portal between such worlds, and to transform itself into a llama?	mythical chullumpi bird
When were birds represented in early cave paintings?	since prehistoric times
What is a mythological giant bird capable of snatching humans?	Pouākai
John James Audubon later lent his name to which group?	National Audubon Society
What did Homer incorporate into his Odyssey?	nightingales
The relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of what book?	The Rime of the Ancient Mariner
How many bird species have gone extinct in historical times?	Over a hundred
How many species are listed as threatened by BirdLife International and the IUCN?	1,227
When did the most dramatic human-caused avian extinctions occur?	during the human colonisation of Melanesian, Polynesian, and Micronesian islands
What was the last Chinese dynasty?	Great Qing, or the Manchu dynasty
When did the Manchu dynasty rule?	1644 to 1912
What was the dynasty that ruled before the Manchu?	Ming
What government took over from the Manchu dynasty?	Republic of China
What is another name for the Manchu dynasty?	Qing
Who started the Manchun dynasty?	Jurchen Aisin Gioro clan
Where did this dynasty form?	Manchuria
Name a peasant rebel leader?	Li Zicheng
Where was the ming capital?	Beijing
What pass was opened to the Banner Armies?	Shanhai Pass
What years did the Qianlong Emperor rule?	(1735–1796)
When was the Taiping rebellion?	(1850–64)
When was the Dungan Revolt?	(1862–77)
How many people died during the Taiping Rebellion and the Dungan Revolt?	20 million people
When was the first Sino-Japanese War?	1895
What started on October 11, 1911?	Xinhai Revolution
Who was the last Qing emperor?	Puyi
When did he step down?	February 12, 1912
Who named himself the Bright Khan?	Nurhaci
What imagery is suggested in the Chinese characters of the dynasties new name?	water imagery
Who renamed the Qing dynasty in 1363?	Hong Taiji
What language did the dynasties name come from originall?	Mongolian
What Mongolian word did Qing dynasty get it's name from?	Mongolian word that means "warrior"
After taking the bulk of China what did the Manchuse call their state?	China
What does China mean?	Middle Kingdom
What ethnice groups did the Qing thin made up China?	Han and non-Han peoples
What ethnic group make up the most people in China?	Han Chinese
Who founded the Qing dynasty?	Jurchen
What type of lifestyle did the Jurchen live?	sedentary farming
What parts of China did they come from?	Jilin and Heilongjiang
Were the Manchu's nomadic?	farming people
Where did Nurhachi move his court to?	Liaodong
Where did Nurhachi move his court from?	Jianzhou
Who posed a threat to the Chinese borders?	Mongol nation
What group did the Manchus take over to add strength to their numbers?	Mongols
What weapon helped the Ming defeat the Manchus?	artillery
When did the Manchus create their own artillery?	1641
When were the first couple Han Banners founded?	1637
When did the Han Banners grow to eight?	1642
Who killed Yuan Chonghuan?	Chongzhen Emperor
Which leader defeated the Ming armies?	Hong Taiji
Where did the Ming armies retreat to?	north of the Great Wall
Who included newly conquered Ming officials in his government?	Hong Taiji
When did a Han revolt occur?	1623
Where did a Han revolt occur?	Liaodong
What proportion of bannerman were Manchu by 1648?	one-sixth
When did Hong Taiji die?	September 1643
Who was his heir?	without a designated heir
Who were the likely heirs?	Hong Taiji's oldest son Hooge and Hong Taiji' half brother Dorgon
Who became the emperor?	Fulin
Who raided Beijing in 1644?	Li Zicheng
Who was Li Zicheng?	former minor Ming official
Who was the last Ming leader?	Chongzhen Emperor
What dynasty did Zicheng form?	Shun
How did the Chongzhen Emporer die?	suicide
How big was Li Zicheng's army?	200,000
Who did Li Zicheng's army fight?	Wu Sangui
What was the name of the general at the Ming fort?	Wu Sangui
Who beat Li Zicheng's army?	Wu and Dorgon
When did the battle take place?	May 27, 1644
How long did it take for the Manchus to take the rest of China?	seventeen years
Who did the Manchus struggle against?	Ming loyalists
When did the Shunzhi emperor become the Son of Heaven?	October 30
What was the Shunzi Emperor called?	"Son of Heaven"
When did Beijing fall?	June 6
What percent of bannermen did the Han represent?	75%
Who made up the Han Chinese Banners?	Han Chinese
Who besides the Manchus and the Han made up the Eight Banners?	Mongol
Who were the three Liandong Han bannermen who were instrumental in the taking of southern China?	Shang Kexi, Geng Zhongming, and Kong Youde
What part of China did Kexi, Zhongming, and Youde rule?	southern China
What was the three Han Bannermen position called?	viceroys
Who made Beijing his capital?	Dorgon
Whose capital was Beijing before the Manchu's?	Ming
Why did Dorgon keep Beijing as his capital?	stabilize the regime and sped up the conquest of the rest of the country
What did Dorgon declare in July of 1645?	the "haircutting order")
What was the peoples description of the haircutting order?	"To keep the hair, you lose the head; To keep your head, you cut the hair."
How did the Ming's typically wear their hair>	top-knot
What city was massacred for not wearing the proper haircut?	Jiading
Who was a threat to Shunzhi's throne?	Dorgon
What was Dorgon known as after death?	Emperor Yi
When did Shunzhi's death?	1661
Who was Shunzhi's oldest brother?	Hooge
How old was Shunzhi at his death?	twenty-four
Who did the Manchus send to battle Koxinga's troops?	Han Bannermen
Where did the fight between Ming loyalists and Manchus occur?	Fujian
What were the Manchus accused of being afraid of?	water
How long was Kangxi Emperor in power?	sixty-one year
What era did Kanxi's rule kick off?	High Qing
Who had the longest rule of any emperor?	Kangxi
How old was Kangxi when he took over?	eight
Who ruled while Kangxi was young?	Oboi
What type of learning did the early Manchu leaders respect?	Confucian
What declaration solidified Confucian values?	Sacred Edict of 1670
Who did the Manchu appeal to?	Mongol, Tibetan and Uighur
What Christians did Kangxi allow in his court?	Jesuit missionaries
Who was the most important Ming general?	Wu Sangui
What provinces did Sangui control?	Yunnan and Guizhou
Name the other two important Ming generals?	Shang Kexi and Geng Jingzhong
Which provinces did Kexi and Jingzhong receive?	Guangdong and Fujian
When did Kexi retire?	1673
Who did Kexi thing should take over for him?	his son
What happened when Kexi, and the two other generals all retired?	all three fiefdoms to be reverted to the crown.
How long did the Revolt of the Three Feudatories last?	eight years
Who declared himself emperor?	Wu
When did the Qing regain power over southern China?	1681
Who did the Qing think were the better soldiers to battle Han Chinese?	other Han people
How many Green Standard Army soldiers  were on the Qing side?	400,000
When did Wu destroy the Qing armies?	1673-1674
How many soldiers did the Qing fight back with?	900,000
What happened to Wu's army?	crushed by the Green Standard Army
Who did Kangxi fight?	Dzungars
When was Galdan killed?	Dzungar–Qing War
Where did Kangxi lead an army?	Outer Mongolia
When did Taiwan fall?	1683
What European country did Kangxi fight?	Russia
When did Kangxi die?	1722
Who took Kangxi's place?	Prince Yong
How old was Yongzheng when he took over?	45
Who did Yongzheng behead?	anti-Manchu writer
What religion did Yongzheng ban?	Christianity
What did Yongzheng crack down on?	collection of the land tax
When did Yongzheng ban christianity?	1723
Who did Yongzheng call Marquis?	Zhu Zhiliang
When did Yongzheng give this title?	1725
What was Zhu's job?	perform rituals
When was the Treaty of Kyakhta written?	1727
Who was the partner in the Treaty of Kyakhta?	Russia
What did the treaty give to the Russians?	territory and trading rights
What did the Qing get from the Treaty of Kyakhta?	Mongolia
How many books were in the Siku Quanshu?	3,400 books
How many volumes were in the Siku Quanshu?	36,304 volumes
Who created the Siku Quanshu?	Qianlong
How many literary persecutions were there under Qianlongs reign?	53
What crops helped the Chinese?	potato and peanut
What led to overpopulation in China?	prosperity and internal stability
How many people lived in China at the start of the 18th century?	100 million
How many people lived in China at the end of the 20th century?	300 million
What was the last part of China with farmland left?	Manchuria
Where did Hans go to to find land?	Manchuria
How much land did the Han cultivate?	500,000 hectares
What percent of the population in Manchuria was Han?	80%
Where were starving Han sent by the Qing?	Manchuria and Inner Mongolia
How much land did the Han farm in Inner Mongolia?	tens of thousands of hectares
What other types of land were the Han allowed to farm?	"imperial estates" and Manchu Bannerlands
Who was the emperor in the later half of the 18th century?	Qianlong
What ethnicity was the majority in urban Manchuria?	Han Chinese
Which empires grew during the 18th century?	European states
What country near China did the Europeans first control?	India
What was the only city the Chinese allowed the Europeans into to trade?	Canton
What were the economies of the European empires built on?	maritime trade
Which two European companies traded in Canton?	British East India Company and the Dutch East India Company
What products from China did Europeans want?	silk, tea, and ceramics
What did the Chinese want in return?	silver
What were the British and French concerned about?	imbalance of trade and the drain of silver
What else did the Chinese want from the British?	opium
Where was opium made?	Bengal
Who fought the Qing in the First Opium War?	British
When did the Qing surrender to the British?	1842
What treaty marked the end of the First Opium War?	Treaty of Nanjing,
What 5 ports did the treaty force open?	Canton, Amoy, Fuchow, Ningpo and Shanghai
What island was given to the British?	Hong Kong Island
What marked the first occurence of anti-Manchu feeling?	The Taiping Rebellion
Who led the Rebellion?	Hong Xiuquan
When did the Rebellion start?	1851
What entity was established in Guizhou province?	Taiping Heavenly Kingdom
Who was king of Taiping Heavenly Kingdom?	Hong
Were the European empires satisfied or unsatisfied by the Treaty of Nanjing?	unsatisfied
Who did the Europeans support during the Rebellions?	Qing government
When did the British try to redo the Treaty of Nanjing?	1854
Whed did the British and French invade Beijing?	1860
Where did the emperor go?	Rehe
What happened to the Old Summer Palace?	burnt it to the ground
What did Prince Gong sign?	Convention of Beijing
Who put down the rebellions?	Zuo Zongtang
How old was Tongzhi when he came to power?	five
What year did Tongzhi take power?	1861
What would the Chinese use to continue Confucian values?	western military technology
What was the name of a modern Chinese Army?	Beiyang Army
Who did the Chinese lose territory to in exchange for help?	Russian
When was the Tientsin Massacre?	1870
When was the Cochinchina Campaign?	1858
Which territory did France control?	Indochina
What triggered the Tientsin Massacre?	murder of French nuns
What was the main problem the Qing had in preventing invasion from Europe?	naval weakness
When was the Arrow War?	(1856–60)
Where did the French and English land in 1860?	Gulf of Zhili
Which historian blamed naval weakness for European imperialism in China?	Edward L. Dreyer
What coup happened in 1884?	Gapsin Coup
Who was involved in the Gapsin Coup?	pro-Japanese Koreans
What resulted between the Chinese and Japanese after the Coup?	Tensions
Who signed the Convention of Tientsin?	Itō Hirobumi and Li Hongzhang
When did the First Sino-Japanese War happen?	1895
What was the name of Xianfeng's concubine?	Cixi
Who was Cixi's son?	Tongzhi
When did Tongzhi Emperor die?	1875
Who took over from Tongzhi?	Guangxu
Where did the Empress Dowager spend most of her time?	Summer Palace
When were two missionaries killed?	November 1, 1897,
Where were the missionaries killed?	Shandong Province
What was the murders of the missionaries called?	Juye Incident
What did the emperor do in response to so many defeats by the Europeans?	Hundred Days' Reform of 1898
Name an advisor to Guangxu?	Kang Youwei
Who took over the policy of China?	empress dowager
Where was there a drought?	North China
What was another name for the Boxers?	Righteous and Harmonious Fists
When did the Boxers begin to kill missionaries and Chinese Christians?	1900
Who invaded China?	A coalition of European, Japanese, and Russian armies
Where did Cixi go after Beijing fell to the 8 armies?	Xi'an
What did Cixi do in 1901?	issued an imperial edict
What were the governments New Policies also called?	"Late Qing Reform"
When were imperial examinations halted?	1905
What year did Guangxu die?	1908
What year did Cixi die?	1908
Who ruled after Guangxu?	Prince Chun
How old was Prince Chun?	two
What year was the Republic of China created?	1911
Who led the Qing?	Yuan Shikai
Who negotiated with Yuan Shikai to prevent war?	Sun Yat-sen
Who led the Republic of China?	Sun Yat-sen,
Who became the President?	Yuan
What year did the end of Imperial China occur?	1912
How long did Imperial China last for?	2,000 years
When was Manchukuo created?	1932
Who split the leadership roles in the Qing dynasty?	Han Chinese and Manchus
Where did the Qing find their officials?	imperial examination system
How many ranks were there in civil service in the Qing dynasty?	nine
Who was the main leader of the Qing?	Emperor
Which ethnicities made up the Qing government?	Manchu noblemen and Han officials
What happened to the Grand Secretariat?	evolved into an imperial chancery
Who controlled the "Inner Court"?	imperial family and Manchu nobility
Where was the Inner Court?	Forbidden City
What was the Grand Council?	core institution of the inner court
What shape of emblem signified a Han official?	square emblem
What shape of emblam signified members of the royal family?	circular
Which two ethnicities made up each position in government?	Manchu and a Han Chinese
Who governed the areas of Tibet and Mongolia?	Lifan Yuan
Who administered the minority groups?	Lifan Yuan
How many boards were there in the Qing government?	six
What was the foreign service called?	Zongli Yamen
Who performed the tasks of the Zongli Yamen before it was created?	Board of Rites and Lifan Yuan
What was the war called fought between the British and French against the Qing?	Second Opium War
Which emperor followed Shunzhi?	Kangxi
Where were textile factories located?	Jiangnan region
What did China trade with Tibet and Mongolia?	jade, ginseng, salt, furs
What century did Qing China stretch to its largest?	18th century
How many kilometers was Qing China at its height?	13 million km2
How many provinces were there at the height of Qing China?	22
When did Japan take over Taiwan?	1895
How did the Japanese win Taiwan?	First Sino-Japanese
What two provinces were formed from Huguang?	Hubei and Hunan
What was the name of the highest ranking official in a province?	governor
What were provinces broken up into?	prefectures
What is another name for the main 18 provinces?	China proper
How many viceroys were there in China Proper?	eight
When did Tibet become part of Qing China?	mid-18th century
What was the main government entity that ran the territories like Tibet?	Lifan Yuan
What is another name for Chinese Turkestan?	Xinjiang
Which emperor allowed Han migration to Dzungaria?	Qianlong
Who first ran Manchuria?	military generals
What title did the emperor hold in Mongolia?	khan
Who ruled Kashgaria?	Yaqub Beg
Who supported Beg?	British
When did the British invade Tibet?	early 20th century
What was the name of the agreement between Britain and the Chinese that kept the British out of Tibet?	1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention
Who created the Eight Banners?	Nurhaci
How were the 8 banners recognized?	color
What were the banners called that were under direct leadership of the emperor?	Upper Three Banners
What ethnicity made up the Upper Three Banners?	Manchus
What were the rest of the banners called?	Lower Five Banners
How were Banner's organized?	along ethnic lines
Which two ethnicities made up the majority of the Banner Armies?	Manchu and Mongol
Which ethnicity dominated the army in the reigns of Shunzhi and Kangxi?	Han Bannermen
When did Manchu ethnicity become important again in the Eight Banners?	Qianlong's reign
What did the Europeans call Han Bannermen?	"Tartarized Chinese" or "Tartarified Chinese"
What caused the Qing armies to lose many battles?	Taiping Rebellion
What city did the Qing lose in 1853?	Nanjing
What was Zeng Guofan?	Xiang Army
Who created a new type of army to thwart the Taiping rebels?	Zeng Guofan
What was the Xiang Army named after?	Hunan region where it was raised
Who inspired Zeng Guofan in creating his army?	Qi Jiguang
What did Qi Jiguang's private army do?	repel raiding Japanese pirates
What was the original plan for the Xiang Army?	eradicate the Taiping rebels
What entity became the main Qing troops?	Yongying corps
Who paid for the Yongying?	provincial coffers
Who led the Yongying?	regional commanders
When was the Second Opium War?	1860
How big was the French-British army?	25,000
What was the Qing governments attempt to create a modern socity called?	Self-Strengthening Movement
What happened to the Summer Palace?	sacked
Who beat the Chinese in the First Sino-Japanese War?	Japan
Which fleet did the Japanese destroy?	Beiyang Fleet
When did the Qing decide to modernize their military?	1894
What was the new modern army called?	the New Army
Who became the President of the Republic of China?	General Yuan Shikai
What happened in early and middle Qing history?	population growth
How much did the population grow during the 18th century?	doubled
What were the 2 types of migration during the 18th century?	permanent migration for resettlement, and relocation conceived by the party (in theory at least) as a temporary sojourn
How many estates were there in Qing society?	five
What 2 groups were normal Chinese broken into?	the good "commoner" people, the other "mean" people
What was the legal term for commoner?	liangmin
What did China export?	tea, silk and manufactures
What did the Chinese get paid for their goods?	silver
When did the Chinese economy finally recover after the wars with the Mings?	end of the 17th century
What did the Qing do to reform land ownership?	reduced the tax burden
What happened to the price of rice during the 18th century?	rise slowly and smoothly
What was the Great Divergence?	Western world overtook China economically
What was China's population at the end of the 18th century?	300 million
What were the reasons for the population explosion during the 18th century?	peace and stability in the 18th century and the import of new crops
What crops were imported?	peanuts, sweet potatoes and maize. New species of rice
What arts were the Qing emperors good at?	poetry and often skilled in painting
What was the rhyme dictionary called that was published by Kangxi?	Peiwen Yunfu
When was the Kangxi Dictionary published?	1716
When was the Siku Quanshu finished?	1782
Name three painters?	Four Wangs and the individualists Bada Shanren (1626–1705) and Shitao (1641–1707)
What two schools of art were created in the 19th century?	Shanghai School and the Lingnan School
Name two arts of the Four Arts?	Calligraphy and painting
What was the sign of a gentleman?	Poetry
Who started writing poety during the Qing dynasty?	women
What was the name of Pu Songling's collection of short stories?	Strange Stories
Who wrote the novel Dream of the Red Chamber?	Cao Xueqin
What was the name of Shen Fu's memoir?	Six Chapters of a Floating Life
Who wrote the Suiyuan Shidan?	Yuan Mei
What was the Suiyaun Shidan about?	recipes
What was the Manchu Han Imperial Feast?	appreciation by Han Chinese for Manchu culinary customs
Who are the indigenous people of the Americas descended from?	pre-Columbian inhabitants of the Americas
What is a common term in Spanish speaking countries for the indigenous peoples?	Pueblos indígenas
In Quebec, The Guianas and places in the Caribbean where English is spoken, what is the preferred term for the indigenous people of the Americas?	Amerindian
What term is used in Argentina to refer to the original peoples of a continent?	Aborigen
How are the indigenous people most commonly referred to by citizens of the U.S.?	Native Americans
Where do most theories today attribute the settlement of the Americas as originating from?	Asia
What was Beringia?	a land bridge which connected the two continents
How did humans cross over to the Americas from Asia?	Beringia
Most experts can at least agree that the earliest pre-modern human migration took place when?	13,500 years ago
How do the indigenous peoples explain how they came to live in the Americas?	a wide range of creation myths
What incorrect term for the indigenous population originated with Christopher Columbus?	Indian
Where did Columbus believe he had arrived?	East Indies
Because of Columbus' mistake, the Americas came to be known as what?	West Indies
What is implied by the global term of "Indian"?	some kind of racial or cultural unity
Despite fitting under the umbrella label of "Indian", Aleuts, Inuit and Yupik peoples are still considered to be what to the Americas?	indigenous
What were many of the indigenous people of the Americas traditionally?	hunter-gatherers
What remains as a testament to the time and work the indigenous people spent cultivating the flora of the Americas?	agricultural endowment
What did many of the societies practice a mix of?	farming, hunting, and gathering
Large cities, chiefdoms, monuments and empires were just some of the things created by which peoples?	indigenous
What did many segments of the indigenous population also practice?	aquaculture and agriculture
Belize, Chile and Greenland are just some countries with sizable populations of what peoples?	indigenous
Where are there still populations of indigenous peoples?	Many parts of the Americas
How many different indigenous languages are spoken in the Americas?	At least a thousand
What do many indigenous cultures still practice to different extends to this day?	religion, social organization, and subsistence practices
What have some indigenous peoples managed to remain in relative isolation from?	Western culture
How Paleo-Indians migrated to the Americas is still a matter for what type of research?	ongoing
When did humans inhabit North and South America's continents?	last
What allowed people to move across Beringia to North America?	falling sea levels
A small population could exist in Alaska because of it's lack of any significant what?	snowfall
What confined the nomadic inhabitants to East Beringia for thousands of years?	Laurentide Ice Sheet
What do studies on the genetics of the first American inhabitants conclude about their ancestral population?	single
Where did the single ancestral population of all the indigenous peoples of the Americas likely develop?	in isolation
How many years may the isolation of the peoples in Beringia lasted?	10–20,000 years
When did the glaciers begin to melt?	16,500 years ago
What did the people follow in the corridors between the ice sheets?	Pleistocene megafauna
What does the data indicate about the population the individual was from?	directly ancestral
What populations is the individual closely related to?	present North American Native American
What type of divergence is implicated to have occurred between North American and South American populations?	early
Theories that there were invasions which overwhelmed or assimilated previous migrants into the Americas have been what?	ruled out
The term Pre-Columbian technically refers to which era?	before Christopher Columbus' voyages of 1492
When was Columbus' first voyage?	1492
In practice, Pre-Columbian refers to the history of the indigenous cultures of America prior to Europeans doing what to them?	conquered or significantly influenced
What term is used most often when discussing the great civilizations of the Americas?	"Pre-Columbian"
What area of the Americas did the Inca Empire, Moche culture and Muisca confederation hail from?	Andes
Urban settlements and complex societal hierarchies are just some of the hallmarks established by which civilizations?	pre-Columbian
What had long faded prior to the first European and African arrivals?	Some of these civilizations
How do we know about some of the civilizations that were gone by the time of European arrival?	oral history and through archaeological investigations
What did European colonists destroy on their pyres?	written records
What gave today's historians a glimpse of the culture and knowledge of the indigenous civilizations?	a few documents
What had the civilizations in the Americas achieved by the time the Europeans encountered them?	many accomplishments
What had the Aztec civilization constructed?	one of the largest cities in the world
How big was the population of the Aztec cit of Tenochtitlan?	200,000
Astronomy and mathematics were also accomplishments of which civilizations?	American
How many years of selective breeding did it take to domesticate maize?	thousands
What did the European colonization forever change?	lives and cultures of the peoples of the continents
How much did the population of the Americas decrease after first contact with the Europeans?	between 80 and 90%
What was the leading cause of death for the native population after European contact?	disease
What triad of disease epidemics ravaged the American continent?	smallpox, measles, and cholera
Why did Native Americans suffer such high mortality rates to the diseases?	lack of prior exposure
Who was the first group of indigenous people Columbus encountered?	the 250,000 Taínos of Hispaniola
What did the Taínos represent in the Greater Antilles and Bahamas?	dominant culture
What percentage of the Taínos were dead thirty years after contact with Columbus?	70%
Why were outbreaks of measles and smallpox able to so easily decimate the Taínos' population?	no immunity to European diseases
What led to the last great Taínos rebellion?	Increasing punishment
What behaviors did the Taínos begin to adopt after years of mistreatment?	suicidal
What did Taínos women start doing to their infants?	aborting or killing
Why would ingesting untreated cassava be a bad idea?	violent poison
Who was sent to negotiate a peace treaty with the rebels?	Francisco Barrionuevo
How many years was a Taínos Cacique able to hold ou in the Baoruco Mountain Range?	thirteen
What was the overwhelming reason for the decline of Native American populations?	epidemic disease
Old World diseases accounted for up to what percentage of deaths among the native New World population?	90 to 95%
How long did it take for the Old World diseases to decimate the native population to the extent it did?	150 years
What disease killed almost a third of the population of Hispaniola in 1518?	Smallpox
How did smallpox cause the Inca Civil War?	By killing the Incan ruler Huayna Capac
What percent of the Aboriginal population of North America was killed in the first hundred years after first contact by smallpox and measles?	between 50 and 67 per cent
How much of the native population near Massachusetts was killed by smallpox in the epidemic between 1617 and 1619?	90 per cent
Who were the Native Americans exposed to smallpox because of?	Europeans
When did smallpox read the lands of the Iroquois?	by 1679
What did the Indian Vaccination Act of 1832 establish?	a smallpox vaccination program for Native Americans
What Empire brought horses to the Americas?	Spanish
What kind of impact did the re-emergence of horses have on some Native American cultures?	profound
How long had horses been extinct in the Americas prior to their re-introduction?	7500 years
What did some tribes achieve by domesticating horses?	great success
What enabled some tribes to expand territory, increase trade and capture more game?	horses
What did the indigenous peoples of America cultivate over the course of thousands of years?	a large array of plant species
What percent of worldwide crops in cultivation derive from the efforts of the America's indigenous people?	50–60%
How were new species and strains of crops developed?	artificial selection
What was the origin of maize?	wild teosinte grasses
What products sometimes retain their native names in both English and Spanish?	agricultural
Where was a center of early agriculture?	South American highlands
Based on genetic testing, what has been suggested about the origin of the potato?	single
Where did the potato originate?	area of southern Peru
How long ago was the decedent of 99% of all modern potatoes cultivated as long ago as?	10,000 years ago
What event in 850 AD coincided with the collapse of Mayan civilization?	persistent drought
When did the North American natives begin farming?	approximately 4,000 years ago
What had pottery become 4,000 years ago in the Americas?	common
What did technology make feasible when it came to trees?	small-scale felling
How did Archaic Indians use fire?	a controlled manner
What was the intentional burning of vegetation intended to mimic?	effects of natural fires
What global industry owes its existence to having been domesticated by indigenous Americans?	Many crops
What is arguably the most important crop in the world?	corn
Squash, beans, and peppers are all examples of what type of crop?	significant
What type of bean is used to make chocolate?	cocoa
Who do we owe gratitude for even some species of cotton to?	indigenous Americans
What did geographical zones encourage the sharing of?	Cultural practices
What did people in the same reason adopt?	similar technologies and social organizations
Where did millennia of coexistence produce a culture with advanced agricultural and social patterns?	Mesoamerica
How long was there a homogeneous culture on the North American plains?	until the 19th century
What creature did the nomadic hunter-gatherers of the plains hunt?	buffalo
What was one of the many achievements of the American cultures?	development of writing
What region produced several writing systems independent of other areas of the world?	the Mesoamerican region
What is presumed to be written upon the Cascajal Block?	extensive text
When were writing systems being created in the Americas?	beginning in the 1st millennium BCE
When has the Olmec tablet been dated to?	900 BCE
What is the Mayan writing system the only known pre-Columbian one to completely represent this?	spoken language of its community
What writing system combined phonetic symbols and logograms?	Maya
What signs play a significant role in the Mayan's writing system?	syllabic
How many different glyphs in total does the Mayan writing system have?	more than one thousand
How many of the Mayan glyphs had phonetic or syllabic interpretations?	some two hundred
When were indigenous scribes taught to use Latin letters?	the sixteenth century
Who taught indigenous scribes to write their languages?	Spanish
What were a large number of the local documents in regards to?	lawsuits and other legal matters
What were Spanish translations at the time made for?	legal cases
What viewpoint have scholars translated and analyzed documents to writes histories from?	indigenous
What characteristic did the majority of Native American music have?	monophonic
What did traditional Native American music center around?	drumming
What are examples of popular percussive instruments of Native Americans?	Rattles, clappersticks, and rasps
How were flutes constructed by the Native Americans?	rivercane, cedar, and other woods
How many strings did the Apache fiddle have?	single
What feature did the music of Central America have?	pentatonic
What role did music play in the religious festivities?	inseparable from
What instruments were used to make music by the Central Americans?	large variety of percussion and wind
Where did archaeologists find a depiction of a Mayan stringed instrument?	a jar in Guatemala
What did the Mayan's stringed instrument sound like when played?	a jaguar's growl
What comprises a major category in the world art collection?	Visual arts by indigenous peoples
Pottery, weavings and carvings are just some of the contributions to art by which peoples?	indigenous
Why did the U.S. pass the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990?	too many artists were posing as Native Americans
What does the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990 require artists to prove they're enrolled in?	a state or federally recognized tribe
When was a national Native Arts and Cultures Foundation established?	2007
What was the number of indigenous people in Argentina as of 2005?	about 600,329
How many Mapuche were there in Argentina in 2005?	113,680
Who are the Quechua and Chorote?	Minor but important peoples
What indigenous population is now virtually extinct?	The Selknam
Who still speaks Southern Tehuelche?	a handful of elderly people
What percentage of the residents in Bolivia self-identify as belonging to an indigenous people?	62%
What percent of people in Bolivia grew up with an indigenous mother tongue yet don't call themselves indigenous?	3.7%
In the 2001 census, how much of Bolivia's population was labeled as being indigenous?	66.4%
How many cultures does the Constitution of Bolivia recognize?	36
How many total groups of indigenous peoples are in Bolivia?	fifty
Who retained indigenous language and culture after the Spanish conquest?	Bolivian highland peasants
What re-emerged during the Katarista movement in the 1970s?	ethnic and class militancy
What did the highland peasants resist attempts at?	dissolution of communal landholdings
What took place frequently until 1953?	Indigenous revolts
What march successfully pressured the national government to sign the ILO Convetion 169?	March for Territory and Dignity
Who came up with a policy for indigenous autonomy?	Morales
When did Morales launch his policy in the eastern lowlands?	2009
What was Bolivia the first country in the history of South America to do?	affirm the right of indigenous people to govern themselves
What did the President vow he would never betray?	fight
What effect has the issue of indigenous autonomy had on Bolivia?	divided
Who came up with a policy for indigenous autonomy?	Morales
When did Morales launch his policy in the eastern lowlands?	2009
What was Bolivia the first country in the history of South America to do?	affirm the right of indigenous people to govern themselves
What did the President vow he would never betray?	fight
What effect has the issue of indigenous autonomy had on Bolivia?	divided
How much of Brazil's population is comprised of indigenous peoples?	0.4%
Where do the majority of the indigenous people of Brazil live?	Indian reservations
How many Brazillians have some indigenous ancestry?	millions
How many different uncontacted tribes were confirmed in Brazil in 2007?	67
What country has the largest number of uncontacted tribes?	Brazil
What is the term Eskimo said to mean?	"eater of raw meat."
First Nations and Inuit are labels for what peoples in Canada?	Aboriginal
How many Aboriginal nations evolved trade, as well as spiritual and social hierarchies?	Hundreds
What resulted from First Nation and Inuit people marrying European settlers?	The Métis culture
What has been enacted between European immigrants and First Nations across Canada?	Various laws, treaties, and legislation
What were the early interactions between First Nations and Europeans?	relatively peaceful
What have Canadian indigenous peoples been able to have a strong influence on?	national culture
How long have European Canadians been encouraging Aboriginals to assimilate into their culture?	late 18th century
What does National Aboriginal Day recognize from the Aboriginal peoples of Canada?	cultures and contributions
How many recognized First Nations governments are spread across Canada?	over 600
What is the name for the Polynesian people living on Easter Island?	the Rapanui
What percent of the Chilean population were indigenous according to the 2002 census?	4.6%
Who are many of the people of Chile the descendants of?	the Mapuche
How long were the Mapuche able to fight off the Spaniards?	350 years
When did the Mapuche surrender to the Chilean army?	1880s
What was Ecuador the site of?	many indigenous cultures
Where did the Valdivia culture develop?	coastal region
What two cultures unified to for an elaborate civilization?	the Caras and the Quitus
What culture did the Inca fear the most?	The Cañaris
What did the Spaniards and Incas destroy?	architecture remains
What percentage of Ecuador's indigenous population are Highland Quichuas?	96.4%
Who are the Highland Quichuas primarily descended from?	Inca
Where do the Highland Quichuas live?	valleys of the Sierra region
The Saraguro and Panzaleo are two of the member groups of what population?	Highland Quichuas
What language do the Highland Quichuas speak?	Kichwa
El Salvador was home to which indigenous peoples?	the Pipil, the Lenca, Xinca, and Kakawira
What was a major Pipil settlement in western El Salvador?	Cuzcatlan
What was the language of the Pipil?	Nawat
What did the Princes and Princesses see the Spanish as?	barbaric invaders
What people resulted from the Spaniards intermarrying with Pipll and Lenca women?	Mestizo
How much of the population of Honduras is of full-blooded indigenous descent?	About five percent
What percentage of Hondurans have African blood mixed in with the rest of their ancestry?	about ten percent
Where are the main concentrations of indigenous people in Honduras?	rural westernmost areas
The Lencas, Miskitos, Mayans Pech, Sumos and Tolupan comprise the majority of what in Honduras?	indigenous people
What was Mexico home to prior to the arrival of the Spaniards?	indigenous civilizations
When did the Olmecs flourish?	from between 1200 BCE to about 400 BCE
Who held sway in the mountains of Oaxaca?	the Zapotecs and the Mixtecs
Who lived in the Yucatan?	the Maya
Where was the Aztec's central capital located?	Tenochtitlan
What grants all indigenous languages spoken in Mexico validity?	General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples
What are indigenous peoples entitled to request?	some public services and documents in their native languages
What has the Mexican government promoted in some indigenous rural communities?	bilingual primary and secondary education
How many languages have been giving the status of "national languages"?	more than 60
How many of the indigenous peoples in Mexico speak an indigenous language?	about 67% of them
What percentage of the Nicaraguan population are indigenous?	About 5%
How did Creole English come about?	frequent contact with the British
What is the largest indigenous group in Nicaragua?	Miskito
What didn't the king have in Miskito society?	total power
How many Mayanga people are in Nicaragua?	some 10,000
What percentage of Peru's population is indigenous?	45%
What has shaped the way Peruvians live and see themselves today?	Native Peruvian traditions
What is not very well developed in Peru?	Cultural citizenship
What regions suffer from state-sponsored abuse and violence?	Amazonian
Where are the indigenous peoples referred to as "American Indians"?	the contiguous United States
Eyak and Tlingit are some of the peoples who are collectively called what?	Alaska Natives
How many cultures and languages do the indigenous peoples of Alaska have?	11
Tahitian and Tongan are two examples of indigenous peoples of what descent?	Polynesian
How are Pacific Islands Americans distinct from the indigenous peoples of the Americas?	geographically and culturally
What amoun of the United States population is compromised of Native Americans?	0.97% to 2%
How many people identified as Native American in the 2010 census?	5.2 million
How many of the self-identified Native Americans are recognized as enrolled tribal members?	1.8 million
Where do a minority of US Native Americans live?	Indian reservations
What tribe has the legal right to freely cross the US-Canadian border?	Haudenosaunee
What amoun of the United States population is compromised of Native Americans?	0.97% to 2%
How many of the self-identified Native Americans are recognized as enrolled tribal members?	1.8 million
How many people identified as Native American in the 2010 census?	5.2 million
What tribe has the legal right to freely cross the US-Canadian border?	Haudenosaunee
Where do a minority of US Native Americans live?	Indian reservations
What do most Venezuelans have?	some indigenous heritage
How many different languages does the 2% of truly indigenous Venezuelans speak?	around 29
Why are the languages of the indigenous peoples of Venezuela in danger of becoming extinct?	groups are very small
Who were the most advanced native people to have lived in what is present-day Venezuela?	Timoto-cuicas
What made the Timoto-cuicas so advanced?	agricultural techniques used
What remains a controversy regarding how to refer to the indigenous peoples of the Americas?	The Native American name
How may subsets of peoples be named?	shared language, region, or historical relationship
Many of what have been used to refer to the indigenous peoples of the Americas?	English exonyms
Who used foreign language terms to give names to indigenous peoples?	earlier explorers and colonists
Why were pejorative terms sometimes used for the native populations?	out of prejudice and fear
What have the peoples in the Americas been more vocal about since the 20th century?	the ways they wish to be referred to
What terms do the indigenous people press to eliminate?	obsolete, inaccurate, or racist.
Who initially proposed using the term "Native American" to recognize the primacy of the native population?	United States government
What naming convention is accepted by all indigenous groups?	none
Where has there been a rise of indigenous movements in recent years?	the Americas (mainly South America)
What do the organizing groups hope to obtain for themselves?	preservation of their culture
What is an example of a movement which is working to obtain rights for Amazonian populations everywhere?	Indian Council of South America
Where can similar movements for indigenous rights be seen?	Canada and the United States,
Who started a forum in support of Morales' legal process of change?	Representatives
What did the meeting condemn plans by the Europeans to do?	destabilize the country
What did the forum express for Morales and his proposed changes?	solidarity
What did the forum question about US interference?	diplomats and NGOs
What was the forum suspicious of?	plots against Bolivia and other countries
What does the genetic history of indigenous peoples of the Americas primarily focus on?	Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups
How is Y-DNA passed along?	patrilineal line
What is the only way that Y-DNA and mtDNA change?	chance mutation
Which type of DNA is passed from the mother to offspring of both genders?	mtDNA
What is AtDNA generally only used to measure?	average continent-of-ancestry
Who have studies of the mtDNA of Turkic-speaking peoples shown they're closest to genetically?	Amerindians
What group were the ancestors of the American Indians separated from?	Asian population
When did the ancestors of the American Indians separate from their parent population?	Middle Paleolithic
When did research find evidence for a common ancestry between Native Americans and Altaians?	2012
What DNA analysis indicated the common ancestry of the Native Americans?	mitochondrial DNA and Y-Chromosome
What did human settlement of the New World occur in?	stages
How long of a layover did the human nomads have in Beringia?	15,000 to 20,000-year
What do the diversity and distributions of Y lineage specific to South America indicate about certain peoples there?	isolated since the initial colonization of the region
What population has mtDNA and atDNA mutations, making them distinct from other indigenous peoples of the Americas?	Alaskan
What does the DNA evidence suggest about the migrants into the northern extremes of North America?	later migrant populations
When was a study about the DNA of a young boy published in Nature?	2013
How old was the young boy's remains?	24,000-year-old
What culture was the boy from?	Mal'ta-Buret'
What may one-third of the indigenous Americans ancestry be traced back to?	western Eurasians
What percent of Native American ancestry may originate through gene flow from the Mal'ta-Buret' population?	14 to 38 percent
What is more likely than the Solutrean hypothesis?	route through Beringia
What supports a scenario of dual origin for Paleo-Indians?	similarities in ages and geographical distributions
What is C4c deeply rooted in the Asian portion of?	the mtDNA phylogeny
When did Kashani and others make their statement regarding the similarities for C4c distributions?	2012
Because C4c and X2a are characterized by parallel genetic histories means what controversial hypothesis may be dismissed?	an Atlantic glacial entry route into North America
What 2 continents meet at Egypt?	Africa and southwest corner of Asia
What land bridge between Asian and Africa?	Sinai Peninsula
How larger is Egypt?	1,010,408 square kilometres
What Sea borders Egypt to the east?	Red Sea
What country borders Egypt to the south?	Sudan
How far back does Egypt's history date back?	tenth millennium BC
Why is Egypt considered a cradle of civilisation?	earliest developments of writing, agriculture, urbanisation, organised religion and central government
What were some of Egypt's foreign influences?	Greek, Persian, Roman, Arab, Ottoman, and European
What are iconic monumuents of Egypt?	Giza Necropolis and its Great Sphinx
In what century were islamic conquests of Egypt?	seventh century
How many inhabitants does Egypt have?	over 90 million
What is the rank of Egypt popultaion among African nations?	third-most populous in Africa
Majority of Egypt people live near what river?	Nile River
What desert constitutes most of Egypt territory?	Sahara desert
What leader stepped down in 2011?	President Hosni Mubarak
What party rose to power after 2011 resignation of Egypt leader?	Muslim Brotherhood
What economic sectors does Egypt have?	tourism, agriculture, industry and services
What influence does Egypt have?	cultural, political, and military influence in North Africa, the Middle East and the Muslim world
What is the Egyptian Arabic name for Egypt?	Miṣr
What is the Hebrew name for Egypt?	מִצְרַיִם
What is the oldest term for Egypt?	Akkadian
What does the oldest know term for Egypt translate to?	"border" or "frontier".
During 6000 BC what area was occupied by a Neolithic culture?	Nile Valley
What culture succeeded the Naqada culture?	Badarian culture
When is the earliest hieroglyghics date back?	3200 BC
How long did cultures coexist in lower Egypt?	more than two thousand years
How long was the upheval of the first Intermediate period?	150 years
In 1650 BC Lower Egypt was control by what invaders?	Hyksos
What new capital was founded in 1650, lower Egypt?	Avaris
What was the first foreign ruling dynasty of Egypt?	Semitic Hyksos
What year were the New Kingdom in control?	1550–1070 BC
What dynasty maked the rise of Egypt as international power?	Eighteenth Dynasty
Who were some well known Pharaohs of the New Kindom?	Hatshepsut, Thutmose III, Akhenaten and his wife Nefertiti, Tutankhamun and Ramesses II
Who were some of the invaders to Egypt during the New Kingdom?	Libyans, Nubians and Assyrians
Who took control of Egypt in 525 BC?	Achaemenid Persians
What pharaoh was captured by the group led by Camyses II?	Psamtik III
From where did Camyses II rule Egypt?	Susa in Persia
What was the duration of the 27th dynasty of Egypt?	525 BC to 402 BC,
What were the reaches of the Ptolemaic Kingdom?	Syria in the east, to Cyrene to the west, and south to the frontier with Nubia
What were leaders known as during Ptolemaic Kingdom?	Pharaohs
What was the capital in the Prolemaic Kingdom?	Alexandria
What religious life was the Ptolemaic Kingdom?	Egyptian
Who was last ruler of Ptolemaic Kingdom?	Cleopatra VII
Who captured Alexandria, ending Ptolemaic rule?	Octavian
How did Mark Anthony's love die?	suicide
What culture annexed Egypt?	Rome
Who took control of Egypt from Sasanian Persian rule?	Byzantines
What war gave Sasanin Persians control of Egypt?	Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628
How long were Sasanin Persians ruling Egypt?	ten years
What religion did Arabs bring to Egypt?	Sunni Islam
Who modernized Egyptian army?	Muhammad Ali Pasha
In what 2 ways was Army improved?	strengthening it with numbers and in skill
Why did military use barracks?	to avoid distraction of their growth
What traits grew among military men that helped Ali maintain rule?	nationalism and pride
When was Suez canal completed?	1869
Who partnered with Egypt to build Suez Canal?	French
In what year did Egypt sell its portion of Suez Canal?	1875
Who sold Egypt's portion of Suez?	Ismail
To whom did Egypt sell its interest in Suez Canal?	British Government
When was new constitution drafted?	1923
What system of government was constitution based on?	parliamentary system
Who was elected in 1924?	Saad Zaghlul
Who succeeded King Farouk?	his son Fuad
How long did British military presence remain in Egypt?	1954
In what year did Egypt and Syria Form a sovereign union?	1958
What was the sovereign union with Syria known?	United Arab Republic
How long did the union with Syria last?	1961
Who found the claims of Israeli attack baseless?	Mohamed Fawzi
How many steps did Nasser take in preparation for war?	three successive steps
Who warned of impending Israeli attack on Syria in May 1967?	Soviet Union i
On what day did Nasser state "The battle will be a general one and our basic objective will be to destroy Israel?"	23 May
How many rich, upper class were in Egypt in 1950s?	less than half a million
How many middle class were in Egypt in 1950s	four million
How many lower class were in Egypt in 1950s	17 million
What professions made up the buld on middle class under Nasser?	Doctors, engineers, teachers, lawyers, journalists
What direction did the Egypt economy take in the 1960s?	went from sluggish to the verge of collapse
When did Nasser die?	1970
Who succeeded Nasser?	Anwar Sadat
Which side of the Cold War was Sadat?	United States,
What was the October War?	surprise attack to regain part of the Sinai territory Israel had captured 6 years earlier
What did Sadat exchange for the remainder of Sinai?	peace with Israel
What was encouraged through Infitah?	foreign investment
What tools did Infitah use to attract investment?	reduced taxes and import tariffs
What was largely ignored and upset many of Sadat's polidy?	elimination of subsidies on basic foodstuffs
What occured in 1977?	Egyptian Bread Riots.
What group dominated the political scene when Mubarak was in power?	National Democratic Party,
What laws created in 1990s impacted culture?	1993 Syndicates Law, 1995 Press Law, and 1999 Nongovernmental Associations Law
When did parliamentary politics become irrelevant in Egypt?	late 1990s
What did constitutional changes in 2007 prohibit?	parties from using religion as a basis for political activity
What was Dr. Ali El Deen Hilal Dessouki's position?	Media Secretary of the National Democratic Party
What was the long term goal for Egypt?	democracy
What presidential powers were included in 2007 law changes?	power to dissolve parliament and end judicial election monitoring
When was interim government instituted?	18 January 2014
What was the support by voters for referendum?	98.1%
Who was elected President in 2014?	Abdel Fattah el-Sisi
What group boycotted the elections?	Muslim Brotherhood and some liberal and secular activist groups
When does most of Egypts rain fall?	winter months
Where does snow fall in Egypt?	Sinai's mountains and some of the north coastal cities
When was the last snow fall in Cairo?	13 December 2013,
What is the sunniest county in the world?	Egypt
How many species of plants were recorded in Egypt?	2426
How many species of fungi were recorded in Egypt?	627
How many species of algae were recorded in Egypt?	1483
How many species of animals were recorded in Egypt?	15,000
How many species of protazoa were recorded in Egypt?	371
What branch of government are the House of Representatives focused on?	legislation
What percent of votes did el-Sisi get?	96.91%
What tems do House of Representatives serve?	five-year terms
Who came in second place in election for Egypt president to es-Sisi?	Hamdeen Sabahi
Who were primary targets of Egypt terrorist attacks?	Christian Copts, foreign tourists and government officials
What was the name of a high profile terrorist group in Egypt in 1990s?	Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya
What sector of economy was plagued by terrorism attacks?	tourism
When was new constitution institutionalised?	18 January 2014
How long are presidential terms?	four-year term
How many terms may a president serve?	2 terms
Who may impeach the president?	parliament
what may not be basis for political party?	religion, race, gender or geography
Where does Egypt rank for Religious freedom according to Pew Forum?	fifth worst
What percentage of Egyptians polled support death penalty for those leaving Islam?	84%
What violation could result in stoning and was supported by 82% of Egyptian responders?	adultery
What trend has Egypt healthcare made recently?	great strides forward
How much of ppopulation can be covered by immunization programs?	98%
What was life expectancy in 1960s?	44.8 years
What was the life expectancy in 2009?	72.12 years
What direction has infant mortality rate taken?	noticeable decline
According to QS World University Rankings where does Cairo University rank?	551-600
According to QS World University Rankings, where does American University in Cairo rank?	360
According to QS World University Rankings and Al-Azhar University, Alexandria University and Ain Shams University are all ranked where?	701+ range
What is the aim of new research institutes?	modernising research
What do Coptic Christians face?	discrimination at multiple levels of the government,
When government computerised ID cards who were adversely impacted?	religious minorities
When did Egyptian court rule that members of other faiths could obtain ID cards without listing faith?	2008
what controversial practice does Egypt actively administer as punishment?	capital punishment
What was Muslim Brotherhood labelled post coup?	terrorist organisation
In March 2014 what number of people were sentenced to death in a single hearing?	529
What former president's supporters are set to be executed?	Mohamed Morsi
What US president was critical of Egypt's repression of Muslim Brotherhood?	US president Barack Obama
How many individuals did one judge in Minya governatorate court sentence to death in April 2013?	1,212
What was the criticism of judge Mohammad NAgi Shatata sentence of 188 member of Muslim Brotherhood for assaulting police station?	lack of fair trials, that often last only a few minutes
How much military assistance di US give Egypt in 2015?	US$1.3 billion
What event soured relations of US and Egypt in 2013?	Egypt's violent crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood and its supporters
Equipment from what country is being replaced?	Soviet Union
How many factories does Egyptian military have?	dozens
After Morsi removal, what country has Egypt improved relations with?	Russia
In 2014 what country did Egypt form partnership with?	China
Where is the Arab League headquarters?	Cairo
Who is the leader of Arab League?	Nabil el-Araby
What 2 Gulf monarchies have pledged billions of dollars to help Egypt overcome recent economic difficulties?	United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia
What country has Egypt famously had peace with since 1973 treaty?	Israel
Is Israel considered a safe state for egyptians?	still widely considered as a hostile
What rope has Egypt played in Middle East peace efforts?	mediator
What areas of economy is Egypt dependent on?	agriculture, media, petroleum imports, natural gas, and tourism
Where do Egyptians working abroad work mainly?	Saudi Arabia, the Persian Gulf and Europe
What lake reulted from completion of Aswan High Dam?	Lake Nasser
What year was Aswan High Dam completed?	1970
Is Egypt able to sustain just from its own energy production?	has been a net oil importer since 2008
How much coal is mine yearly in northeast Sinai?	600,000 tonnes
What efforts were made in 2013 to maintain sustainability?	cut exports of natural gas and tell major industries to slow output this summer to avoid an energy crisis
What is Egypts energy market based upon?	coal, oil, natural gas, and hydro power
What has been the trend lately in the Egypt economy?	improve considerably
What area of business have boomed lately in Egypt?	stock market
What was change made to corporate taxes in 2005?	decreased corporate taxes from 40% to the current 20%
What ws the overall impact to tax revenue from change of corporate tax rate?	100% increase in tax revenue by the year 2006
How much had FDI increased to in 2006?	$6 billion
Since 2011 direction has Forign direct investment gone?	drastic fall
What has been the change in foreign exhange reserves since 2011?	60% drop
What has been the overall growth of economy since 2011?	3% drop
To what extent does wealth reach from affluent down to average population?	limited trickle down
Who do Egyptians blame for higher prices, while purchasing power and standard of living are stagnate?	government
Where did Egyptian plan to get funds to use for reconstruction of infrastructure?	newly acquired third mobile license ($3 billion) by Etisalat
Where did Egypt rank in Corruption perceptions Index in 2013?	114 out of 177
What are Egypt's 2 most prominent multinational compnaies?	Orascom Group and Raya Contact Center
What sector has expanded radiply by selling outsourcing services to North America and Europe?	information technology (IT)
What has stimulated IT sector?	new Egyptian entrepreneurs with government encouragement
Where are Egyptian beaches situated?	Mediterranean and the Red Sea
How far do Egyptian beaches extend?	3,000 km
What Egypt located body of water is known for its serenity?	Red Sea
What locations on Egypt's northern coast are major tourist destinations for recreational tourism?	Dahab, Ras Sidr, Marsa Alam, Safaga
How much oil is Egypt producing in a day?	691,000 bbl/d
How much natural gas is Egypt producing in a day?	2,141.05 Tcf
Where does Egypt rank among oil and natural gas sonsumers in Africa?	largest consumer
Where is Egypt planning to build is first nuclear power plant?	El Dabaa city
What is consideredt the most important part of maritime transport in middle east?	The Suez Canal
Is the Suez Canal natural?	artificial sea-level waterway
What 2 bodies of water does Suez connect?	Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea
When was Suez canal completed?	November 1869
How long is Suez canal?	193.30 km (120.11 mi)
How deep is Suez canal?	24 m (79 ft)
How wide is Suez canal?	205 metres (673 ft)
How many locks are contained in Suez Canal?	no locks
What direction does the canal north of Bitter lakes flow?	north in winter and south in summer
What basic part of civilization has been characterized by achievement and challenges?	Drinking water supply and sanitation
From 1990 to 2010 what was improvement in piped water supply to urban areas?	89% to 100%
From 1990 to 2010 what was improvement in piped water supply to rural areas?	39% to 93%
Currently how much of Egypt's population is connected to sanitary sewers?	99%
Because of low sanitation coverage 17,000 Egyptian children to die each year from what condition?	diarrhoea
Relative to other countries of world how do Egypts's water tariffs compare?	among the lowest in the world
Due to low waer tariffs, what is required to maintain water treatment operation?	government subsidies
What is the largest ethnic group in Egypt?	Ethnic Egyptians
What are the minorities that live in eastern deserts of Egypt?	Abazas, Turks, Greeks, Bedouin Arab tribes
Where are Dom clans mostly gathered?	Nile Delta and Faiyum
Approximately how many rufugees and asylum seekers are in Egypt?	between 500,000 and 3 million
What cities house several important Jewish archaelogical sites?	Cairo, Alexandria and other cities
How may Palestinian refugees are in Egypt?	70,000
How many recent Iraqi refugees are in Egypt?	150,000
What is official language of Egypt?	Modern Standard Arabic
What are main laguages of immigrants?	Greek, Armenian and Italian
In the 19th century, what city of Egypt was a large community of Italian Egyptians?	Alexandria
What are the three most spoken languages in Egypt?	Egyptian Arabic (68%), Sa'idi Arabic (29%), Eastern Egyptian Bedawi Arabic (1.6%)
Prior to 7th century, what was primary religion of Egypt?	Christian
What became the main source of law with increasing Islamic influence in Egypt?	Sharia
Under what leader did Islam become official religion of Egypt?	Anwar Sadat
What church do 90% of Christian minority in Egypt belong?	Coptic Orthodox Church
Where are other Non-native Christian communities found?	urban regions of Cairo and Alexandria
What do Syro-Lebanese belong to?	Greek Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Maronite Catholic denominations
What 3 religions does Egypt recognise?	Islam, Christianity, and Judaism
What recognition do Baha'i and Hmadi community get from Egyptian government?	are not recognised by the state
Until what year did some minorities need to lie about religion or not get mandatory state issued ID?	2008
What color was frequently used in Egyptian designs?	Egyptian blue
What art required adherence to rigid code?	wall paintings done in the service of the Pharaohs
What is the main performing arts venue in Egyptian capital?	The Cairo Opera House
Who designed the Pyramid of Djoser?	Imhotep
Who was the first to develop literature?	Egyptians
What syles did writers in Arabic literature experiment with first?	modern styles
What was the first modern Egyptian novel?	Zaynab
When was Munammad Huayn Haykal's first modern novel published?	1913
Who financed Studio Misr?	Talaat Harb
In more that 100 years how many films have been produced in Egypt?	4000 films
In what year was Studio Misr founded?	1936
What share of Arab productions have come from Egypt?	three quarters
What elements mix for Egyptian music?	indigenous, Mediterranean, African and Western
Who is credited with invention of music by ancient Egyptians?	Hathor
What artist are considered the golden age of Egyptian music?	Abdu El Hamouli, Almaz and Mahmoud Osman, who influenced the later work of Sayed Darwish, Umm Kulthum, Mohammed Abdel Wahab and Abdel Halim Hafez
What is more contemporary Egyptian Pop Singer?	Amr Diab and Mohamed Mounir
What is the oldest era in Egypt?	prehistoric
How many museums are found in Egypt?	at least 60
What are some examples of Ages in Egypt?	Pharonic, Roman, Greek, Islamic
What is koshari?	mixture of rice, lentils, and macaroni
What can be added to koshari?	Fried onions
What is a polular green soup of Egypt?	mulukhiyya
What beans are used to make falafel?	Fava bean
What is the most popular sport in Egypt?	Football
What is one of the toughest derbies in the world, run in Egypt?	The Cairo Derby
In terms of international trophies, whos is the most successful club?	Al Ahly
What was the last international competition Egypt hosted?	2009 FIFA U-20 World Cup
Who holds Guiness record for Deepest salt water scuba dive?	Ahmed Gabr
How deep did Gabr dive?	1,066 feet down
In what body of water did Gabr dive?	Red Sea
What millennium did Mosaic start?	the 3rd millennium BC
What kind of mosaic were made in Tiryns?	Pebble mosaics
Who besides the Romans did the Jewish people get influenced by?	Byzantine
When did mosaic fall out of fashion?	the Renaissance
The Norman kingdomwas in what italian city state?	Sicily
The pebble mosaics found at Tiyns are from what age?	Bronze age
The Beauty of Durres is in what country?	Albania
The famous artists Sosus was from what area?	Pergamon
When was the Greek figure style mostly formed?	the 3rd century BC
When was the famous mosaic "The Beauty of Durres" created?	the 4th-century BC
What common artform is far more prestigious than mosaic?	paintings
Which culture adapted the use of mosaics for large ground coverings in their villas?	the Romans
Most names of Roman mosaic workers are what nationality?	Greek
Often regular everyday craftsman were most likely what?	slaves
Carthage and Tunisia are in what general area?	North Africa
What type of mosaic uses small tesserae?	opus vermiculatum
What were small panel mosaics known as?	emblemata
What was the name of the mosaic technique that used larger tesserae?	opus tessellatum
What was the benefit of using small pieces to create a mosaic?	very fine detail
Why were black and white pieces used in most italian mosaics?	cheaper than fully coloured work
Which caesar hired builders to construct the Domus Aurea?	Nero
When did figure wall mosaics become the highest form of artistic expression?	the Christian era
The church of Santa Costanza is in what country?	Rome
When was the Domus Aurea constructed?	64 AD
The imperial family of Rome used the church of Santa Costanza as what?	a mausoleum
In what area of Italy is the largest collection of mosaics in the world?	Sicily
Who most likely lived in the large villa rustica?	Emperor Maximian
What caused the mosaics at the villa rustica to be protected for centuries?	a landslide
How long is the hunting scene at the villa rustica?	64m
Where in Sicily were the "Orpheus," and the "Four Seasons" discovered?	Piazza Vittoria in Palermo
What scenes are depicted on the Zliten mosaic?	gladiatorial contests
When was the Zliten mosaic discovered?	1913
How long was the mural discovered in Libya?	30 ft
The mosaics uncovered in Libya were from which century?	1st or 2nd century AD
The gladiator mosaic is on par with the Alexander mosaic in which city?	Pompeii
Around what century were mosaics adapted for Christian churches?	the late 4th century
What Christian church besides the Santa Costanza was built in the 4th century?	Santa Pudenziana
What was the original function of the Santa Costanza church?	a mausoleum
In which basilica is the Tomb of Julii?	St Peter's Basilica
Under what period were the 4th century churches built?	Constantinian
Which city besides Ravenna served as the capital of the Western Roman Empire?	Milan
What is the name of the mosaic in the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio?	apse
The shrine of San Vittore in ciel d'oro had mosaics from which century?	the 5th century
Who do the mosaics at the the basilica of San Lorenzo depict as being abducted?	Elijah
When was the baptistry at the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio demolished?	the 15th century
In the 5th century what was the capital of the Western Roman Empire?	Ravenna
What years was the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia decorated with mosaics?	425–430
What other famous landmark in Ravenna was established by Galla Placidia?	the church of San Giovanni Evangelista
Why did Galla Placidia erect the church of San Giovanni Evangelista?	fulfillment of a vow
When were most of the mosaics at the church of San Giovanni Evangelista destroyed?	1747
When was Ravenna conquered by the Eastern Roman Empire?	After 539
When did the biggest achievement in Christian mosaics take place?	the second half of the 6th century
What event led up to the creation of the amazing mosaics in in the Basilica of San Vitale?	the Byzantine conquest
When were the mosaics at the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare created?	549
Where are the remains of the apse mosaic of San Michele?	Berlin
The floor mosaic in Butrint is how much older than that of the Baptistry?	almost a generation
In what country is Butrint?	Albania
What type of message was left on the mosaics at Butrint?	prayer
The Vrina Plain basilica is in which city?	Butrint
What was the mosaic at Butrint designed to portray?	a terrestrial paradise
What was depicted on the Butrint mosaics in abundance?	natural life
What do the katharos vase and vine refer to?	the eucharist
What do peacocks represent in Christian symbolism?	paradise and resurrection
What do most sea-creatures represent in Christina symbolism?	baptism
What did deers or stags represent in Christian Symbolism?	the faithful aspiring to Christ
When did conditions become difficult for mosaic art in Rome?	the Early Middle Ages
When was the mosaic of Sant'Agata dei Goti destroyed?	1589
What was similar between the three most important 5th century mosaics?	iconography
When was the mosaic at Santa Sabina replaced with a fresco?	1559
Who was the artist that painted the fresco that replaced the mosaic at Santa Sobina?	Taddeo Zuccari
During which centuries did ROme fall under the influence of Byzantine art?	the 7th–9th centuries
The lateran Palace was decorated with what?	mosaics
What do most mosaics from the 7th-9th centuries have in common?	They were all destroyed later
Which mosaic survived through the 9th century, and then had a copy made in the 18th?	Triclinio Leoniano
When was the mosaic at the church of Santo Stefano del Cacco destroyed?	1607
When were the mosaics at the Great Palace of Constantinople commissioned?	during Justinian's reign
What is considered the most important surviving mosaic of the Justinian age?	The portrait of a moustached man
What was the small vaulted room in the Great Palace of Constantinople called?	small sekreton
Vine Scroll motifs are classified under what kind of tradition?	Classical
When were the mosaics at the church in Thessaloniki created?	5th–6th centuries
How many Byzantine mosaics survived past the 8th century?	Very few
The mosaic in the church in Thessaloniki is know as what?	Christ in majesty (or Ezekiel's Vision)
When were the panels in the Hagios Demetrios Church created?	between 634 and 730
Why was Christ in majesty protected from the iconoclastic destruction?	hidden behind mortar
What is common about the surviving mosaics from the 7th-9th centuries?	almost all represent Saint Demetrius
What was the common mosaic theme of iconoclastic churches?	gold mosaics with only one great cross
Why were mosaics destroyed in the iconoclastic era?	condemned as idolatry
When did the Iconodules  change the cross in the Hagia Sophia?	787–797
When did the Hagia Irene adapt the iconoclastic era mosaics?	after 740
When was the Dormition church destroyed?	1922
Where is the Nea Moni Monastery located?	Chios
Who established the Nea Moni Monastery?	Constantine Monomachos
When was the Nea Moni Monastery established?	1043–1056
When was the mosaic at the Nea Moni Monastery destroyed?	1822
The Nea Moni mosaics are more detailed than what what other famous mosaics?	Osios Loukas
Who restored the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in the 1040's?	Constantine Monomachos
Who left the only description of the mosaics at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre?	the Russian abbot Daniel
What survives of the mosaics that adorned the walls and dome of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre?	Nothing
Where did the Russian abbot Daniel travel in 1106-07?	Jerusalem
When were the Byzantine mosaics of the Hagia Sophia created?	The 9th- and 10th-century
The tympana under the dome had images of whom displayed?	prophets, saints and patriarchs
What does the Empress give to Christ as depicted by the mosaic?	a bulging money sack
When did the Empress Zoe die?	1055
Who was depicted with the Empress Zoe on a panel in the gallery of the Hagia Sophia?	Constantine Monomachos
Why are there so few surviving mosaics from the Komnenian period?	accidents of survival
Where is the only existing 12th century mosaic in Constantinople?	Hagia Sophia
The empress Eirene had what color hair?	red
What deity does the 12th century mosaic in the Hagia Sophia depict?	the Theotokos
The only surviving mosaic from the Komnenos dynasty outside Constantinople is in what church?	the cathedral of Serres
How big were the tesserae in the Komnenian period miniature mosaic icons?	1 mm or less
What were the tesserae usually set in for miniature mosaic icons?	wax or resin
The more humanistic conception of Christ appeared when?	in the 12th century
What was the intended purpose of the miniature mosaic icons?	private devotion
When was the Church of the Holy Apostles built?	1310–14
Who removed the gold tesserae in the background of the mosaic at the Church of the Holy Apostles?	some vandal
Where is the Theotokos Paregoritissa Church located?	Arta
Who established the Theotokos Paregoritissa Church in 1294-96?	the Despot of Epirus
The same team of mosaicists worked on the Church of the Holy Apostles in Thessaloniki as which other building?	Pammakaristos
where is the greatest mosaic work of the renaissance?	the Chora Church in Constantinople
How many mosaic panels from naos have survived?	three
The panels of naos are only capped in importance by which other location?	the Hagia Sophia
Who commissioned the mosaics at naos?	Theodore Metochites
The panels from naos show what influence on Byzantine art.	Italian trecento
When was the last period of Roman mosaic art?	the 12th–13th century
Where is the church of Santa maria?	Trastevere
Who does the facade at the Santa Maria church depict?	Christ and Mary
When were the mosaics at Torriti and Jacopo fully restored?	in 1884
What year was the medallion above the gate of the church of San Tommaso?	1210
Who created the Navicella mosaic in the Old St. Peter's church?	Giotto di Bondone
Who commissioned the Navicella mosaic?	Cardinal Jacopo Stefaneschi
Who did the navicella mosaic depict walking on water?	St. Peter
What century was the majority of the Navicella mosaic destroyed?	the 17th
Navicella means what in Italian?	"little ship"
Why did the Normans adopt a Byzantine art style?	enhance the somewhat dubious legality of their rule
when was the height of mosaic art in sicily?	the 12th century
Who was influenced by Western European and Islamic tendencies?	Greek masters working in Sicily
Who adopted the Byzantine mosaic tradition?	Norman kings
The Martorana church is an example of the best mosaic art in what part italy?	Sicily
When was the Martorana church decorated?	around 1143
Who is featured in the mosaic at the Martorana church?	Christ
The Martorana church was likely decorated by the same greek masters who decorated which church?	the Cappella Palatina
Who was the founder of the Martorana church?	Georgios of Antiochia
Who is receiving a crown from christ in the mosaic originally in the narthex?	Roger II
What is the name of the largest mosaics in Italy?	The Monreale mosaics
At least how many tesserae are used in the the Monreale mosaics?	100 million
Who commissioned the Monreale mosaics between 1176 and 1186?	King William II of Sicily
Who is displayed getting crowned by christ in the Monreale mosaics?	King William II
What is the king offering Theotokos in the Monreale mosaics?	the model of the cathedral
What region of italy was part of the Norman empire?	Southern
The only surviving mosaic from Norman held souther Italy is what?	pavement of the Otranto Cathedral
The mosaics in churches of Ravello prove what?	mosaic art was widespread
What year were the mosaic pavements installed at the Otranto Cathedral?	1166
What survives from the mosaics of Amalfi's Norman Cathedral?	Only fragments
Which area in Italy besides Sicily did mosaic art not go out of fashion in the middle ages?	Venice
Which church in Venice is decorated with elaborate golden mosaics?	St Mark's Basilica
When were the oldest scenes in St. Mark's mosaics completed?	the late 11th century
The majority of the mosaics in Venice were created by who?	local artists
When was the sack of Constantinople?	1204
Where is the Cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta?	Torcello
When were the mosaics in the Cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta built?	the 12th century
Where is the Basilica of Santi Maria e Donato located?	Murano
Who purchased the 13th century mosaic from the the San Cipriano Church?	Frederick William IV of Prussia
Where did Frederick William IV relocate the mural he purchased?	the Friedenskirche of Potsdam
Who hired Byzantine experts to decorate a rebuilt abbey church?	The Abbot of Monte Cassino
After what time did the Abbot of Monte Cassino send for Byzantine mosaicists?	1066
What animal was on the only surviving mosaics created by the greeks at the rebuilt abbey?	greyhounds
Where are the only remaining greek mosaic panels now kept?	in the Monte Cassino Museum
What was special about St Mark's Basilica in Venice?	façades were also decorated
When was the latest addition to the facade at St Mark's Basilica in Venice?	from 1270–75
the Cathedral of Orvieto has a mosaic facade, done first in which century?	the 14th
The Cathedral of Spoleto is signed by who?	Solsternus
the Basilica di San Frediano in Lucca has a large golden mosaic facade depicting which figure?	Christ
What proves mosaics were used in the early middle ages?	scant remains
Where is the Abbey of Saint-Martial?	Limoges
When was the crypt of the Abbey of Saint-Martial re-discovered?	the 1960s
What was found under the Basilica of Saint-Quentin?	9th century mosaic
What common element do mosaic panels from the 11th century have?	simple colors
What would replace the labor intensive technique of mosaic?	fresco
When was the the mosaic at the Royal Basilica of Hungarian Kings destroyed?	the 17th century
Who created the Last judgement mosaic in the St. Vitus Cathedral?	Venetian craftsmen
What is the Royal Basilica of the Hungarian kings also known as?	Alba Regia
Where is the Royal Basilica of the Hungarian kings?	Székesfehérvár
Where is the Church of the Holy Sepulchre located?	Jerusalem
Where is the mosaic "Ascension of Christ" located?	in the Latin Chapel
What nation influenced the Crusaders mosaic styles?	Byzantine
What is the name of the lone surviving mosaic of the Crusader period?	"Ascension of Christ"
The Byzantine emperor, the king of Jerusalem and the Latin Church came together in what year to redecorate the Church of the Holy Sepulchre?	1169
when were mosaic pavements uncovered at the Bizere Monastery?	2003
Where would the Bizere Monastery be located today?	Romania
When were the mosaics at Bizere Monastery created?	between the 10th and 11th century
In what kingdom was the Bizere Monastery located?	Hungary
How is Raphael portrayed in St. Peter's?	by a mosaic replica of this last painting
What year did Pietro Paolo Cristofari die?	1743
What was the art of the Fabbrica usually used for?	papal gifts
What was the name of the painting used to represent raphael in St. Peter's?	Transfiguration
The mosaics of St.Peter's are often based on what?	designs or canvases
What is the most important mosaic piece built by Byzantine Christians?	the Madaba Map
When was the the Madaba Map made?	between 542 and 570
Where is the church of Saint George?	Madaba, Jordan
When was the Madaba Map rediscovered?	1894
The Madaba Map depicts as far South as the Nile delta, and as far North as what country?	Lebanon
What era were the mosaics that adorned Saint Catherine's Monastery?	Justinian
Where is Saint Catherine's Monastery located?	Mount Sinai in Egypt
Why have wall mosaics generally not survived in the region?	the destruction of buildings
Who is depicted in Saint Catherine's Monastery on a mosaic landscape background?	Moses
When was the mosaic at Saint Catherine's Monastery created?	in 565/6
Which city had the highest percentage of mosaic covered churches?	Jerusalem
Where was the Armenian Mosaic found in Jerusalem?	near Damascus Gate
What type of plant is depicted in the Armenian Mosaic?	a vine with many branches
When was the Armenian Mosaic re-discovered?	1894
What was the room under the Armenian Mosaic used for?	mortuary chapel
Where would the Byzantine church of the Lazarium be located today?	Bethany
When was the Byzantine church of the Lazarium constructed?	between 333 and 390
The mosaic at the Byzantine church of the Lazarium most closely resembles mosaics from which area?	Palestine
A church was built on top of the Byzantine church of the Lazarium in waht century?	the 6th
The churches of which desert decorated their monasteries with mosaics?	the Judean
When was the Monastery of Martyrius created?	the end of the 5th century
When was the Monastery of Martyrius re-discovered?	in 1982–85
Where in the Monastery of Martyrius is the most important mosaic work?	the refectory
What was the name of the monastery that was discovered in 1930?	Monastery of Euthymius
How many Christian churches have been found in the Christian Petra?	three
When was the most important Byzantine church re-discovered?	in 1990
What type of mosaics were present in the church discovered in 1990?	only the floor panels
What century was the oldest known mosaic at the church discovered in 1990?	the 5th
The scenes depicted on the mosaics were both native and what kind of mythological animals?	exotic
Where would the Church of St Stephen be located today?	Umm ar-Rasas
When were the mosaics in the Church of St Stephen created?	in 785
When were the mosaics in the Church of St Stephen re-discovered?	1986
The mosaic floor in the Church of St Stephen is the largest in what country?	Jordan
How many artists signed the frame of the mosaic at the Church of St Stephen?	Six
Yaroslav held what title in medieval Russia?	Grand Prince of the Kievan Rus'
Where did Yaroslav build his Cathedral?	Kiev
What was used as a model for the church Yaroslav commissioned?	the Hagia Sophia
What was the name of the church Yaroslav commissioned?	Saint Sophia Cathedral
Who sent the Byzantine craftsmen that built Yaroslav's cathedral?	Constantine Monomachos
In what country is the the Gelati Monastery located?	Georgia
Who started construction on the Gelati Monastery?	king David IV
Who eventually oversaw completion of the Gelati Monastery?	Demetrius I of Georgia
Who was the central theme of the mosaics at Tsromi?	Christ
The remains of what was found at Sepphoris?	a 6th-century synagogue
Who were the primary inhabitants of Sepphoris in the 3rd through 7th centuries?	Jews
The mosaic found at Sepphoris display a mix of Jewish and which beliefs?	pagan
What figure is dominant in the mosaic at Sepphoris?	Helios
What surrounds Helios in the mosaic at Sepphoris?	a Jewish month
When was the synagogue in Eshtemoa constructed?	around the 4th century
What patterns are present on the mosaic at the synagogue in Eshtemoa?	only floral and geometric
When was the synagogue in Khirbet Susiya re-discovered?	in 1971–72
How many panels are in the synagogue in Khirbet Susiya?	three
What do the images at synagogue in Khirbet Susiya suggest about the communities views?	rather conservative
In Byzantine Gaza, Jews were relaxed on what ban?	figurative depiction
Where were ancient remains of a synagogue found in 1966?	in the ancient harbour area
The mosaic found in 1966 depicts who as the central figure?	King David as Orpheus
What is the central figure doing in the mosaic found in 1966?	playing a lyre
When was the mosaic floor constructed?	in 508/509
A 5th-century building in Huldah is believed to be what?	a Samaritan synagogue
What does the mosaic at Huldah contain?	typical Jewish symbols
What language are the inscriptions on the mosaic at Huldah?	Greek
The synagogue located in Bet She'an had what kind of symbols depicted in its mosaic?	cultic
The masters who built the floor in the synagogue at Bet She'an also constructed what other mosaic?	the floor of the Beit Alfa synagogue
Who conquered the Eastern Provinces of the Byzantine empire?	Muslim
What would later become the main Islamic form of wall decoration?	tile
In Syria and Egypt, other than early Christians, who influenced their mosaic work?	Roman
The Umayyad Dynasty made mosaic making do what in the Islamic culture?	remained a flourishing art form
Where is the most important Islamic mosaic work?	the Umayyad Mosque
Where is the the Umayyad Mosque located?	Damascus
What was the significance of Damascus during this time period?	capital of the Arab Caliphate
What is the largest section of mosaic still present in the Umayyad Mosque?	the "Barada Panel"
What happened in 1893 that destroyed most of the mosaics in the mosque?	a fire
Any mosaic having secular designs were likely what?	floor panels
What were the floor panels of the caliphs and high ranking officials modeled after?	Roman country villas
Where can the most superb example of Umayyad mosaic floor paneling?	the bath house of Hisham's Palace
In which present day country would the residence of Al-Walid II in Qasr al-Hallabat be?	Jordan
At Qastal in 2000 the earliest examples of what were found in Jordan?	Umayyad mosaics
Where are some of the best examples of islamic mosaic work found?	Moorish Spain
The mosaics in the Great Mosque in Corduba have what kind of style?	Byzantine
Who sent the master mosaicist to Spain?	the Byzantine Emperor
When were the mosaics in the Great Mosque in Corduba created?	between 965 and 970
Who created the mosaics in the Great Mosque in Corduba?	local craftsmen
The Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis holds the largest what?	mosaic installation
What along texas interstate Highways contains everyday examples of mosaics?	the rest areas
Which station in the NYC subway has a modern example of mosaic?	the Museum of Natural History station
Edward Burne-Jones is noted for creating mosaics in what century?	19th
What has recently seen an expansion of mosaic artwork?	street art
Who is the most famous street artist who works with mosaics?	the French Invader
What does the French Invader usually create with the traditional style of mosaic?	8 bit video game character
The French invader coined his own style of mosaic named what?	Rubikcubism
How does the French Invader create "Rubikcubism" styled mosaics?	grids of scrambled Rubik's Cubes
Which city has almost all of its sidewalks in Portuguese pavement?	Lisbon
What is the most common pattern for Portuguese pavement?	geometric
Portuguese pavement is known by what other name?	Calçada Portuguesa
What other cityscape is done with Portuguese pavement?	streets
What is Portuguese pavement?	two-tone stone mosaic paving
How were larger mosaics usually constructed?	face-down to a backing paper
Why was adding a step i production useful for larger projects?	gives the maker time to rework
What is the style called of putting tessere on a backing paper?	the indirect method
What besides benches and tabletops was usually created using the indirect method?	murals
The indirect method also helped for projects with what kinds of areas?	repetitive
When is the double indirect method of mosaic useful?	when it is important to see the work
What is the most powerful aspect of the double indirect method?	directly controlling the final result of the work
When was the double indirect method invented?	1989
Who invented the double indirect method?	Maurizio Placuzzi
What is used as a backing adhesive for the double indirect method besides putty or paper?	sticky plastic
What is the typical size of a ceramic mosaic tile?	1 in × 1 in
What is usually the purpose of a tile mosaic in pools?	express text
Where is the most common application of tile mosaics?	on a shower room or bathing pool floor
How should the tiles be aligned next to each other?	in a non-overlapping fashion
Why has production automation become popular?	high cost of labor in developed countries
Which software can aid in the design of robotically created mosaics?	CAD
How much faster is automated creation over handmade?	10 times faster
How does the robot pick the tiles it places?	a command file
What is not the same between hand made and robotic amde mosaics?	different look
From what language does Universitas come from?	Latin
What did a universitas have in common with similar guilds?	they were self-regulating
Around the beginning of what two things did word universitas start to become prevalent?	urban town life and medieval guilds
Which individuals usually approved charters for universitas?	princes, prelates
In terms of academics what is a core requirement of a university?	academic freedom
What was the first university?	University of Bologna
What charter is said to be the first establishing academic freedom in a university?	the Constitutio Habita
What did the Constitutio Habita say students were allowed?	unhindered passage in the interests of education
On what date was the Magna Carta Universitatum signed?	18 September 1988
Who presided over classes at a scholae monasticae?	monks and nuns
What is a scholae monasticae?	monastic schools
What church is said to be responsible for the formation of universities?	Latin Church
In the chronology of academic institutions, where are Christian cathedral schools compared to universities?	immediate forerunners
During which era did universities grow out of already extant schools?	early medieval period
Which ancient texts began to see more study after universities were formed?	Greek
What outlook developed the creation of the university system?	humanism
Why did rulers and governments in Europe form universities?	to satisfy a European thirst for knowledge
What type of governments were involved in creating universities?	city governments
Roughly how many pages of the works of Aristotle were translated by the 12th century?	more than 3000 pages
Richard Dales believes that the work of Aristotle represents the turning point of what?	Western thought
What word described the early attempts to understand the work of Aristotle?	scholasticism
What faculty did scholars attempt to use to prove the thoughts of Aristotle?	reason
What language did 12th century scholars studying Aristotle speak in?	Latin
Which language was used in lectures in early European universities?	Latin
For what subjects did professors use the work of Hippocrates?	medicine
What type of subjects did the universities of northern Europe focus on?	arts and theology
What type of degree was given out at a English university?	bachelor's degrees
What type of university was an Islamic madrasa akin to?	Mediterranean universities
What type of individual funded a Mediterranean university?	prince or monarch
From where did a degree come in a madrasa?	individual teachers
In which century did Islamic madrasas start to transform into universities?	10th
Madrasas in which specific location are said to have guided the formation of medieval universities?	Al-Andalus
Some scholars think that universities come from what, rather than solely local influences?	a global context
Al-Andalus was an Emirate of which entity?	Sicily
During what notable Middle East conflict is it believed by some that Universities received influence from madrasas?	the Crusades
What was the time span of the Early Modern period?	late 15th century to 1800
At the completion of the Middle Ages how long had universities existed?	about 400 years
How many universities were within Europe at the closure of the middle ages?	twenty-nine
How many universities were within Europe by the completion of the 18th century?	143
The German Empire had how many universities?	34
What war most curtailed the spread of universities in the 17th century?	the Thirty Years' War
Which university is said to have started faculty governance?	University of Paris
Which entity started to appoint the administration of universities in the 17th century?	the state
The control of universities by the state can be attributed to the advancement in the development of what?	the nation-state.
How would one describe the control of universities before nation-states in the 17th century?	student-controlled
What were the faculty who supervised students in the University of Paris called?	masters
The structure of the University of Paris served as what for other universities?	a standard
What type of student did schools that focus on very specific topics aim to create?	specialists
Which university had teaching which was more general, and not centralized?	University of Oxford
How many styles did the University of Paris model end up taking when applied to other universities?	at least three
What was the source of educational material in Early Modern age universities?	the curriculum and research of the Middle Ages
What sources did Early Modern age universities rely on for medical curricula?	Galen and Arabic scholarship
The concentration on students to live honorable lives is an example of what form of thought?	Humanist
Niccolò Leoniceno was a professor of what subject?	medicine
Which individual added a humanist view into the Corpus Juris?	Andreas Alciatus
Discovery and exposition were examples of the focus of what type of university scholar?	humanist
A concentration on the study of the self resulted in what field of study?	the humanities
What work did Vesalius push the study of?	Galen
What spread the use of texts by Galen within universities?	the printing press
In multiple countries in Europe students can attend a university with what kind if financial burden?	without tuition fees
Until what year were public universities in nordic nation free of tuition?	around 2005
What kind of students pay fees in public universities in Denmark?	foreign students
In terms of Universities in Denmark what is the fee status for citizens of EFA states?	exempted from tuition fees
What happened to public grants in nordic universities that continued to allow foreign students?	increased
In Ireland what word is mainly used instead of university?	college
Scotland is said to frequently refer to university as what?	Varsity
Spain refers to a university in what other way?	uni
The nation of Ghana shortens university to what?	varsity
In what century was it believed that the UK used the word varsity to refer to a university?	19th
A college teaches students for how many years in Canada?	two
What type of institution is a college in Canada?	non-degree-granting
How many years does a degree-granting university in Canada spend teaching students?	four
What is McGill University in Canada an example of?	medical schools
What type of university is St Francis Xavier in Canada?	undergraduate
How many vice presidents do most universities have?	at least one
What kind of board does a university commonly have?	a board of trustees
Who controls public universities?	government-run higher education boards
What are the different departments of a university called?	schools or faculties
Besides students, what is the source of funds of private universities?	business corporations
How does the financial backing of universities around the world differ?	varies widely
Outside of state funded schools, and funds coming from donors, how might a university collect funds?	fees which students attending the university
In nations that accept students from through the world what might the university offer to a student?	accommodation
What is a university formed through a bilateral treaty known as?	intergovernmental
In terms of intergovernmental universities, what is EUCLID?	Pôle Universitaire Euclide, Euclid University
What is a mission of EUCLID as it relates to signatory nations?	sustainable development
What type of school is the European University Institute?	post-graduate
What type of study does the European University Institute focus on?	social sciences
What was a focus of the National University of Ireland during the beginning of Irish Independence?	Irish language and Irish culture
In what nation did the University Revolution occur?	Argentina
In what year did Argentina's University Revolution occur?	1918
What was the result of the University Revolution in Argentina?	Reforms
In what year did the Robbins report say that universities should have four objectives to remain balanced?	1963
What nation did the 1963 Robbins Report focus on?	the United Kingdom
What should a university promote, according to the Robbins Report?	general powers of the mind
Universities should maintain what, according to the Robbins Report?	research in balance with teaching
The Robbins Report says universities should transmit what?	a common culture and common standards of citizenship
Ending with what century did religion play a smaller part in the curriculum of universities?	19th
what model of university structure was being used throughout the world at the finish of the 19th century?	the German university model
What was the focus of universities in the 20th century?	science
Who was Sir Keith Murray?	chairman of the University Grants Committee
What university did Sir Samuel Curran contribute to the creation of?	the University of Strathclyde
At the end of what period would universities become alike to contemporary universities?	the end of the early modern period
What type of focus did universities have at the end of the early modern period?	mechanistic
What replaced theological studies in universities at the completion of the early modern period?	humanities
The change in universities towards the completion of the early modern period is credited with the formation of what entity?	the modern state
The study of the humanities at the end of the early modern period replaced the study of the work of what individual?	Aristotle
Scientists and universities were competing for what?	limited resources
What type of education did private benefactors hope to provide to the public?	free
 Governments created universities to serve as what?	an alternative to traditional universities
What type of entity created competition with government created universities?	private benefactors
What percentage of scientists from 1450–1650 in the Dictionary of Scientific Biography were taught in a university?	more than 80%
On the part of universities what was their reaction to giving up the Aristotelian system?	considerable reluctance
What university was Melancthon from?	University of Wittenberg
The acceptance of new concepts and sciences by universities brought these ideas what?	legitimacy and respectability
What type of epistemology was adopted for a short period of time in European universities?	Cartesian
What type of epistemology served as the foundation of knowledge constructions and  training scholars in universities?	Aristotelian
The scientific revolution contributed to what, in terms of science?	autonomy
There was disagreement between universities and scientists over schools focusing on science, and the idea of what?	a general scholar
A hierarchy of scientific disciplines came out of what?	the scientific revolution
Where did students after the scientific revolution put science on the scale of importance?	first
The study of humanism among those studying math, astronomy and medicine is said to have caused what?	the scientific revolution
Resisting what caused many scientists to court private benefactors?	changes in science
Where might a scientist find a friendly private benefactor?	princely courts
Which historian argues that traditionalism in a university system hindered attempts to form new views on knowledge and nature?	Richard S. Westfall
The members of what class were priests in ancient Rome?	elite
Which God exemplified just rule for the Romans?	Jupiter
What was the time span of the Roman Republic?	509–27 BC
What kind of political separation did not exist in Rome?	church and state
As a result of what war were many new temples built by victorious generals?	Punic Wars
What characteristics were not inherent in Roman religious practice?	faith or dogma
What was brought forth by religion in Rome?	social order
What religious feature did each Roman home have?	household shrine
What type of celebrations made up the Roman calendar?	religious observances
What religious group was in charge of Rome's sacred flame?	Vestals
How deities did the Romans have?	great number
What group was an influence to Roman culture?	Greeks
What sort  of practices did the Greeks offer to Rome's culture?	religious
What myths did the Romans adapt to their needs?	Greek
What religion influenced augury for the Romans?	Etruscan
What was the practice of religion to the Romans?	personal choice
What was the standard practice in Roman religious life?	public religion
What part of Roman religious practice involved secrecy?	mysteries
What group viewed the mysteries as suspicious or subversive?	conservative Romans
What did the mysteries seem to threaten that made the Romans occasionally attempt to ban them?	morality and unity
To the Romans what did them think promoted social stability?	preserving tradition
What did the Romans tend to do with local religions and deities in conquered areas?	absorb
What facet of religion was not an issue for Roman?	tolerance
To what areas of the Roman empire did the Romans take their deities?	remote provinces
What facet of a foreign people did Rome add to itself to promote order?	religious heritage
After the Republic collapsed,  what addition was made to the religions of Rome?	emperors
Who was the first Roman emperor?	Augustus
For whose well being were public vows made in the empire?	emperor
What did the Romans use as a means of expanding their rule throughout the empire?	Imperial cult
As what during the time of the Roman empire  was rejection of the state religion viewed?	treason
What mythical figure did the Romans consider to be semi-divine?	Aeneas
Of what did Aeneas establish the central feature?	Roman religion
Who were the keepers of Aeneas's sacred objects?	Vestals
What ancient festival was celebrated until the 5th century?	Lupercalia
To whom did Aeneas set up an alter in Rome?	Hercules
What mythical characters were involved in the founding of Rome?	Romulus and Remus
What type of story was the Romulus and Remus tale?	hero myth
Who was the mother of Romulus and Remus?	Rhea Silvia
What god was the father of Romulus and Remus?	Mars
What type of events saved the twins of Roman myth?	miraculous
What type of organization did Romulus establish?	religious
According to myth, what god's temple did Romulus found?	Jupiter
What did Romulus offer to Jupiter in the first Roman Triumph?	spoils taken in war
What religious festival did Romulus found?	Consualia
Instead of death, what happened to Romulus?	deified
To what were the first kings of Rome associated?	religious institutions
To what group of deities did Lucius Tarquinius Priscus  establish a temple?	Jupiter, Juno and Minerva
The removal of whom marked the beginning of the Roman Republic?	Tarquinius Superbus
Where was the temple to the triad gods established?	Capitoline
What organization did Servius Tullius found?	Latin League,
What type of myth did Rome not have?	creation
To the Romans who ruled all aspects of heaven and earth?	immortal gods
What did the Romans do for those deities that favored Rome?	Rome honoured them
What did Rome make the myriad various cults?	lawful
What was basic facet of Roman religious experience?	Change
To the Romans who was the most powerful of the gods?	Jupiter
What did Jupiter personify in regards to Rome's highest offices?	divine authority
What gods did Juno and Minerva replace in Roman religious practice?	Mars and Quirinus
From where does the practice of linking various gods into grouping come?	Greek in origin
Of what did the linking of Greek and Roman deities promote a feeling?	heritage
What type of religious practices outnumbered the state observances?	commonplace
To what did the mixture of official and individual religious practices  pertain?	lawful Roman
What were the characteristics of state religious observances?	impressive, costly, and centralised
Who made the choices of personal religious practices in Rome?	individual
What type of deities did Roman communities have?	patron
How many religious celebrations did Rome have?	forty
 What type of day were there more of in Rome?	sacred days
With what were Roman festivals organized in accordance?	seasonal
What traditions did the seasonal festivals incorporate?	local
Instead of the public, what did some religious rites only require?	particular groups
What type of festivals happened when events warranted them?	fulfillment of religious vows
What is an example of an event organized religious celebration?	The triumph
In what aspect of the festival did political figures try to out do each other?	public display
Under what auspices did public displays  come during the Principate?	Imperial
Who paid for the most lavish of festival events?	emperors
What did obscure festivals offer Romans the opportunity to do?	reinterpretation
What did Augustus wish to do for Roman religion?	reform
What poet wrote a long poem describing Roman religious holidays?	Ovid
What was lacking in the presentation of religious events in Rome?	authoritative calendar
Under whose rule were new Christian festivals added to previous Roman holidays?	Christian
Around what aspect did the Romans a lot space?	ritual
What religious practice did Rome use to determine ritual?	augury
What Roman word was used to refer to the scared precinct?	templum
What common Latin words were used to mean a shrine or building?	aedes, delubrum, or fanum
What monuments were the some of most visible of Roman culture?	temples
What did each offering require to be valid in Roman religion?	prayer
What did Pliny the Elder think that a sacrifice without prayer was?	useless
What act alone had power in Roman thought?	Prayer
What was missing in the formulas of prayer in Rome?	personal expression
What knowledge was of importance in the potency of prayer?	correct verbal formulas
When did the sacrifices to the deities of the heavens occur?	daylight
What color was the sacrifice mandated to be for heaven deities?	white
What event was held after the sacrifice?	banquet
What type of sacrifices were offered to gods with earth connections?	fertile
Who ate the meat of the sacrifice during the after sacrifice  banquet?	officials and priests
When were the gods below and the dead celebrated?	nighttime
What type of sacrifice victims were the dark gods offered?	dark, fertile
How was the sacrifice to the gods below handled?	burnt offering
What daylight event was not celebrated after the dark sacrifice?	shared banquet
What feature had importance in sacrifices?	Color
What elements had the power of benefit or harm in Roman religion?	divine agencies
What was expected when the divine intervention benefited the patron?	gratitude
What kind of intervention could be sought to avoid disasters?	Divine
What act was decreed in times of crisis in Rome?	public rites
What was the point of public procession to the god's temples?	supplicating the gods
What type of circumstances were called for in times of extreme difficulties?	Extraordinary
What offering was Jupiter promised during the Second Punic War?	every animal born
From whom was Rome asking for protection?	Hannibal
What happened to the sacrifice if the god failed to uphold the agreement?	withheld
What was the offering for the Emperor in Pompeii?	bull
What were the exta of a sacrifice?	entrails
How were the exta read in Roman religious practice?	disciplina Etrusca
What part of the sacrifice were reserved for the gods?	exta and blood
What part of the sacrifice was shared among humans?	meat
Into what was the god's portion of the sacrifice placed?	fire on the altar
What type of sacrifice was rare in Rome?	Human
What act was repulsive to Romans?	Human sacrifice
How were sacrifices of humans carried out in Rome?	buried
Before the invasion of what area was human sacrifice carried out?	Gaul
When was the invasion of Gaul by Rome?	113 BC
During what war was the first gladiator munus held?	First Punic War
How was the gladiatorial combat described?	funeral blood-rite
What was not the ultimate purpose of gladiatorial rites?	death
In what way was gladiatorial combat considered?	as an offering
How did later Christians view Gladiatorial combats?	human sacrifice
Who was the founder of the Roman Republic?	L. Junius Brutus
What were stand-ins for child sacrifices to Mania?	woolen dolls
Who was Mania in Roman religion?	Mother of the Lares
What leader was the first consul of the Roman Republic?	L. Junius Brutus
What acts were sometimes arranged so as to be sacrifices?	executions
What act did Romans view as obnoxious?	human sacrifice
To whom was human sacrifice usually attributed?	enemies
What did Rome do about human sacrifice?	banned it
As what  did the law of 81 BC view human sacrifice?	murder
What ruler banned human sacrifice empire wide?	Hadrian
Which individual in the household was responsible for the Vesta cult?	wife
Who was the senior priest of the household in Rome?	pater familias
Which ancient hero brought the lares cult to Rome?	Aeneas
From what city did Aeneas bring the lares cult?	Troy
What was put in the temple of Vesta?	Palladium
On what kind of system was Roman religious law focused?	ritualised
What form of religion was atheism considered to be?	Religious neglect
What results did proper religious practices produce?	harmony and prosperity.
What could deviations from proper religious practices cause?	divine anger
What did participation in public religious rites show about the individual?	commitment
What organization payed for the maintenance official cults?	state
Who funded non-official religious cults?	private individuals
What group benefited from non- official cults?	own communities
What group presented the opening ceremonies of the Parentalia festival?	Vestals
What individuals had the right to regulate all cults?	censor and pontifices
What was lacking as to the profession of a priest class in Rome?	separate priestly caste
What authority in a community sponsored religious rites?	highest
What type of religious participants were available for consultation?	Specialists
What were the earliest priesthoods?	flamines
Which member of a family functioned as priest?	paterfamilias
Who supervised sacred rites during the era of kings?	rex sacrorum
What type of authority did the rex sacrorum lack?	civil
What group's power increased after the rise of the Roman Republic?	Republican pontifices
What individual became more powerful during the late Republic?	pontifex maximus
By the late Republic, what position had become largely symbolic?	rex sacrorum
What group selected public priests in Rome?	collegia
What was the term of office for a priest in Rome?	lifetime
What limited an individual's access to religious offices?	law
Because of the lack of pay, what was the type of honor in being a priest?	costly
What did a priesthood in the Imperial cult gain a provencial?	Roman citizenship
How many Vestals were there in Rome?	six
Of what was Vesta the goddess?	hearth
Of what were the Vestals protectors?	vital flame
What was the benefit of being a Vestal?	political influence
To whom did the Vestal answer?	Pontifex Maximus
What vow was required of Vestals?	chastity
How were the Vestals' devotion to Rome's security viewed to be ?	essential
What was the punishment for the loss of a Vestal's chastity?	buried alive
What was a Vestal expected to be to her duties?	devoted
What was the honor granted a Vestal ?	religious
Where could a householder rekindle the home's flame?	Vesta's flame
For what state artifacts did the Vestals care?	Lares and Penates
What was the Vestal festival called?	Vestalia
To what part of official state sacrifices did the Vestals attend?	mola salsa
What was the nature of the role of the Vestals in state sacrifices?	Indirect
What group's status was improved by Augustus' religious reforms?	Vestals
What advantage was there in being a Vestal at games?	seating
For whose cult were the Vestals appointed as priestesses?	Livia
Until what time did the Vestal retain their social distinctions?	4th century
Which emperor disbanded the Vestals?	Theodosius I
In what area did public rites take place in Rome?	sacred precinct
What person marked the religious area ritually?	augur
What was the original meaning of the templum in Latin?	sacred space
Who designated the first boundary of Rome?	Romulus
What did augers seek to understand through observances?	divine will
What process did haruspicy use to divine the will of the gods?	examination of entrails
Which of the entrails was especially important to augury?	liver
To which group can haruspicy to traced?	Etruscan
What type of private  individual had several generals and politicians used to validate their actions?	diviners
What type of diviners did the armies use to determine the will of the gods?	public haruspices
What were considered to be natural transgressions by the Romans?	Prodigies
Of what were prodigies predictors?	conflict and misfortune
What did prodigies show the Romans?	divine anger
What did the expiation of a prodigy impose?	dedicated rites
What group determined the truth of a prodigy?	Senate
What author wrote of disaster prodigies?	Livy
What type of sacrifices were required to expiate the minor prodigies ?	lesser victims
Of what did the greater prodigies require in sacrifice?	greater victims
Of what did Livy think the prodigies proved about Roman religion?	widespread failure
What is the only proof of religious success over prodigies?	Rome's victory
From what source does information of Roman thought about the afterlife come?	educated elite
What type of practices were those affecting the care of the dead?	archaic
What did the ancient Romans expect after death?	afterlife
With whom did the  early Romans expect to associate?	gods
What did later Romans invest in rather than grave offerings?	monumental endowments
What type of rites varied in accordance with status and religion?	Funeral and commemorative
What was the grave sacrifice in Cicero's time?	sow
What class gave only wine and food as a grave offering?	less well-off
What was the multi day of remembrance for the dead?	Parentalia
What goddess was an intermediary  between the dead and the living?	Ceres
What group's burial practices over-lapped with the Roman's?	Christian
What items were shared among Christian and non- Christians?	Tombs
What did St Augustine believe that funeral feasts gave an opportunity for?	alms of food
When was Christian attendance at Parentalia become forbidden by the Christians?	AD 567
How did the Romans view the corpse of the dead?	ritual pollution
How were Roman camps laid out?	standard pattern
For what purpose were Roman camps arranged?	defense and religious ritual
Of what were Roman camps diminutive versions?	Rome
What was in the center of each Roman camp?	commander's headquarters
What does the religious rites performed before battle suggest that the camp has become?	divine templum
What type of personnel did every camp have?	religious
What officer headed the religious personnel of a Roman camp?	senior magistrate-commander
In the Imperial era, what cult did legionnaires follow?	emperor
Even in other places, of what did the legions keep observance?	Rome's official festivals
What person was considered to be "Mother of the camp''?	Empress
What was a Roman general's most extreme offering?	devotio
What Roman general had a dream of his fate in battle?	Decius Mus
With what does the devotio link to military ethics?	Roman gladiator
By dying what did Decius avoid for the battle?	disastrous consequences
Who wrote a detailed account of the demise of Decius Mus?	Livy
What general was consul in 249 BC?	Publius Claudius Pulcher
What type of campaign did Publius fight?	sea
What was Publius's critical mistake in his sea campaign?	defiance of the omen
How did Publius fare in his battle?	defeated
What was the cause of Publius's failures according to Roman feeling?	impiety
What was the amount of participation by women in religious observances?	limited
What religious act did women not perform?	animal sacrifice
What priesthood was reserved solely for women?	Vestals
What Roman rites excluded men?	Bona Dea
With what are many deities aligned for women in Rome's religions?	motherhood
What was excessive religious fervor in Rome's religions?	superstitio
What was excessive religio equated with in Rome?	superstition
What was the basis of Roman religion?	knowledge
Doing what type of actions were considered to be wrong in Rome?	more than was necessary
What type of knowledge seeking was superstitio considered to be?	inappropriate
What type of diviners were suspect in Rome?	private diviners
What was the purpose to be discovered by state sanctioned diviners?	will of the gods
What action was not to be sought by state diviners?	foretelling the future
What group of people were several times expelled from Rome?	Astrologers and magicians
What had an astrologer predicted to warrant from Rome by Tiberius?	death
What word was used by the Romans for practitioners of magic?	magi
To what did the term magi originally refer?	Persian priests
Who wrote a skeptical work outlining magic and its use?	Pliny the Elder
What was the title of Pliny's work on magic?	"History of magical arts"
Who was a noted magician who could vanish into thin air?	Apollonius of Tyana
What witch was reputed to be able to stop the rotation of the heavens?	Erichtho
Who consulted a witch before the battle of Pharsalus?	Sextus Pompeius
What natural order was Erichtho accused of undermining?	order of gods
How was Erichtho portrayed?	stereotypical witch
From what country did Erichtho come?	Thessaly
What forbid harmful  incantations?	Twelve Tables
What deities were on the edge of Roman religious community?	Chthonic
What could public rites and magic easily become in some circumstances?	indistinguishable
What did people seeking the aid of magicians avoid?	public gaze
Where was magic conducted in Rome?	outside the sacred boundary
What science has confirmed the existence of magic use from early times?	Archaeology
What was the term for binding spells in the Roman world?	defixiones
What did the elite use instead of spells and potions to redress a wrong?	law and justice
Until what era did spells persist in the empire?	7th century AD
What era produced a decline in the use of spells?	Christian era
What male group dominated all aspects of Rome?	aristocracy
Of what class was more than half of Rome's population?	slave or free non-citizens
What was the lowest class of Roman citizens?	plebeians
How many adult males were able to vote in Rome?	Less than a quarter
What organization was Rome's official caretaker?	the senate
The link between what groups was necessary to Rome?	religious and political
Where was the basic power in Rome to be found?	patrician elite
What group was excluded from high offices ?	plebeians
Who did the Senate select to settle a strike by the lower classes?	Camillus
To whom was a temple dedicated at the settlement of the strike?	Concordia
What did the patrician electorate keep in spite of a new plebeian nobility?	political traditions and religious cults
What cult arrived from southern Italy?	Dionysus
During what time did the Dionysus cult become popular?	Punic crisis
To what Roman god was Dionysus similar?	Bacchus
With loyalty a necessity, what censorship did not need to be enforced?	divine hierarchy
What appointment was the start of Cesar's political rise?	pontifex maximus
What did the Augustan settlement signify in Rome's classes?	cultural shift
What did the claims of officials imply about the nature of the individuals?	divinely inspired
In what year was Cesar made pontifex maximus?	63 BC
How were opportunities limited in the principate for the citizens of Rome?	by law
At the end of the regal period, what class was kept out of the state political and priesthood arenas?	plebeian
With whom did Rome have alliances at the end of the regal period?	neighbours
What goddess became a part of the Capitoline triad?	Minerva
In what style was the temple to Minerva built?	Etruscan
What gods were in the Capitoline triad?	Jupiter, Juno and Minerva
Whose cult appeared from Africa at the time of the Latin League?	Diana
To whom was a new temple dedicated on the Alban Mount?	Jupiter Latiaris
What cult was formed at the ars maxima in the Forum Boarium ?	Hercules
For what group was Castor a patron?	cavalry
From where was Venus brought and lodged on the Capitoline Hill?	Sicily
What cult appeared from Pessinus in 206 BC?	Magna Mater
What cult was brought in to Rome after the Great Mother cult?	Bacchus
In what year did the Senate declare the Bacchus subversive?	186 BC
In what year was Diana  brought into the pomerium?	179 BC
What god was introduced in Rome in 138 BC?	Mars
The spread of all things Greek provided what for the interpretation of Rome's religions?	model
What writer defined the development of the gods?	Euhemerus
At the end of the Republic, who read the Stoic interpretations of Roman gods and religion?	literate elite
What factors sustained the beliefs in gods according to Varro?	devotion and cult.
What theory claims that popular belief was based on fiction?	Euhemerus' theory
What did many Romans claim in the Republican era?	divine ancestor
What style of claim did Romans favor as a link to the gods?	personal claim
Of what were such claims of deity relations the start?	Imperial cult
What deity did the Julii claim as an ancestor?	Venus Genetrix
What author further elaborated on the imperial claim of godhood?	Vergil
By the end of the Republic, what offices were increasingly joined?	religious and political
What Roman figure was given wide and lifeime powers?	Augustus
How many priesthoods was Augustus given?	unprecedented number
How were Augustus's reforms viewed?	adaptive, restorative and regulatory
As a return to what did Augustus portray the Vestals in his reforms?	Roman morality
From what were countries in the empire free?	Roman religious law
What were Rome's policies in regards to foreign peoples?	inclusionist policies
What was Rome's policy towards government?	Autonomy and concord
What did foreign cults gradually begin to display in similarity to Roman cults?	Romanised
What was Rome not demanding of in religion of foreign areas of the empire?	centralised legal requirement
What style of religious dedication was not uncommon for outer border areas?	diis deabusque omnibus
What type of household gods and cults did soldiers bring to outer areas?	domestic
To whom did Roman soldiers set up alters?	traditional gods
What act  of provincials brought new gods into the military?	conscription
What did Rome typically award to provincial members of the empire?	citizenship
What Roman leader aspired to be a living god?	Julius Caesar
What form of government did Cesar seem to be attempting?	divine monarchy
To what ruler did foreign allies offer a divine cult?	Augustus
By the end of Augustus's reign what was an established fact?	Imperial cult
For what was Augustus's reformed system of government notiable?	integrated
What was the emperor's rule in Rome?	divinely approved
As a living divus, what was the emperor to Rome?	father of his country
As first citizen, what must the emperor's mores represent?	traditional
After his death, how was the emperor's afterlife decided?	vote in the Senate
What did emperors before Diocletian try to guarantee in religion?	traditional cults
What means guaranteed the Jews and Judaism in Rome?	treaty
When did Judea become an allied kingdom to Rome?	63 BC
What religious buildings were established in Rome in the imperial period?	synagogues
Who recognized the Jewish synagogues as being legitimate in Rome?	Julius Caesar
In contrast to what religion was Judaism acceptable in Rome?	Christianity
What group was accused of starting the Great Fire of 64 AD?	Christians
Who made the accusation that the Christians had started the Great Fire?	Emperor Nero
What outcome did the accusations against the Christians produce?	persecution
What was the persecution of the Christians by Rome?	official policy
How did early Christians view traditional Roman cultism?	ungodly practices
Which emperor decreed that all Romans must sacrifice to traditional gods?	Decius
What oath was a requirement of the emperor's decree?	Decian oath
What religious group was exempt from sacrifices?	Jews
What was the Decian decree meant to root out?	subversives
What happened to the decree after a year?	edict expired.
What did  Valerian call the Christian religion?	subversive foreign cult
What Christian events did Valerian outlaw?	assemblies
To what gods did Valerian tell the Christians to sacrifice?	Rome's traditional
What did Valerian's second edict call the Christians' presence in the empire?	threat
What did the Christian church become in the years after Valerian's death?	stronger
For what reason were Maximillian and Marcellus executed?	treason
In what year did Diocletian's edict order the destruction of Christian churches and texts?	303 AD
In 303 AD what did Christians begin losing?	legal rights
To what did the edict of 304 admonish Christians to sacrifice?	traditional gods
With what were Christian priests threatened in the second edict?	imprisonment
How were the Roman edicts handled in some areas?	strictly enforced
In areas of strict enforcement, what happened to Christians?	imprisoned or martyred
What were some Christian communities?	powerful and influential
What were some provincial governors in enforcement of the Roman edicts?	lenient
When did Galerius revoke the anti-Christian policies?	311
Who said the imperial honors were against Christian teachings?	St. Jerome
To what did the Christian church equate the peace of the emperors?	peace of God
With what veneration did most Christians have little trouble?	"pagan" emperors
What Christian group did Constantine I disapprove?	Donatists
What pontifax maximus favored the Catholic church?	Constantine I
What edict defined imperial ideas as being those of toleration?	edict of Milan
How did Constantine accept Christianity?	officially
Besides the acceptance of Christianity, what other religious cults were tolerated?	traditional religions
As what type of ruler did Constantine unite the empire and church?	absolute head of state
As what was Constantine honored when he died?	Christian, Imperial, and "divus"
What group did Constantine call to a meeting?	First Council of Nicaea
From where were the bishops in attendance at the Council few in number?	Western Empire
How many bishops attended the First Council?	318
What agreement was reached a the Council of Nicaea ?	Nicene Creed
What was the Council of Nicaea meant to define?	Christian orthodoxy
What emperor tried to revive traditional religious practices?	Julian
What was proclaimed the state religion under Theodosius I?	Nicene Christianity
What pleas were rejected by the empire?	religious tolerance
What group was excluded or persecuted by the empire?	Heretics
What aspects of Roman religion influenced Christian forms?	ritual
Who rejected the Christian religion?	Julian
When did Julian become Augustus?	361
What did Julian try to restore to the empire?	non-Christian practices
What building did Julian want to rebuild?	Jerusalem's temple
After Julian's death, under to what type of religion did the empire return?	Christian control
What office did Western emperor Gratian decline?	pontifex maximus
What group did Gratian seek the abolish?	Vestals
Which emperor briefly united the empire again?	Theodosius I
Of what was Theodosius the last emperor?	East and West
What flame did Theodosius extinguish to remove the Vestals from power?	Sacred fire
Where is Youtube headquartered?	San Bruno, California, United States
When was Youtube created?	February 2005
How much did Google pay for Youtube in 2006?	US$1.65 billion
Other than video blogging and and educational videos, what content is available on youtube?	short original videos
How does youtube now operate as a business?	as one of Google's subsidiaries
What are the first names of the men that invented youtube?	Hurley and Chen
Where did Chen live in 2005?	San Francisco
What was the original stimuli for creating the website?	difficulty sharing videos
When did the creators have the idea for youtube?	the early months of 2005
when was the first beta test for the youtube site?	May 2005
What was the first video to reach a million views?	a Nike advertisement
How much did Sequoia Capital invest in youtube in November of 2005?	$3.5 million
What was the official launch date for the youtube website?	December 15, 2005
As of May 2010 how many total video views had youtube attained?	14 billion
As of 2014, how many hours of video were being uploaded every  minute?	300
How much content on youtube comes from outside the US?	around three quarters
How many unique visitors a month were tracked as of 2014?	800 million
As of June 2015, how many estimated visitors does youtube have in a month?	15 billion
Youtube is ranked what on the world's list of most visited sites?	third
What did youtube do on March 31 2010?	launched a new design
Who was the Google product manager in 2010?	Shiva Rajaraman
How many videos was youtube serving per day as of May 2010?	more than two billion
How many views per day was youtube receiving as of May 2011?	more than three billion
How many videos per day were streamed as of January 2012?	four billion
What did youtube announce in Feb of 2015?	a new app
what was the name of the new app youtube launched?	YouTube Kids
What platform was launched in Aug of 2015?	YouTube Gaming
What is the name of the youtube feature that removes ads and allows downloading movies?	YouTube Red
On what OS was the YouTube Kids app available?	both Android and iOS
In 2010 youtube launched a version of its site that ran on what standard?	HTML5
What was the main benefit from the switch to HTML5?	allowed videos to be viewed without requiring Adobe Flash Player
How did users opt into the trial version of youtube's HTML5 site?	a page
What format besides H.264 was playable with HTML5?	WebM
What is the maximum length of a video on youtube?	12 hours
When a user with a new account posts a video, what is the maximum length allowed?	15 minutes
When was the time limit on video length first enacted on youtube?	March 2006
in 2006 Youtube found that the majority of longer videos were what?	unauthorized uploads
What is the upload file size limit on out of date browsers?	20 GB
When was 720p HD support added to youtube?	In November 2008
What did youtube change its screen format to from 4:3?	widescreen 16:9
What video format support was added in 2009?	1080p HD
What is the highest resolution of video supported by youtube?	8K resolution
What is the name of the format that has dimensions of 4096×3072 pixels?	4K
Peter Bradshaw held what position in youtube?	software engineer
What type of videos did youtube officially start supporting in July 2009?	3D
What is the name for the common method of viewing a 3d movie, with red and blue glasses?	anaglyph
When did HTML5 officially support side-by-side 3D footage?	In May 2011
Youtube offers users the option to watch content where?	outside their website
What is used to embed a youtube video to a webpage?	HTML
What is the most common use of embedded youtube videos?	social networking pages and blogs
What is a video called when a person records themselves watching a different video?	"video response"
When did youtube officially remove the response feature?	On August 27, 2013
YOutube does not often post a what for its videos?	download link
Youtube intends for users to watch videos where?	through its website
What was added to the upload options in July of 2012?	a Creative Commons license
Which site removed the option of downloading youtube videos after 2012?	Zamzar
Which videos are often available for download straight from youtube?	the weekly addresses by President Barack Obama
When did youtube become available on Apple products?	June 2007
When did youtube launch its first app for the iPhone?	September 2012
What percentage of Smartphone users use the youtube app?	35%
What is Apple's prefered video standard?	H.264
How long did it take to transfer Youtube's content to Apple's standard?	several months
What service was able to search and play youtube videos as of 2008?	TiVo
What did youtube launch in Jan of 2009?	YouTube for TV
later in 2009 what service replaced youtube for TV	YouTube XL
Google made youtube streamable on what gaming console in DEC. of 2013?	the Roku player
When did youtube finally become available on the Playstation 4?	October 2014
What is youtube red?	YouTube's premium subscription service
When was youtube red originally announced?	November 12, 2014
What was the original title of youtube red?	Music Key
When was youtube red re-launched with its added features?	October 28, 2015
What service was "music key" intended to replace?	Google Play Music "All Access"
Other than private individuals, who has used youtube to grow their audience?	large production companies
What is the name of youtube's revenue-sharing program?	Partner Program
What was the highest earning youtube partner video producer?	$12 million
Big pop artists account for how what percentage of the views on youtube?	90.3%
Which music chart said in 2013 it would start taking youtube data into account for its ratings?	Billboard
Who is the TED curator?	Chris Anderson
What surprising feature does youtube possibly have the chance to revolutionize?	face-to-face communication
Who is the founder of the Khan Academy?	Salman Khan
What other surprising aspect of human development will youtube likely have an impact on?	education
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using Facebook to what?	schedule the protests
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using Twitter to do what?	coordinate
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using youtube to do what?	tell the world
Who was the co-sponsor of the condemnation by the US Senate over the kony 2012 video?	Senator Lindsey Graham
What year was the first youtube question asked to a presidential nominee?	2007
How has youtube helped the government?	to more easily engage with citizens
the white house's youtube channel was the what number ranked news channel on youtube in 2012?	seventh
What was deemed necessary by the white house when creating youtube content?	creators' new media savvy
In 2013 who did the healthcare exchange commission to impersonate Obama and post it to youtube?	Iman Crosson
What was the purpose of Iman Crosson's video?	encourage young Americans to enroll
What is the name of the group that drew responses from the resident and most of his staff regarding anti-bullying?	It Gets Better Project
How old was Amanda Todd when she took her own life because of bullying?	fifteen
How ling did it take the It Gets Better Project video to draw such a huge response?	within two months
What was done after Amanda Todd's death?	legislative action was undertaken
What was the goal of the actions taken after Amanda Todd's death?	form a national anti-bullying strategy
How much time does the average person spend watching youtube videos each day?	15 minutes
What is the average time an American watches TV in day?	four or five hours
What was youtube's estimated ads revenue in 2013?	3.7 billion
What was youtube's revenue as estimated in 2008?	$200 million
Youtube's financial records are not reported by who?	Google
When did youtube enter a partnership with NBC?	June 2006
What is the name of the section in youtube that allows major content publishers to post full length movies and episodes?	Shows
What was the intended purpose of youtube's "shows" section?	to create competition
When did youtube launch the version of "shows" for the UK?	In November 2009
In 2010 how many movies did youtube's rental service offer?	over 6,000 films
What was youtube's 2007 partner program based on?	AdSense
What percentage of revenue does youtube get for ads on "partner program" channels?	45 percent
How many people are employed by the partner program?	over a million
As per estimate in 2013 how much would a partner program member earn with ad revenue off of pre-roll advertising per 1000 views?	$2.09
How much ad revenue goes to the original uploader of the youtube video if they're in the partner program?	55 percent
Where does the majority of youtube's revenue go?	to the copyright holders
In 2010 what were the estimates for the amount of videos with advertisements uploaded without the copywriter's consent?	nearly a third
Which major gaming company claimed copyright ad revenue rights against uploaders?	Nintendo
When did Nintendo finally agree to share ad profits with the original uploaders?	February 2015
What option besides removing the video does youtube grant copyright holders?	have them continue running for revenue
What does the message when uploading a video ask the user not to do?	violate copyright laws
Posting a video without consent of the copyright holder is what according to youtube?	unauthorized
How many copyright infringements must an account have before the account is deleted?	Three
Youtube doesn't do what to videos before they're posted?	view
What kind of notice must a copyright holder issue when trying to take down content?	DMCA
How much did Viacom want in damages in their lawsuit against youtube?	$1 billion
Companies including Viacom and Mediaset have done what against youtube?	filed lawsuits
What does youtube do to prevent losing lawsuits involving copyright infringement?	goes far beyond its legal obligations
How many unauthorized clips did Viacom allegedly find on youtube that infringed its copyrights?	150,000
How much data did youtube have to hand over to Viacom as a result of the lawsuit?	12 terabytes
Which organization spoke against the courts ruling?	Electronic Frontier Foundation
What did Viacom plan to do after the ruling in 2010?	appeal
What happened to Viacom's lawsuit in 2010?	rejected in a summary judgment
Who was the residing judge of the lawsuit?	Louis L. Stanton
In 2007 youtube launched an automated system to detect what?	videos that infringe copyright
Who was Google's CEO in 2007?	Eric Schmidt
What is the name of the system that automatically detects copyright violations?	Content ID
Why did the CEO of Google think the new software was necessary?	resolving lawsuits
What does Content ID do if an upload is too close a match to a known copyright material?	flags the video
What was the ultimate view of Content ID's performance after a 2009 test?	surprisingly resilient
As of 2010 what is the maximum length of a video a user can upload given the proper authority?	unlimited
How does one dispute the ruling of Content ID?	fill in a form
What happened to the sites rules in Dec. 2010?	were modified
Youtube depends on who to flag inappropriate videos?	users
Who checks the flagged videos for unauthorized content?	a YouTube employee
Who of the house of commons spoke out on youtube's policies?	the Culture and Media Committee
The United Kingdom stated it was what with youtube's policies with moderating its content?	unimpressed
When did the UK speak out against youtube's copyright policies?	In July 2008
Most videos enable users to do what	leave comments
What has attracted negative attention about comments on youtube besides their content?	their form
Time in 2006 wrote that youtube harnessed the wisdom and what else of humanity?	stupidity
Which magazine wrote about youtube in a 2009 article on user comments?	The Guardian
Some of the positive aspects of youtube might be that it provides what on a scale we've never seen before?	community and collaboration
When did youtube first require the user to have a google account before posting a comment?	November 6, 2013
The changes to the google+ additions allowed uploaders to better moderate and what to comments?	block
There were better sorting functions put in place in 2013 to make sure what kind of comments appeared on top?	more relevant discussions
What is youtube co-founder Karim's first name?	Jawed
How many thumbs down votes did youtube's official statement about the new commenting system get within two days?	20,097
youtube is completely what in some places?	blocked
Why besides limited periods of time would youtube not be allowed in a country?	long term standing ban
What might happen in a restrictive state even if you do have access to the youtube site itself?	specific videos is blocked
How many independent labels did the Merlin Network represent?	20,000
What was the percentage of labels youtube had signed contracts with prior to the planned launch date?	90%
What was youtube planning on doing to labels it did not reach a deal with?	block all music content
Which journalistic organization released the reports of youtube's agreement with the Merlin Network?	The Financial Times
Why did youtube want to ensure only contractees music was played?	to launch the enhanced music experience
Who made a metaphor about a wall of separation?	Jefferson
What has the U.S. Supreme Court repeatedly cited?	metaphor
When was the case of Reynolds v. United States?	1879
What did the Court write about Jefferson's comments as it related to the scope and effect of the First Amendment?	authoritative declaration
What was the clause against establishment of religion by law intended to erect?	a wall of separation between church and state
What was one of the reason early immigrant groups came to America?	to worship freely
What were Protestant Christians fleeing from?	religious persecution
Who was persecuting the Puritans?	King of England
What did William Penn ensure the protection of in his colony?	religious minorities
What did the Plymouth Colony and Massachusetts Bay Colony both establish?	churches
What may no person within Georgia be deprived of the privilege of doing in any manner agreeable to them?	worshipping God
When was the Georgia Constitution amended to add Article IV, Section 10?	1789
What can a citizen of Georgia not be compelled to do?	attend any place of worship contrary to his own faith and judgment
What is constitutionally forbidden to be established in the state of Georgia?	No one religious society
What will no person be denied the enjoyment of in Georgia based on their religious principles?	any civil right
When did the North Carolina Constitution disestablish the Anglican church?	1776
What religious denomination was the only one allowed to hold public office in NC until 1835?	Protestants
What category did the NC Constitution broaden the people allowed to hold public office to from 1835 to 1876?	Christians
What part of the NC Constitution forbids atheists from holding public office?	Article VI, Section 8
When did the U.S. Supreme Court rule clauses forbidding people from holding public office based on their religion was unenforceable?	1961
What shows support for the separation of church and state as early as the mid-17th century?	The Flushing Remonstrance
What were the Remonstrance opposed to?	religious persecution of any sort
When did a group of English citizens sign a document condemning hatred, war and bondage?	December 27, 1657
Who were the signers of the document affronted by the persecution of?	Quakers
What had Peter Stuyvesant formally banned all of other than the Dutch Reformed Church?	religions
What did an established church, even at the state level, have?	opponents
What was Issac Backus' profession?	Baptist minister
What region did Isaac Backus come from?	New England
When did Isaac Backus write against a state sanctioned religion?	1773
When was Thomas Jefferson's Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom enacted?	1786
Who was Roger Williams?	Baptist theologian
What phrase did Roger Williams first use?	"[A] hedge or wall of separation between the garden of the church and the wilderness of the world"
What colony was Roger Williams the founder of?	Rhode Island
When was the book The Bloody Tenent of Persecution published?	1644
Who used William's phrase as a description of the First Amendment and its restriction on the legislative branch?	Thomas Jefferson
Whose conceptions of separation have long been argued over?	Jefferson and James Madison's
What did Jefferson refuse to issue, when it was sent to him by Congress during his presidency?	Proclamations of Thanksgiving
Where did both Jefferson and Madison attend religious services?	at the Capitol
How many religious proclamations did Madison issue while President?	four
What is essential to the purity of both religion and civil government?	practical distinction
What did Jefferson's opponents accuse him of wanting to do to Christianity?	destruction
What did Jefferson encourage the separate sects at the University of Virginia to have of their own?	preachers
How was the state banned from supporting a Professorship of Divinity?	Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom
What scheme did Jefferson apparently support when it came to University students?	attend religious worship each morning
What does Mark David Hall think people focus on way too much?	one Jeffersonian letter
When did Jefferson's letter enter American jurisprudence?	1878
What was the case that used Jefferson's letter?	Reynolds v. U.S.
What was the topic of Reynolds v. U.S.?	Mormon polygamy
What was the court seeking, in using Jefferson's letter?	legal definition for the word religion
What did the court rule outlawing polygamy was?	constitutional
What approach was not the only one taken in the 18th century?	Jefferson and Madison's
What did Jefferson draft his Statute of Religious Freedom in opposition to?	a bill
Who was the chief supporter of the bill that got Jefferson motivated to draft his Statute?	Patrick Henry
What did Patrick Henry want to require Virginians to pay taxes to support?	some denomination
What did the Constitution of Massachusetts express no one would be restrained from doing?	worshipping God
What did the Duke of York require every community in his lands to support?	some church
Instead of Anglican, what were the churches most often supported in New York and New Jersey?	Dutch Reformed, Quaker or Presbyterian
What were taxpayers free to do after they paid the Duke of York his local tax?	to choose their own church
Why was the Duke not a friend of Anglicanism?	openly divine-right Catholic,
When did the first Anglican minister arrive in New Jersey?	1698
What did the original charter of the Province of East Jersey restrict membership in its Assembly to?	Christians
What was the Duke of York's relationship to his religion described as being?	fervently Catholic
What religious sect were the proprietors of Perth Amboy?	Scottish Catholic
What did the Province of West Jersey specify there would not be for those running for an office, in 1681?	religious test
When was an oath requiring militia to abjure the pretensions of the pope replaced?	1799
What does the first amendment to the US Constitution state?	"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof"
What is the first part of the First Amendment know as?	"establishment clause"
What is the last part of the sentence of the First Amendment known as?	"free exercise clause"
What do the two clauses of the First Amendment for the basis of?	the Supreme Court's interpretations of the "separation of church and state" doctrine.
What are citizens of the United States free to embrace or reject as they choose?	a faith
What is John Baker of LSU's profession?	legal scholars
Why was a more general "religion" used in the language of the First Amendment?	to appease the Anti-Federalists
Why was the word "national" a cause for alarm to both Federalists and Anti-Federalists?	because of the experience under the British crown
Who took issue with Madison's language during the debate over the establishment clause?	Elbridge Gerry
What was Elbridge Gerry's constituency?	Massachusetts
Where was Representative Roger Sherman from?	Connecticut
Why did Sherman believe the establishment clause was unnecessary?	Constitution only gave Congress stated powers
What power was not granted to Congress by the Constitution?	establishing a national religion
What was Tucker concerned the establishment clause could preempt?	religious clauses in the state constitutions
Where was Representative Thomas Tucker from?	South Carolina
When was the 14th Amendment to the US Constitution created?	post-Civil War
What was the intent of the 14th Amendment?	secure rights for former slaves
What does the 14th Amendment also introduce the concept of?	incorporation of all relevant federal rights against the states
What clauses does the 14th Amendment include?	due process and equal protection clauses
What has the doctrine of incorporation been used to ensure?	application of most of the rights enumerated in the Bill of Rights to the states
What landmark case has impacted all subsequent interpretations of the separation of church and state in regard to state governments?	Everson v. Board of Education
What did the Supreme Court uphold in Everson v. Board of Education?	state law
What did the Supreme Court hold the First Amendment establishment clause was fully applicable to?	state governments
What was a recent case involving the application of the principle of the establishment clause against states?	Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet
When was the case of v. Grumet?	1994
What did Jefferson's concept of 'separation of church and state" became part of what jurisprudence?	Establishment Clause
What case was Jefferson's concept apropos to?	Reynolds v. U.S., 98 U.S. 145
What does the constitution guarantee when it comes to religion?	freedom
What word is not defined in the Constitution?	religion
Who had Jefferson's letter been sent to?	the Danbury Baptists
When was the centrality of the "separation" concept to the Religion Clauses of the Constitution made explicit?	1947
What was the topic of the Everson v. Board of Education?	government funds to pay for transportation of students to both public and Catholic schools
What case was the concept relevant?	Everson v. Board of Education, 330 U.S. 1
What was the case of Everson v. Board of Education the first instance of?	court applied the Establishment Clause to the laws of a state
How must the wall separating church and state be kept?	high and impregnable
What did the decision ultimately uphold?	state law
What was the state allowed to continue to fund?	transportation of students to religious schools
What did both the majority and dissenting opinions reiterate?	that the Constitution has erected a "wall between church and state"
What was the disagreement between the Justices over whether funding breached what?	that wall
What did Justice Jackson argue there were no grounds upon which to support what?	the present legislation
When did the Supreme Court address the issue of officially sponsored prayer in public schools?	1962
What was the case in 1962 where the Supreme Court addressed the issue of officially sponsored school prayer?	Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421
By what vote did the Supreme Court determine it unconstitutional for state official to compose an official school prayer?	6-1
Even if a prayer is non-denominational it's still considered what?	unconstitutional
What was one of the reasons early colonists left England to seek religious freedom in America?	governmentally composed prayers for religious services
Who was the lone dissenter in the Supreme Court's ruling?	Justice Potter Stewart
What did Stewart object to?	the court's embrace of the "wall of separation" metaphor
Stewart felt the court was not responsibly aided by the uncritical invocation of what?	metaphors
Stewart pointed out that the phrase "Wall of separation" was nowhere to be found in what?	the Constitution
When did the case of Epperson v. Arkansas take place?	1968
What did the Arkansas law violate the constitutional prohibition of state laws in respect to?	an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof
Who wrote the court's opinion in Epperson v. Arkansas?	Justice Abe Fortas
What does the State have no legitimate interest in protecting any or all religions from?	views distasteful to them
What did an Arkansas law make it a crime to teach the theory of?	that mankind ascended or descended from a lower order of animals
When was the case of Lemon v. Kurtzman?	1971
What state's policy was in question in Lemon v. Kurtzman?	Pennsylvania
Whose salaries were being reimbursed in private religious schools?	teachers of secular subjects
What did the state's policy violate?	the Establishment Clause
What did the court's decision argue that the separation of church and state could never be?	absolute
How many prongs is the Supreme COurt's test to determine if a government action comports with the Establishment Clause?	three
What is the three-pronged test regarding the Establishment Clause know as?	"Lemon Test"
To not violate the Establishment Clause, a law must be adopted with neutral or what purpose?	non-religious
What much the primary effect of a law neither advance or inhibit?	religion
Excessive entanglement occurs when a state policy results in a close relationship of what?	government with religion
How many judges were on the panel which held the Pledge of Allegiance in California public schools was unconstitutional?	three
When did the three judge panel make their ruling?	2002
What did both houses of Congress pass measures reaffirming their support for?	the Pledge of Allegiance
Why was the case of Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow overturned?	procedural grounds
What did the five-justice majority hold that Newdow lacked?	standing to sue
When did the US Court of Appeals rule in the case of ACLU v. Mercer County?	December 20, 2005
What was displayed in Kentucky courthouses?	the Ten Commandments
What did a federal judge rule must be removed from public property?	the cross
When was a ruling handed down on the Mount Soledad cross controversy?	May 3, 2006
Why were the displays of the ten Commandments allowed?	secular in nature
What case is in regards to whether prayers at town meetings must allow various faiths?	Town of Greece v. Galloway
When did the Supreme Court rule on Town of Greece v. Galloway?	May 5, 2014
What was the Supreme Court's final vote in Town of Greece v. Galloway?	5-4
Who did the Supreme Court rule in favor of?	Town of Greece
What did the Supreme Court rule the Constitution allowed for?	sectarian prayers
What do some organizations disagree with the notion of?	separation of church and state
What do the critics argue the phrase misrepresents?	the textual requirements of the Constitution
What do scholars also disagree with about the way the Supreme Court has interpreted what?	constitutional limitation on religious establishment
What do critics note were intermingled at the time the Constitution was ratified?	many aspects of church and state
What do these critics argue couldn't have been intended by the framers of the constitution?	prevalent degree of separation of church and state
Critics of modern separation of church and state note there was official establishment of what in several states at the time of ratification?	religion
When was the passage of the 14th Amendment?	1868
What was recognized by the time the 14th Amendment passed?	first amendment's application to the state government
What kind of theory is the doctrine of the Living Constitution?	progressivist
What do some debates center on the law of the land not being just defined by the Constitution's Supremacy Clause but also by what?	legal precedence
What clause are both elected officials and appointed ones covered by?	religious test
What type of beliefs are not an allowed job qualification test for federal employees?	Religious
How many states violate the religious test clause with language somewhere in their official policies?	Seven
What do states violate the clause require state office-holders to possess?	particular religious beliefs
What do the non-permissible clauses require a belief in?	a Supreme Being
What's one example in Tennessee's constitution?	Article IX, Section 2
What language do some of the same states specify the oath of office include?	so help me God
Requiring oaths invoking God are today deemed to be in violation of what?	federal First Amendment
Because such oaths are in violation of the First Amendment, they're what?	unconstitutional and unenforceable
Why have perks like relaxed zoning rules and special parking privileges been allowed for churches?	beneficial arrangements for the society
What is the national motto "In God We Trust" officially known as?	ceremonial deism
What has the Supreme Court ruled about ceremonial deism?	not religious in nature
What state uses as a motto a passage from the Bible?	Ohio
Why was Ohio allowed to use a biblical passage as its motto?	because it displayed no preference for a particular religion
When do Jeffries and Ryan that the modern concept of separation of church and state dates from?	mid-twentieth century
What was the central point of the rulings of the Supreme Court's rulings?	constitutional ban against aid to religious schools
What was later banned in public education?	religious observance
How many propositions make up the separationist position on the Establishment Clause?	two
What position do Jeffries and Ryan argue was the reason for support from a coalition of separationists?	no-aid
What type of secularism came to dominate American public life?	pervasive
Who supported the ban against government aid to religious schools before 1970?	most Protestants (and most Jews)
What diminished after 1980?	anti-Catholic sentiment
What is opposed today by members of many Protestant faiths?	strict separationism
What do critics of the concept of separation of church and state argue it's untethered to?	anything in the text of the constitution
What is the profession of Philip Hamburger?	professor
What school is Philip Hamburger associated with?	Columbia Law school
What does Hamburger feel the modern concept of separation of church and state is rooted in?	American anti-Catholicism
What are state constitutional amendments relating to separation of church and state known as?	Blaine Amendments
Who is the Executive Director of the Baptist Joint Committee?	J. Brent Walker
What does Walker feel does not impugn the validity of the principle of separation of church and state?	supported by some who exhibited an anti-Catholic animus or a secularist bent
Who have argued for the separation of church and state for reasons having nothing to do with a desire for a secular culture?	Champions of religious liberty
Separationists opposed the Catholic church when it sought to do what?	tap into the public till to support its parochial schools
What does a principled debate on the issues not support a charge of?	religious bigotry
What did evangelicals want to keep apart?	the spiritual and secular worlds
What did religious freedom result from?	an alliance of unlikely partners
What profession does Frank Lambert have?	historian
What is the name of Lambert's book?	The Founding Fathers and the Place of Religion in America
What did Deists and skeptics join together to fight for?	a complete separation of church and state
What does Bellah say the separation of church and state is grounded firmly in?	constitution of the United States
Whose speech does Bellah's 1967 article analyze?	John F. Kennedy
What does Bellah use the term "civil religion' to describe?	the specific relation between politics and religion
What word does Bellah ask how a President is justified to use?	God
What has the separation of church and state failed to deny the political realm of?	a religious dimension
What does having no state-run or state-established allow a variety of religions to do?	flourish
Who has argued the United States is a model for the world in separation of church and state is a good thing?	Robert S. Wood
Where is the Center for New Religions located?	Toronto
What does Wood believe the U.S. operates on?	a sort of civic religion
What does Wood call the approach of allowing individuals the freedom to decide what they want to believe?	genius of religious sentiment in the United States
What type of faith is Protestantism?	Christian
Whose teachings were once considered to be heretical?	Martin Luther
Other than Protestantism, what are the other two divisions of Christianity?	Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy
Who wrote a letter protesting the condemnation of Martin Luther?	Lutheran princes
What was the name of the movement that started Protestantism?	the Protestant Reformation
What do all Protestantism denominations reject?	the notion of papal supremacy over the Church universal
What Catholic doctrine is usually denied in Protestantism?	transubstantiation,
What is the term to describe using only faith for justification?	sola fide
What is the highest authority in Protestantism for morals?	the Bible
What is the term to describe the differences between Protestantism and Catholicism?	Five solae
Where did Lutheranism begin?	Germany
Name three early Protestant reformers.	John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli, and John Knox
Where did Arminianism take hold?	the Netherlands and parts of Germany
Who ended Catholic supremecy in England?	King Henry VIII
Who made large contributions in the sciences in latter centuries?	Protestants
What percentage of Christians are Protestant?	nearly forty percent
Which continents have some form of Protestantism?	all populated continents
What types of Protestantism are increasing?	Nondenominational, evangelical, independent and other churches
What Protestant church has members around the world?	the Anglican Communion
How many people are considered Protestant?	more than 900 million
From what language does the term evangelical originate?	German
What German word refers to the gospel or being Protestant?	evangelisch
What English word for a church began with the Puritans in England?	evangelical
Name two contributors to Reformed churches.	John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli
Who brought Evangelicalism to the U.S.?	the Puritans
What is the term for teaching by only scripture?	sola scriptura
How many primary doctrines are focused on the Bible?	four
What is the term that means all in the Bible is true?	inerrancy
What power can help someone overcome sin?	the Holy Spirit
What is the term for needing the Bible for salvation?	necessity
Which ideas had little criticism for the most part?	necessity and inerrancy
What is the term for how the church as a whole works?	ecclesiology
What group believes that some in the church have a special status to understand the bible?	Catholics
At what period was inerrancy debated?	the Enlightenment
What item could be learned to gain salvation?	the Bible
What was Luther's main principle?	sola fide (by faith alone)
What principle made the Bible the one source for teaching?	sola scriptura
What did reformers considered their beliefs to be, in terms of focus?	Christocentric
What is the second principle of Protestantism?	sola fide (by faith alone)
Faith can bring what eternal benefit?	salvation
When did Protestantism begin to split?	the mid-to-late 16th century
What was one of the main causes of the split in Protestantism?	controversy over the Eucharist
What Catholic belief did early Protestants not agree with?	transubstantiation
What two substances are used in a Catholic Mass?	bread and wine
Whose body and blood is considered present in Holy Communion?	Christ
Who was one of the first to try to reform the Catholic Church?	Arnold of Brescia
When were the Waldensians created?	the early 1170s
In what year were the Waldensians labeled as heretics?	1215
Where does the Waldensian movement still exist currently?	Italy
What teachings originated with Arnold of Brescia?	apostolic poverty
Who started the Hussite movement?	Jan Hus
Whose words were an inspiration for Jan Hus?	John Wycliffe
How many crusades were waged against the Hussites?	five
Who called the crusades against the Hussites?	the Pope
How did Jan Hus die?	burned at the stake
When did Martin Luther attach his 95 theses on the door of the church?	31 October 1517
What did the theses argue against selling?	indulgences
What Catholic devotion would Martin Luther write about after the 95 theses/	Virgin Mary
Where was All Saints' Church?	Wittenberg
Who did Martin Luther criticize in the 95 theses?	the Church and the papacy
Who condemned the Reformation?	the Pope
Who wrote the Ordinances of 1541?	John Calvin
What city became the unofficial capital of the Protestant movement?	Geneva
When did John Calvin die?	1563
What type of missionaries were taught in Geneva?	Calvinist
What was the nickname for French Protestants?	Huguenots
What did the French find alienating about Catholicism?	the obduracy and the complacency of the Catholic establishment
When were French nobles converted to Protestantism?	the 1550s
When was the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre?	August 1572
Whose death caused an increase in the French civil wars?	Henry II
Who began the Protestant movement in Switzerland?	Huldrych Zwingli
Which two areas had a long history of resentment?	the German states and the Swiss Confederation
What was the name of the meeting to make an alliance between Zwingli and Luther?	the Colloquy of Marburg
What Prince hosted the Colloquy of Marburg?	Prince Philip of Hesse
What did the Colloquy of Marburg become infamous for?	its failure
Under whose reign did the Church of England part from Rome?	Henry VIII
When was the Act of Supremacy passed?	1534
What made Anglicanism into a more distinct tradition?	The Elizabethan Religious Settlement
In what years were the Dissolution of the Monasteries carried out?	Between 1535 and 1540
Who was made the Supreme Head of the Church of England in 1534?	King Henry
The growth of Puritanism happened during what age?	the Elizabethan Age
What did the Puritans want the Church of England to emulate?	the Protestant churches of Europe
The Puritan movement worked on reforming what church?	the Church of England
What was another name for the later Puritan movement?	dissenters and nonconformists
What did the later Puritan movement create?	various Reformed denominations
When was the Scottish Reformation?	1560
The Scottish Reformation decreased what country's influence?	France
Who was the leader of the Scottish Reformation?	John Knox
Whose regime made possible the Scottish Reformation?	Mary of Guise
When was the Papal Jurisdiction Act passed?	1560
When was the German Peasants' War?	1524–25
What war was waged from 1618 to 1648?	the Thirty Years' War
How much was the German population reduced during the Thirty Years' War?	between 25% and 40%
What treaty ended the Thirty Years' War?	the Peace of Westphalia
Where was the German Peasants' War?	the Bavarian, Thuringian and Swabian principalities
What movement occurred during the 1730's and 1740's?	The First Great Awakening
What movement made a permanent mark on Protestantism in the U.S.?	The First Great Awakening
When did the Second Great Awakening start?	around 1790
Which congregations joined the Second Great Awakening the most after 1820?	Baptist and Methodist
When did the Second Great Awakening lose momentum?	by the late 1840s
What did the Second Great Awakening create?	the formation of new denominations
What was the Second Great Awakening a reaction against?	skepticism, deism, and rationalism
When was the Third Great Awakening?	the late 1850s to the early 20th century
What denominations did the Third Great Awakening affect?	pietistic Protestant denominations
What other movement gained its force from the Third Great Awakening?	the worldwide missionary movement
What movement was affiliated with the Third Great Awakening?	the Social Gospel Movement
What new groups were formed as a result of the Third Great Awakening?	the Holiness, Nazarene, and Christian Science movements
What modern movement began in the 20th century?	the modern Pentecostal movement
What were the roots of the modern Pentecostal movement?	Methodist and Wesleyan
What movement did Pentecostalism create?	the Charismatic movement
In what city did the modern Pentecostal movement begin?	Los Angeles
What type of mission was the birthplace of the modern Pentecostal movement?	urban
Where has there been a rise in evangelical Protestantism?	In the United States and elsewhere in the world
What type of churches have declined?	mainstream liberal churches
When did Liberal Christianity increase?	In the post–World War I era
When did conservative churches start to increase?	In the post–World War II era
What type of evangelical churches are the most popular?	those that are more exclusively evangelical
What direction has Europe moved towards?	secularism
What caused the spread of secularism?	The Enlightenment
What areas have a higher rate of Christian observance?	North America, South America and Australia
When did South America show an increase in Evangelicals?	the 20th and 21st centuries
What country is more religious than other developed nations?	United States
Which reformation was seen as not being effective enough?	the Magisterial Reformation
What did Karlstadt call Lutheran theologians?	new papists
What were reform movement leaders compared to?	Roman Popes
What is another name for magister?	teacher
What has been linked with pacifism?	Anabaptism
What type of church do Protestants believe in?	the invisible church
Who comprises the invisible church?	all who profess faith in Jesus Christ
What is the name of the main principles of Protestantism?	the five solas
What other entities are also considered to be Protestant?	non-denominational groups and organizations
What Catholic doctrine do Protestants not believe in?	it is the one true church
What type of movements have tried to unite Protestant denominations?	Various ecumenical
Which is larger, divisions or unions of Protestantism?	divisions
What beliefs do most denominations agree on?	common beliefs in the major aspects of the Christian faith
What types of doctrines do denominations not agree on?	secondary
What type of belief defines what is a major or minor doctrine?	idiosyncratic
What do national churches bring together?	the ecclesiastical structure with the state
How long has the Faroe Islands church been independent?	since 2007
Who has the only Reformed church?	Tuvalu
Who is the head church of the Anglican Communion?	The Church of England
What type of church does Tonga have?	Methodist
What is another name for denominational families?	branches
What are the major branches of Protestantism?	Adventist, Anglican, Baptist, Calvinist (Reformed), Lutheran, Methodist and Pentecostal
What created the differentiation of Protestant branches?	how they have been influenced by important movements since the Reformation
What small branch of Protestantism will also be discussed?	Anabaptist
What do some branches share in common?	lineage
The Adventist movement has encouraged examining what in full?	the whole Bible
What Adventist groups observe the Sabbath?	Seventh-day Adventists and some smaller Adventist groups
What is the name of the Seventh-day Adventist's core beliefs?	the 28 Fundamental Beliefs
What is used for justification of the 28 Fundamental Beliefs?	Biblical references
What belief about ultimate punishment do Adventists disagree on?	annihilation or eternal torment
What does the word Anabaptist describe?	one who baptizes again
Who named the Anabaptists?	their persecutors
What baptism do Anabaptists reject?	baptism of infants
Who persecuted the Anabaptists in the 16th century?	Magisterial Protestants and Roman Catholics
Hans Denck was considered what type of reformer?	Second Front Reformers
What does Anglican mean?	the English Church
When did the word Anglican begin?	1246
Who do the Anglican churches have communion with?	the Archbishop of Canterbury
How many Anglican Communion members are there in the world?	80 million
What power does each national or regional church possess?	full autonomy
Who did the Church of England split from?	the Catholic Church
At what time did the Church of England become independent?	the Elizabethan Religious Settlement
Who headed the Anglican reforms in the middle of the 16th century?	Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer
The Church of England's reforms put it in the middle of what two traditions?	Lutheranism and Calvinism
What liturgical forms in Anglicanism were considered unacceptable by many progressive Protestants?	traditional
According to Baptists, who should have baptisms?	professing believers
What type of churches are most Baptists churches considered to be?	Protestant
What two offices do Baptists have?	pastors and deacons
What type of baptism do Baptists conduct?	complete immersion
What is another term for soul competency?	liberty
Where was the earliest Baptist church founded?	Amsterdam
Who was the pastor of the first Baptist church?	John Smyth
Who believed that Christ's atonement was for everyone?	General Baptists
Who founded the first Baptist group in what is now the United States?	Roger Williams
Who has spread the teachings of the Baptists to each continent?	Baptist missionaries
What is the most well-known summary of Calvin's teachings?	the five points of Calvinism
What area does the five points of Calvinism focus on?	the Calvinist view on soteriology
What is a brief description of Calvinism?	the sovereignty or rule of God in all things
What Calvinism doctrines are examples of the concept of the sovereignty of God?	predestination and total depravity
Who was an early leader in the Reformed churches?	Calvin
What is one of the largest Protestant branches with 80 million members?	Lutheranism
How popular is the branch of Lutheranism?	third
What is the largest body of Lutheran churches?	The Lutheran World Federation
How many people belong to the Lutheran World Federation?	over 72 million people
Name two smaller Lutheran church bodies.	International Lutheran Council and the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference
Who was the inspiration for Methodism?	John Wesley
Who did Methodism originally attract?	workers, agricultural workers, and slaves
What was John Wesley's occupation?	Anglican priest
How many Methodists are there in the world today?	approximately 80 million
How did the Methodist movement spread so far and wide?	vigorous missionary activity
What is Methodism known for, as far as music goes?	its rich musical tradition
Methodists believe that Christ achieved salvation for whom?	every human being
What do Methodists believe that one must do to receive Christ's salvation?	exercise an act of the will
Who wrote most of the Methodist hymns?	John Wesley's brother, Charles
What Calvinist doctrine is focuses on salvation?	monergism
Give two examples of spiritual gifts.	speaking in tongues and divine healing
What are other terms used to describe Pentecostalism?	Apostolic or Full Gospel
Pentecostals liken their teachings to those of what age?	Apostolic
Pentecostals believe in baptism with what entity?	the Holy Spirit
What three things are Pentecostals committed to?	biblical authority, spiritual gifts, and the miraculous
How many denominations were spawned by Pentecostalism?	hundreds
How many Pentecostals are there in the world?	over 279 million
What movement has caused non-Pentecostal churches to accept some Pentecostal beliefs?	Charismatic
Who can claim over 500 million members?	Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity
Where is Pentecostalism currently growing the most?	the global South
What denomination do these small groups belong to?	"non-denominational" or "evangelical"
How much affiliation do these small groups have with historical denominations?	little
Who has founded these small groups of Christians?	individual pastors
What do some groups of people who believe in basic Protestant principles identify as?	"Christians" or "born-again Christians"
Where do the Plymouth Brethren hail from?	Dublin, Ireland
What belief is the emphasis of the Plymouth Brethren?	sola scriptura
Though the Plymouth Brethren do not have a denominational name, what name is generally used for them?	The Brethren
When did the Plymouth Brethren originate?	late 1820s
What denomination do the Brethren originate from?	Anglicanism
What is another informal name for Quaker?	Friends
What is the Quakers unifying belief?	the priesthood of all believers
What have the Quakers tried to avoid?	creeds and hierarchical structures
What collective movement are the Quakers associated with?	the Religious Society of Friends
What types of Christianity do Quakers belong to?	evangelical, holiness, liberal, and traditional conservative
What is a prominent example of a movement which crosses over denominational lines?	Evangelicalism
Which movement actually affected the Catholic Church?	Charismatic Movement
What groups beliefs does the Charismatic Movement seek to add to branches of Christianity?	Pentecostals
Name a sub-group of the Charismatic Movement.	Neo-charismatic churches
What other types of churches often adopt charismatic or evangelical beliefs?	Nondenominational churches
What period saw a large upswing in Evangelicalism?	the 18th and 19th centuries
Where did the Great Awakenings increase interest in Evangelicalism?	Britain and North America
Methodism is part of what movement?	Evangelicalism
What man is associated with the beginnings of Evangelicalism?	Nicolaus Zinzendorf
What American is considered to have been a seminal influence in the charismatic movement?	Dennis Bennett
When was the Massey conference held?	1964
The Massey conference eventually led to developing what seminars?	Life in the Spirit
Name UK influences on the Charismatic movement.	Colin Urquhart, Michael Harper, David Watson
Where was the Massey conference held?	New Zealand
Who helped Lutherans understand the charismatic movement in the 1960s?	Larry Christenson
In what state did charismatic Lutheran congregations grow to be quite large?	Minnesota
Where is an annual event that has quite a bit of charismatic activity?	Huntington Beach
What was published in 1974?	Touched by the Spirit
Who wrote Touched by the Spirit?	Richard A. Jensen
Who heads the Newfrontiers movement?	Terry Virgo
What tendencies do reformed charismatics avoid?	overemotional
Where is Every Nations Churches located?	USA
What is a name for gifts of the Spirit?	charismata
Name the renewal movements which could be considered overemotional.	Word of Faith, Toronto Blessing, Brownsville Revival and Lakeland Revival
What group was very much hampered in England from making changes?	Puritans
What college was influenced by Puritan beliefs?	the University of Cambridge
What movement influenced the Puritans?	millennialism
What movement did the Puritans adopt in the 17th century?	Sabbatarianism
When was the Synod of Dort?	1619
What type of theology did Puritans accept?	Reformed
When did separatists become powerful in Puritanism?	the 1640s
What types of piety did the Puritans advocate?	personal and group
Where was Calvin criticized?	Geneva
At what gathering were supporters unsuccessful in establishing a new national church?	the Westminster Assembly
What religious movement affected education, politics, the economy, and marriage?	the Reformation
What churches let their clergy marry?	Protestant
When did women join the Protestant ministry?	1950
What types of churches have women had leading positions?	Protestant
What priesthood rules do Protestant churches reject?	celibate
What did Reformers increase so that their followers could read the Bible?	education
In the middle of the eighteenth century, how many Swedes could read and write?	eight of ten men and women
Who founded Harvard College?	the Puritans
When was Yale founded?	1701
What state became a hub of learning?	Pennsylvania
What is the heart of the Protestant moral code?	Industry, frugality, calling, discipline, and a strong sense of responsibility
What did Calvin particular reject?	luxury
What was a strong reason for inventors and investors to work on technical inventions?	economic success
What work ethic was an influence on capitalism and the Industrial Revolution?	Protestant
What is another name for the Protestant work ethic?	Protestant ethic thesis
Who calculated the Global Value Development Index?	Arno Tausch
What does a good job of combining religion and liberalism?	Protestantism
Who did an analysis of World Values Survey data?	Arno Tausch
What university is Arno Tausch from?	Corvinus University of Budapest
What type of engagement is considered a World Value?	environmental activism
What denominations are considered to be wealthier than most other groups?	Episcopalians and Presbyterians
Affluent American families are what type of families?	Mainline Protestant
What denominations are considered to be better educated than most other groups?	Episcopalians and Presbyterians
What political group has a disproportionately large number of Protestants?	Republican Party
Other than politics, what areas have a disproportionately large number of Protestants?	American business, law
The rise of English Puritanism and German Pietism resulted in a corresponding rise in what?	early experimental science
What religions did Merton think caused the scientific revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries?	English Puritanism and German Pietism
What other reason did Merton believe causes science to advance?	an accumulation of observations and improvement in experimental technique and methodology
What religions were English scientists in the 17th century?	Puritans or other Protestants
What values were thought to have a significant synergy?	ascetic Protestant values and those of modern science
What was the name of the doctrine that separated church and non-religious affairs?	doctrine of the two kingdoms
Who added the election of laymen to church government?	Calvin
When was the treatise that allowed a congregation to elect or remove a minister?	1523
Who added synods to church government?	The Huguenots
What were Luther's followers advised to use when governing worldly affairs?	reason
What political mixture did Calvin prefer?	aristocracy and democracy
What is the term for checks and balances in a political system?	separation of powers
Who paved the way for modern democracy to emerge?	Calvin
Who was allowed to teach a liberal Bible interpretation?	Hugo Grotius
What philosophers were given asylum?	Baruch Spinoza and Pierre Bayle
Whose democracies were created by Protestants?	the English and the American democracies
What democratic principles were followed by the Plymouth Colony?	self-rule and separation of powers
Other than the U.S., to what colonies did the British export their democratic beliefs?	Australia, New Zealand, and India
What group believed that democracy was the will of God?	Congregationalists
What other group in America practiced self-rule and separation of powers?	Massachusetts Bay Colony
What group initiated the right to religious freedom?	Protestants
Where did Luther refuse to change his beliefs?	Worms
What persecuted groups followed the separation of church and state?	Anabaptists and Huguenots
Who wrote about religious freedom in the early 17th century?	John Smyth and Thomas Helwys
How many American Protestants supported independence in America?	The great majority
What group popularized early Protestant teachings about separation of church and state?	Enlightenment thinkers
What did John Locke use as a basis for his political beliefs?	a set of Protestant Christian assumptions
Whose ideas influenced the Declaration of Independence?	John Locke
What Rights do the Declaration of Independence consider unalienable?	Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness
What scripture did Locke use as a reference for equality?	Genesis 1, 26-28
When did Prussia stop torture?	1740
When did Britain end slavery?	1834
Who were the first men to make large contributions to international law?	Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf
Who founded the Red Cross?	Henry Dunant
What international law was Henry Dunant mostly responsible for?	The Geneva Convention
Who first introduced social insurance programs?	Chancellor Otto von Bismarck
What did Bismarck consider social insurance programs to be?	practical Christianity
What social reform movements were Protestants working toward in the nineteen century?	the abolition of slavery, prison reforms, and woman suffrage
What country started programs that led to the welfare state?	Germany
What area copied Bismarck's social programs the most?	the Western world
What did John Milton do for world literature?	enrich
Samuel Taylor is listed as enriching what?	World literature
What women writers were listed as contributors to world literature?	Emily Dickinson, Emily Brontë
Edgar Allen Poe added value to literature in what area?	World
The Roman Catholic Church considers Protestant denominations to be what?	ecclesial communities or specific faith-believing communities
What is lacking in Protestant priesthood, according to the Roman Catholic Church?	no sacramental ministerial priesthood
What does the Roman Catholic Church say is not comparable to their sacraments and dogmas?	ordinances and doctrines
What other Church shares the Roman Catholic view on Protestant churches?	Eastern Orthodox
What is lacking in Protestantism, according to the Roman Catholic Church?	true apostolic succession
Who were Magisterial reformers?	Martin Luther, John Calvin, and Huldrych Zwingli
What institution did Martin Luther believe he was reforming?	the Roman Catholic Church
Instead of a visible church, what did Protestants believe there was?	a spiritual, invisible, and hidden church
When did the idea of a hidden church begin?	in the early days of the Protestant Reformation
What church did the Reformers claim had left them?	the Roman Catholic Church
Who supported the Magisterial Reformation?	the ruling authorities
The Reformed churches based their beliefs about ecclesiastical organization on what movement?	Conciliar
What are the doctrines of the Reformed churches called?	the five solas
What ecumenical council did the Reformed churches reject?	the Council of Trent
What type of character became central to religious unity in Reformed churches?	invisible
What group has been unsuccessful in creating a unified church since 1948?	the World Council of Churches
What conference was held in 1910?	the Edinburgh Missionary Conference
What churches have been strongly engaged in the ecumenical movement?	Orthodox
What have Orthodox churches condemned the perception of?	watering down Orthodox doctrine
What types of churches have had rapidly declining memberships?	united churches
If done properly, what Protestant practice does the Catholic Church recognize?	baptism
What is the only other sacrament of the Protestants that the Catholic Church recognizes?	marriage
Who can become ordained to the Catholic priesthood after a period of study?	Protestant ministers who become Catholics
Protestants who want full communion with the Catholic Church do not have to be what?	re-baptized
Why does the Catholic Church not recognize the ordination of Protestant ministers?	the lack of apostolic succession and the disunity from Catholic Church
What document was signed in 1999?	the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification
Who rejects the statement signed in 1999?	Confessional Lutherans
Who adopted the Joint Declaration in 2006?	delegates to the World Methodist Conference
The Joint Declaration supposedly resolves the conflict which originally led to what movement?	the Protestant Reformation
What two groups originally signed the Joint Declaration?	Lutheran World Federation and Catholic Church
How many Protestants are there in the world?	more than 900 million
What is the total population of Christians in the world?	approximately 2.4 billion
Approximately how much of the world's population are Protestant (in fractions)?	more than one tenth
What area only had about 2 million Protestants in 2010?	Middle East-North Africa
What area had the largest Protestant population in 2010?	Sub-Saharan Africa
In what European areas is Protestantism still the most practiced religion?	the Nordic countries and the United Kingdom
In 2012, what percentage of the EU was thought to be Protestant?	12%
In what countries is Protestantism one of the most popular (but not THE most popular) religions?	Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Latvia, Estonia and Hungary
The Pew Research Center estimated Protestants to be what percentage of Europe's Christian population in 2010?	17.8%
What area was once the site of a significant pre-reformation movement, but now only has a small number of Protestants?	Czech Republic
Where has Protestantism spread quickly since the 1900's?	Africa, Asia, Oceania and Latin America
When did much of the spread of Protestantism occur in the 20th century?	after World War II
In 2010, what percentage of Anglicans were said to be in Africa?	59%
What percentage of Anglicans were in the UK in 1910?	79%
In 2010, what country had more Protestants than both the UK and Germany together?	Brazil
What is Brazil's capital?	Brasília
What region of Brazil is Brasilia in?	center-western
What is Brasilia's GDP per capita in US dollars?	US$36,175
When was Brasilia founded?	April 21, 1960
What is the population of Brasilia's metro area?	2,556,149
How many administrative regions does the Federal District have?	31
What is Brasilia's proper city population?	209,926
What does Brasilia's metro area consist of?	the Federal District
Which World Cup did Brasilia host?	2014
Which Confederations Cup did Brasilia host?	2013
When did Kubitschek become President of Brazil?	1956
When did Kubitschek leave office?	1961
Who ordered Brasilia be built?	Juscelino Kubitschek
How many people competed to be Brasilia's urban planner?	5550
When was Brasilia inaugurated?	April 21, 1960
When did Brazil pass a new Constitution?	1988
What rights did Brasilia gain in 1988?	to elect its Governor, and a District Assembly
What is Brasilia's District Assembly called?	Câmara Legislativa
What climate type does Brasilia have?	tropical savanna climate (Aw)
When is Brasilia's rainy season?	October to April
When is Brasilia's dry season?	May to September
What is the average maximum temperature in Brasilia in September?	28.3 °C (82.9 °F)
Which month does Brasilia have the highest rainfall?	January
What is Brazil's official language?	Portuguese
What languages besides Portuguese are taught in Brasilia's schools?	English and Spanish
How many international schools are in Brasilia?	six
When will a new international school open in Brasilia?	August 2016
What nationality will the new international school in Brasilia be?	British
Who designed the Cathedral of Brasília?	Oscar Niemeyer
What type of structure is the Cathedral of Brasília?	concrete-framed hyperboloid
When was the Cathedral of Brasília dedicated?	31 May 1970
How many identical columns are used in the Cathedral of Brasília?	16
How much do the Cathedral of Brasília's columns weigh?	90 t
What is in the Planalto Palace?	presidential offices
Where does Brazil's president live, in Portuguese?	Palácio da Alvorada
What does 'Palácio da Alvorada' mean?	Palace of the Dawn
Who designed gardens for some of Brasilia's major buildings?	Roberto Burle Marx
What style of gardens did Marx design?	modernist
What are 'superquadras' or superblocks?	groups of apartment buildings along with a prescribed number and type of schools, retail stores, and open spaces
Where is there a peninsula with luxury homes?	the northern end of Lake Paranoá
What did the planners want to have around Lake Paranoa?	extensive public areas
What took over Lake Paranoa's shores contrary to the plan?	private clubs, hotels, and upscale residences and restaurants
What mostly-unplanned cities are around Brasilia?	Gama, Ceilândia, Taguatinga, Núcleo Bandeirante, Sobradinho, and Planaltina
Who complained that Brasilia was monotonous?	Simone de Beauvoir
What nationality was de Beauvoir?	French
What was de Beauvoir's career?	writer
What is Brasilia famous for?	its cuisine and efficiency of transit
What services are central to Brasilia's economy?	government, communications, banking and finance, food production, entertainment, and legal services
What is Brasilia's most important non-service industry?	construction
How much of Brasilia's GDP is from Public Administration?	54.8%
How much of Brasilia's GDP is from Services?	28.7%
How much of Brasilia's GDP is from Agribusiness?	0.2%
What is Brasilia's GDP?	99.5 billion reais
How much of Brazil's GDP comes from Brasilia?	3.76%
What industries is Brasilia trying to encourage?	software, film, video, and gemology
Where did Brasilia place hotels?	Hotels Sectors North and South
What kinds of restaurants does Brasilia have?	from local and regional Brazilian dishes to international cuisine
What kinds of hotels does Brasilia have?	from inns, pensions and hostels to larger international chain hotels
What lake has some hotels around it?	Lake Paranoá
When was 'The World In Grey' published?	2008
Who wrote 'The World In Grey'?	Ryan J. Lucero
Whose prophecy is 'The World In Grey' based on?	Don Bosco
Who is Brasilia's patron saint?	Don Bosco
What lake did Don Bosco predict?	Paranoá Lake
What does 'Praça dos Três Poderes' mean?	Square of the Three Powers
What does the name 'Praça dos Três Poderes' come from?	the three federal branches around the plaza
What is Brazil's Supreme Court called?	Supremo Tribunal Federal
Who designed the Praça dos Três Poderes?	Lúcio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer
What is Brazil's Congress called?	Congresso Nacional
Where does Brazil's president live?	Palácio da Alvorada
What principles of architecture was the Alvorada designed with?	simplicity and modernity
How large is the Alvorada?	7,000 m2
How many floors does the Alvorada have?	three
When did Brasilia's presidential residence open?	1958
How many floors does the Planalto have?	four
How large is the Planalto?	36,000 m2
Where are the President's offices?	Palácio do Planalto
Who designed the Planalto?	Oscar Niemeyer
Where are the VP's offices?	Palácio do Planalto
When did Brasilia's airport add a second runway?	2006
How many passengers came through Brasilia's airport in 2007?	11,119,872
How many movie theaters are in Brasilia's airport?	four
How many vendor spaces are in Brasilia's airport?	136
How many parking spaces are there at Brasilia's airport?	1,200
How many boarding bridges does Brasilia's airport have?	28
When did the number of boarding bridges at Brasilia's airport nearly double?	2014
What company now runs Brasilia's airport?	Inframerica Group
Besides boarding bridges, what also doubled in 2014 at Brasilia's airport?	the number of parking spaces
What is Brasilia's airport's annual passenger capacity after 2014's improvements?	21 million
What is the JK Bridge a nickname for?	The Juscelino Kubitschek bridge
What does the JK Bridge cross?	Lake Paranoá
Who was the JK Bridge named for?	Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira
Who was de Oliveira?	former president of Brazil
Who designed the JK Bridge?	architect Alexandre Chan and structural engineer Mário Vila Verde
What is the Rodoviária?	bus station
As of 2000, how many people lived in Ceilândia?	344,039
As of 2000, how many people lived in Taguatinga?	243,575
As of 2000, how many people lived in the Plano Piloto?	approximately 400,000
What areas does Brasilia's public transit avoid?	most of the political and tourist areas
What is the older interstate bus station called?	Rodoferroviária
What mall is Brasilia's newest bus station near?	Parkshopping Mall
Where did Brasilia's plan want interstate buses to stop?	Central Station
Where is the older interstate bus station?	the western end of the Eixo Monumental
What street is Brasilia's newest bus station on?	Saída Sul
What type of sports are popular in Brasilia?	unpowered air sports
What air sports event did Brasilia host in 2003?	the 14th Hang Gliding World Championship
What air sports event did Brasilia host in 2005?	the 2nd stage of the Brazilian Hang Gliding Championship
Why is Brasilia a good place for air sports?	strong thermal winds and great "cloud-streets"
What type of country is Greece?	developed
What percentage of Greece's economy is based on service?	82.8%
How much of Greece's economy is comprised of industrial sectors?	13.3%
How much of the national economic output did the agricultural sector of Greece contribute in 2015?	3.9%
How many international tourists visited Greece in 2013?	18 million
What is Greece a significant producer of within the EU?	agricultural
Greece has the largest what in the Balkans?	economy
What was Albania's largest foreign investor in 2013?	Greece
Who is Greece the most important trading partner to?	Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
What Greek telecommunications company has become a strong investor in former Yugoslavia?	OTE
What organization was Greek a founding member?	OECD
What does the abbreviation OECD expand to?	Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
What is Greece's economy classified as?	advanced, high-income
When did Greece join what is now the European Union?	1981
When did Greece adopt the Euro as its currency?	2001
What years of economic growth was called Greece's economic miracle?	1950 to 1980
From what year was Greece's levels of GDP growth above the Eurozone average?	2000
What was the GDP growth rate of Greece in 2013?	−3.2%
How much public debt did Greece have in 2011?	€356 billion
What year did Greece fall back into recession?	2015
What transformed a large part of the world in the 19th century?	Industrial Revolution
What does recent research from 2006 examine?	evolution of the Greek economy
What was Greece's GDP growth between 1833 and 1911 compared other Western European nations?	slightly lower
What type of industrial activity was evident in Greece in the period researched?	shipbuilding
What did Greece do in 1826, 1843, 1860 and 1894?	defaulted on its external loans
How many years of consecutive growth had Greece had?	fourteen
When did Greece go into recession?	in 2008
What did the Greek economy have the highest of at the end of 2009?	budget deficit
What percentage of GDP was the budget deficit of Greece in 2009?	15.7%
What type of crisis resulted from the budget deficit and rising debt levels of Greece?	severe economic
What was Greece accused of covering up the extent of?	its massive budget deficit
What prompted the allegation of Greece's covering up its budget deficit?	massive revision
When did the Parliament vote in favor of an investigation?	February 2012
Who voted in favor of an official investigation of the accusations?	Hellenic Parliament
What did a former member of the Hellenic Statistical Authority say the deficit had been inflated to justify?	harsher austerity measures
What were the majority of the differences in the revised budget due to the temporary changing of?	accounting practices
What did retroactively applying the ESA95 methodology result in raising the budget deficit to?	3.38% of GDP
By how much did the budget deficit of Greece exceed the 3% limit in the reference year of 1999?	.38%
What other European country were claims similar to those levied against Greece made?	Italy
When were expenses recorded by the new government?	when military material was ordered rather than received
Who provided a report for Greece in 2005?	OECD
What was the range of the impact of the new accounting rules on the Greek fiscal figures for the years 1997 to 1999?	0.7 to 1 percentage point of GDP
What was the year of Greece's EMU membership qualification?	1999
What methodology was in force when Greece submitted its membership qualification?	ESA79
What did the Greek minister of finance clarify the 1999 budget was below when calculated with the ESA79 methodology?	the prescribed 3% limit
What error is sometimes made by tying Greece's Eurozone entry with?	controversy regarding usage of derivatives’ deals
What banks did Greece use derivatives' deals with?	U.S. Banks
What was the result of the deals with the U.S. banks?	artificially reduce their reported budget deficits
How many Euros was Greece able to "hide" because of an arrangement with Goldman Sachs?	2.8 billion
Why aren't the deficit values affected by the currency swap with Goldman Sachs relevant to Greece's Eurozone entry?	affected deficit values after 2001
What were credits given to European governments disguised as?	swaps
Why weren't swaps registered as debts by Eurostat at the time?	ignored statistics involving financial derivatives
What rules did a German derivatives dealer say could be quite legally circumvented through swaps?	Maastricht
What was again revised in May of 2010?	Greek government deficit
What was Greece's public debt forecast to hit as high of a percentage of GDP of in 2010?	120%
What was a consequence of the doubt that Greece could pay it's debts?	rise of the country's borrowing rates
What did the international banks have doubts about Greece's ability to repay?	sovereign debt
How much money did the IMF and other Eurozone countries agree to give Greece in 2010?	€45 billion in bail-out loans
What was the total amount of the rescue package given to Greece?	€110 billion
What organizations are keeping a watchful eye on how Greece is implementing austerity measures?	the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the IMF
What did Greece have the highest percentage increase in between 2005 and 2011?	industrial output
What was the increase of Greece's industrial output between 2005 and 2011?	6%
What did the industrial production in Greece fall by due to the financial crisis?	13.4%.
What is Greece ranked in the EU in the production of marble?	third
How many tons of marble does Greece produce?	920,000 tons
What does Greece have the largest of in the world?	merchant navy
Greece's navy accounts for more than what percentage of the world's total deadweight tonnage?	15%
What is the Greek merchant navy's total dwt?	245 million
What percentage of the entire EU's dwt does Greece alone represent?	39.52%
How many ships did Greece's navy have in the late 1970s?	5,000
How many of the world's tankers do Greek companies own?	22.6%
What percentage of the world's bulk carriers are Greece's?	16.1%
What percentage of Greece's GDP does shipping account for?	6%
What did earnings from Greece's shipping amount to in 2011?	€14.1 billion
How many Greek shipping companies were in operation in 2011?	750
When counting shipping as quasi-exports and in terms of monetary value, what is Greece's global rank?	4th
What was the worth Greece's shipping services in 2011?	17,704.132 million $
What three countries were ahead of Greece in 2011 with exports?	Denmark, Germany and South Korea
What was the shipping services imported by Greece in 2011 worth?	7,076.605 million US$
What was Greece's 2011 trade surplus?	10,712.342 million US$
Who ran the phones in Greece between 1949 and the 1980s?	state
What was the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization better known by the acronym of?	OTE
When did the liberalization of the telephone communications in Greece happen?	1980s
What company has a 40% stake in OTE?	Deutsche Telekom
How many shares of OTE does the Greek state own?	10%
What does Greece lag behind other EU countries in terms of use?	Internet
How much did the percentage of households with access to the internet increase between 2006 and 2013?	more than doubled
What percentage of people in Greece had never used the Internet as of 2013?	36%
Who has the EU's third highest percentage of people who've never used the Internet?	Greece
What has the been a massive increase in the number of households with in Greece?	a broadband connection
How many millions of tourists does Greece attract each year?	more than 16 million
What part of Greece's GDP is accounted for by tourism?	18.2%
What did the 2008 OECD report show the average tourist expenditure while in Greece was?	$1,073
How many jobs in 2008 in Greece were somehow related to the tourism industry?	840,000
How many tourists did Greece welcome in 2009?	over 19.3 million
What have a number of tourism-related organizations placed Greek destinations at the top of?	their lists
What Greek city was rated the world's fifth best ultimate party town by 2009's Lonely Planet?	Thessaloniki
What distinction does the city of Thessaloniki have in regards to size in Greece?	the country's second-largest city
What did Travel+Leisure vote the island of Santorini as in 2011?	best island in the world
What island was ranked as the 5th best in Europe?	Mykonos
What was Olympic Airways known as after 2003?	Olympic Airlines
What was Olympic Airlines relaunched as in 2009?	Olympic Air
What airlines was award the "Best regional airline in Europe" award by Skytrax?	Aegean Airlines
What does Olympic Air hold a silver ERA award for?	"Airline of the Year"
What year did Olympic Air receive an award as Top Domestic Airline?	2011
How long is Greek's rail network estimated to run?	2,548 km
Who runs the rail transport in Greece?	TrainOSE
Who is TrainOSE a subsidiary of?	the Hellenic Railways Organization
What gauge is most of Greece's railway?	standard gauge
How many kilometers of Greece's railway is electrified?	764
What was Greece's largest port as measured by good transported in 2010?	Aghioi Theodoroi
How many million of tons went through Aghioi Theodoroi in 2010?	17.38
How many million tons of goods did port Eleusis transport in 2010?	12.37 million tons
How many tons of goods were transported through Greece in 2007?	164.3 million tons
What was the port of Piraeus declared to be in 2013?	fastest-growing port in the world
How many TEUs did Piraeus handle in 2010?	513,319
What amount of TEUs did Thessaloniki handle in 2010?	273,282
How many million of people passed through Greece's ports in 2010?	83.9 million
What record amount of TEUs did Piraeus handle in 2013?	3.16 million
What organization owns Pier II in Piraeus?	COSCO
Who dominates energy production in Greece?	Public Power Corporation
How much of all of Greece's energy demand was supplied by DEI in 2009?	85.6%
What is almost half of DEI's power output generated by the use of?	lignite
How much of DEI's energy output is from natural gas?	20%
What percentage did independent companies' energy production increase between 2009 and 2010?	56%
How much of Greece's energy consumption came from renewable sources in 2008?	8%
What was EU average amount of energy from renewable sources in 2008?	10%
Where does most of Greece's renewable energy come from?	biomass and waste recycling
How much of Greece's energy is targeted to be from renewable sources by 2020?	18%
Who suggested research into the possibility of a Greek nuclear power plant should begin?	Academy of Athens
What is Greece set to start exploring the Ionian Sea for?	oil and gas
What countries have expressed interest in Greece's oil and gas exploration?	Norway and the United States
When were the first results of the energy explorations expected?	summer of 2012
When did the Deutsche Bank publish a report on the findings of the value of the reserves south of Crete?	November 2012
What did the Deutsche Bank estimate the value of the reserves to be at?	€427 billion
What was the currency of Greece until 2002?	drachma
What did Greece sign to apply to join the eurozone?	Maastricht Treaty
How many convergence criteria were there in the treaty?	two
When did the physical exchange of the drachma to euro take place?	January 2002
When did the ten-year period for eligible exchange of the drachma to euro end?	March 2012
What did IMF forecast Greece's unemployment rate to be in 2012?	14.8 percent
What was Greece's unemployment rate between in 2009?	9 per cent and 11 per cent
What did Greece's unemployment rate soar to in 2013?	28 per cent
What was Greece's jobless rate in 2015?	24 per cent
What is thought to have eroded Greece's potential output?	prolonged massive unemployment
Does speaker of the House participate in dbate?	Typically, the Speaker does not participate in debate
Are snate majority leaders more influential than Speaker of the house??	Majority Leaders have been more influential than the Speaker
Who did Newt Gingrich delegate much authority to?	Dick Armey
Who was speaker of the house When Tom Delay was Majority leader?	Dennis Hastert
Who takes over as Speaker if the minority party gains control of the house?	Minority Leader is usually the party's top choice for Speaker
What meetings do Minority and Majority leaders usually meet to discuss?	agreements on controversial issues
Who is he current Minority leader?	Nancy Pelosi
If minority party takes control of congress, who is usually in link to become majority leader?	Minority Leader
Are minority leaders usually experienced?	Minority Leaders are typically experienced lawmakers when they win election to this position
In what congress did Nancy Pelosi bdcome minority leader?	108th Congress
How long had Richard Gephart served in house prior to being elected to minority leader?	20 years
When was Robert Michel elected minority leader?	1981
John Rhodes served as minority leader beginning in what year?	1973
Between majority leader and speaker what roles did Boehner have?	Republican House leader and Minority Leader from 2007 to 2011
What republican majority leader died in a plane crash?	Hale Boggs
Since 1995 who is the only majority leader to become speaker?	John Boehner
Who succeeded Newt Gingrich as Speaker?	Dennis Hastert
Who is the leader of the majority leader in House?	Speaker
What is the title of seconde in command for majority party in congress?	Majority Leader
Who overshadowed House Speaker Dennis Hastert?	Majority Leader Tom DeLay
Who is the leader of the minority party in the House?	Minority Leader
Does the minority or majority party have more leadership positions in House?	minority party has one less leadership position
What role did Pelosi win in 112th Congress?	Minority Leader
What party lost control of House in 2010 elections?	Democrats
What rule gives minority leader right to offer motion to recommit with instructions?	Rule XII, clause 6
Who may place legislation on a corrections calendar?	minority leader
Minority leader may appoint individuals to what government roles?	certain federal entities.
Are minority leadership roles specified closely?	are not well-defined
What congressman largely specified the job description of minority leader?	Representative Bertrand Snell
What despcription was assigned to minority leader in part?	He is spokesman for his party and enunciates its policies.
What defines a large part of minority leader role?	tradition and custom
When was the minority leader position created?	20th-century
Why was minority leader position created?	not always evident who functioned as the opposition floor leader
Who is sometimes considered the first funcioning "Minority Leader?"	James Madison
Who was Treasury Secretary at time of first congress?	Alexander Hamilton
In the early days who represented party leadership?	it was more usual that neither major party grouping (Federalists and Democratic-Republicans) had an official leader
In early 19th century, what were 2 common parties?	(Federalists and Democratic-Republicans)
What would be the purpose of organizing non majority members of  the house?	to represent a party comprising a distinct minority
What made identifying House leadership difficult?	Internal party disunity
How many candidates was typical in early fields for speaker?	at least twenty different candidates
From 1861 to 1875 how many times was Dmocratic minority speaker not nominated?	two of these seven Congresses
Why was Keifer discredited/empty leader?	arbitrarily handed out "choice jobs to close relatives ... all at handsome salaries.
Who's contention is it that the minority party candidate is clearly Minority Leader since 1883?	Randall Ripley
Although Keifer held minority leader role, who was actual gloof leader?	Thomas Reed,
Prior to 1883 there is evidence that serious caucus fights occured in what years?	1871 and 1873
What prominent ex-speaker was nominated for minority role in 1875?	James Blaine
What former appropriations chairman was nominated for minority leader in 1876,77,79?	James A. Garfield
Is there a consensus about the time that minority leadership officially emerged as a position?	there is disagreement among historical analysts
What party characteristics emerged in the house in late 19th century?	strong party organization and professional politicians
What were these conditions effective for in the house?	establishment of a more highly differentiated House leadership structure.
Which party has always elevated minority floor leaders to speakership?	Democrats
What year did Republicans regain control while Rober Michel was Minority Leader?	1994
Why were republicans upset with Mann?	objecting to their private bills on the floor
What is the leadership structure when party controls house and presidency?	Speaker normally assumes a lower profile and defers to the President
Is the Senate or the House more partisan?	more partisan nature of the House
What minority leaders have played prominenct roles to opposing incumbent president?	Gerald Ford, Richard Gephardt, Nancy Pelosi, and John Boehner
How is the minority leader able to accomplish addition demands and tasks?	minority leader is provided with extra staff resources—beyond those accorded him or her as a Representative
What influences role of minority leader?	personality and contextual factors
Obligations for minority leader are stated in what document?	House rule book.
How many private calendar objector members does minority leader appoint?	three
What 2 commissions is the minority leader a member of?	House Office Building Commission; he or she is a member of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission
Who does minority leader have informal ties with for scheduling house matters?	majority party leaders
According to democratic rules of the 106th congress what committee does minority leader chair?	Policy Committee
According to democratic rules of the 106th congress what committee does minority leader head?	Steering Committee
According to democratic rules of the 106th congress what campaign membership do they have?	Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
According to democratic rules of the 106th congress what leadership members do they appoint?	Democratic Leadership Council
Who plays an influential role in the formation of party policy?	A party's floor leader
How are floor leaders kept informed of legislative status?	contacts with his party's members serving on House committees, and with the members of the party's whip organization
In what role are the floor leader's instrumental for legislation?	guiding legislation favored by his party through the House, or in resisting those programs of the other party that are considered undesirable by his own party
How much concern do minority leaders have for campaigning?	hardly any major aspect of campaigning that does not engage their attention
Outside of Washington how much involvement do minority leaders have in campaigns?	travel around the country to speak on behalf of party candidates; and they encourage incumbent colleagues to make significant financial contributions
Who establishes leadership PACs?	Minority leaders
Does minority leader act solely to advance party objectives?	in consultation with other party colleagues
Does minority leader always employ same strategy for party objectives?	options selected depend on a wide range of circumstances
Does dissension and cohesion of majority party factor into minority strategy?	may provide the minority leader with greater opportunities to achieve his or her priorities than if the majority party exhibited high degrees of party cohesion
What is the purpose of Obstruction?	frustrating the majority party's ability to govern or attracting press and media attention to the alleged ineffectiveness
How can obstruction be employed?	motions to adjourn, appeals of the presiding officer's ruling, or numerous requests for roll call votes
Is it safe to employ negative strategy?	"going negative" carries risks
What may be a risk negative tactic?	if his party fails to offer policy alternatives that appeal to broad segments of the general public
What important aim of minority leader pertaining to elections?	develop an electorally attractive agenda of ideas and proposals
How can a minority leader attempt to set some agenda for house?	may employ, or threaten to use, discharge petitions to try and bring minority priorities to the floor.
How many signatures are required on a discharge pertition?	218
What non party affiliated voters are critical for party to attract in elections?	independents and swing voters
How do minority leaders keep party priorities publicized?	"talking points" for constituent meetings in their districts; they help to organize "town meetings"
What items are discussed at party retreats?	issues and assess the party's public image; they create "theme teams" to craft party messages
How do minority leaders gauge party preferences?	conduct surveys of party colleagues
With whom does minority leader consult and participate in news conference?	counterparts in the Senate—and with the president if their party controls the White House
What is the overall party strategy for minority leader?	develop a coordinated communications strategy, to share ideas and information, and to present a united front on issues
What speaking obligations does minority leader have?	floor speeches and close debate on major issues before the House; they deliver addresses in diverse forums across the country
What are the purpose of minority leader writings?	write books or articles that highlight minority party goals and achievements
How often does minority leader speak with president when party controls white house?	minority leader confers regularly with the President and his aides about issues before Congress
What was Robert Michel's role as minority leader?	point man" for Republican presidents
Is the minority leader's strategic role always consitent?	will vary depending on whether the President is of the same party or the other party
What is the difference in role for Minority leader when majority party holds white house?	assumes a larger role in formulating alternatives to executive branch initiatives and in acting as a national spokesperson for his or her party
What was Gerald Ford's role as minority leader under Johnson administration?	propose Republican alternatives
What did Ford's alternatives provide for republican's?	political protection
What options do minority party have in amendment phase?	offer our program as a substitute
If minority party loses committ of the whole, then what motion may be filed?	motion to recommit and get a vote on that
If recommit fails, then what choice needs to be made by minority representatives?	say we did our best to come up with a better alternative. Or they could vote for it and make the same argument
What is a good technique to foster party harmony?	appointment of task forces
What colleagues are best to work with to reach a consensus?	partisan colleagues with conflicting views
What does the creation of leadership positions allow for?	way to reach out and involve a greater diversity of partisans in the leadership structure
Who is the chief vote counter for party?	The Chief Deputy Whip
Who holds the highest appointed Republican position in House?	Patrick McHenry.
Who is the leader of chief deputy whips in democratic conference?	Senior Chief Deputy Whip
How long has democratic leader of whips held position?	senior chief deputy minority whip, John Lewis, has held his post since 1991
Where do Armenians mostly live besides Armenia?	Nagorno-Karabakh Republic
How many Armenians live outside Armenia and the republic within it?	around 5 million
Where do most emigrant Armenians live?	Russia, the United States, France, Georgia, Iran, Ukraine, Lebanon, and Syria
Why did many Armenians leave Armenia?	the Armenian Genocide
How long ago has the term 'Armenia' been used?	around the 6th century BC
What is the earliest known use of 'Armenians'?	476 BC
Who wrote the earliest known use of 'Armenians'?	Hecataeus of Miletus
Who described Armenian life in 401 BC?	Xenophon
What did Xenophon say Armenian language sounded like?	Persians
What mountain does Armenia surround?	Mount Ararat
What era was the Hittite Empire in?	the Bronze Age
When did the Hayasa-Azzi rule?	1600–1200 BC
When did the Arme-Shupria rule?	1300s–1190 BC
When did the Nairi rule?	1400–1000 BC
What subgroup does Hamp put the Armenian language in?	Pontic Indo-European
Where does Hamp say the Pontic Indo-European languages originate?	the northeast coast of the Black Sea and its hinterlands
What languages does Hamp say are similar to Armenian?	Greek and Ancient Macedonian
When was Armenia established?	in the late 6th century BC
What famous inscription mentioned Armenia?	the Achaemenid Behistun Inscription
During which dynasty was Armenia established?	Orontid dynasty
When was Armenia at its largest?	95–65 BC
What was the first country to make Christianity its official religion?	The Arsacid Kingdom of Armenia
What religion was Armenian paganism influenced by?	Zoroastrianism
When did Armenia make Christianity its official religion?	AD 301
Why did Armenia make Christianity its official religion?	in defiance of the Sassanids
Who invented the Armenian alphabet?	Mesrop Mashtots
When did Armenia become a sovereign kingdom?	885 AD
Under which ruler did Armenia become a sovereign kingdom?	Ashot I
What dynasty was Ashot I part of?	the Bagratid Dynasty
Who invaded Armenia in 1064?	Seljuk Turks
What Turkic federations ruled Armenia?	the Ak Koyunlu and the Kara Koyunlu
When did the Russo-Persian War begin?	1826
When did the Russo-Persian War end?	1828
What treaty ended the Russo-Persian War?	Treaty of Turkmenchay
When was the Peace of Amasya?	mid 16th century
When did parts of Armenia under Iranian control become part of Russia?	In the late 1820s
Who says they didn't kill Armenians as genocide, just because they were 'in the way of the war'?	Governments of Republic of Turkey
What has happened when other countries condemned Armenian genocide?	diplomatic conflict
Who ruled Turkey when the Armenian genocide happened?	the Ottoman Empire
What was Armenia's status from 1918 to 1920?	independent republic
When did communists take over Armenia?	late 1920
Who invaded Armenia in 1920?	the Red Army
What part of the USSR did Armenia join?	the Transcaucasian SFSR
When did Armenia leave the USSR?	1991
How long have Armenians lived in the highlands?	over four thousand years
Who founded the first Armenian nation?	Hayk
Who did Hayk defeat?	Bel of Babylon
What does Hayastantsis mean?	those that are from Armenia
How many native Armenians are in Armenia today?	3.5 million
What is the Armenian Quarter?	one of the four quarters of the walled Old City of Jerusalem
How many people live in the Armenian monastery in or near Italy?	35
When was the Italian Armenian monastery founded?	1717
What religion is the Italian Armenian monastery?	Catholic
Where is the Italian Armenian monastery?	on an island near Venice
What are Parskahay?	Armenians who originate from Iran
What are Lipananahay?	Armenians from Lebanon
What dialect do most Diaspora Armenians speak?	Western
How similar is Western Armenian to Eastern Armenian dialect?	considerable differences with Eastern Armenian, but speakers of either of the two variations can usually understand each other
What type of Armenian is spoken by Armenians in Iran and Russia?	Eastern
When did Armenia's church become independent?	451 AD
What is Armenia's church called?	Armenian Apostolic Church
What type of Catholicism is Armenia's church part of?	Oriental Orthodox
Where was the Armenian Catholicosate located at first?	Echmiadzin
Where did the Armenian Catholicosate move to?	Cilicia
What religion is dominant in the countries surrounding Armenia?	Muslim
What are Hamshenis?	ethnic Armenian Muslims
Who became Catholicos in Etchmiadzin in 1441?	Kirakos Virapetsi
Who remained Catholicos of Cilicia?	Krikor Moussapegiants
How do the two Catholicosates compare?	equal rights and privileges
Which Armenian church recognizes the Pope?	Armenian Catholic Church
What broke away from the Armenian Apostolic Church?	Armenian Evangelical Church
Which Armenian church is the most popular in Armenia?	Armenian Apostolic Church
What broke away from the Armenian Evangelical Church?	Armenian Brotherhood Church
Who came up with the Armenian alphabet?	Mesrop Mashtots
When did Armenian writing begin?	400 AD
Who was the 'father of Armenian history'?	Moses of Chorene
Who wrote 'The History of Armenia'?	Moses of Chorene
Which European movement were the Revivalist authors similar to?	Romanticists
When were early Armenian Christian churches built?	between the 4th and 7th century
In which century did Armenia become Christian?	4th
What radiating style are some Armenian churches built with?	Hrip'simé
When were Armenian churches built with center cupola cones?	fifth century
When were Armenian churches built with niched buttresses?	seventh century
Who invaded Armenia in the 11th century?	Seljuk
What Armenian monasteries were built in the 11th century?	Haghpat and Haritchavank
When was there an Armenian architecture revival?	From the 9th to 11th century
What dynasty ruled Armenia in the 10th century?	Bagratid Dynasty
What was ornately carved in the 9th-11th centuries?	Armenian Khachkars
When did Armenia begin winning Olympic medals?	1952
Where were the 1952 Olympics held?	Helsinki
Which Armenian football team was the most successful?	Yerevan's FC Ararat
Who won Armenia's first Olympic medal?	Hrant Shahinyan
What pro team has FC Ararat beaten?	FC Bayern Munich
What kind of music does Sayat Nova play?	Armenian folk music
What instruments are used in Armenian folk music?	the duduk, the dhol, the zurna and the kanun
What kind of Armenian religious music is prevalent?	the Armenian chant
What did Mashtots do besides composing religious chants?	inventor of the Armenian alphabet
What was Aram Khatchaturian's career?	classical music composer
What type of music is Richard Hagopian famous for?	the traditional "kef" style
What instruments does 'kef' use?	Armenian and Middle Eastern folk instruments (often electrified/amplified) and some western instruments
What type of music does Sirusho perform?	pop music combined with Armenian folk music
What nationality is Charles Aznavour?	French-Armenian
What US heavy metal band is comprised of Armenians?	System of a Down
What job do many Armenian women traditionally do?	Carpet-weaving
When is the earliest known Armenian carpet from?	early 13th century
Where is the earliest known Armenian carpet from?	the village of Banants (near Gandzak)
What is 'gorg'?	the Armenian word for carpet
Where is the earliest known use of 'gorg'?	in a 1242–1243 Armenian inscription on the wall of the Kaptavan Church in Artsakh
What is Hakobyan's career?	Art historian
What creatures are often depicted on Armenian carpets?	dragons and eagles
What are artsvagorgs?	eagle-carpets
What are vishapagorgs?	dragon-carpets
What are otsagorgs?	serpent-carpets
What is khorovats?	an Armenian-styled barbecue
What is lavash?	Armenian flat bread
What is paklava?	a popular dessert made from filo dough
What is a kabob?	a skewer of marinated roasted meat and vegetables
What is ghapama?	a rice-stuffed pumpkin dish
What are the Jehovah Witnesses?	millenarian restorationist Christian denomination
What are the beliefs of Jehovah Witnesses distinct from?	mainstream Christianity
How many adherents worldwide does the group claim?	more than 8.2 million
Who is in charges of directing the Jehovah Witnesses?	Governing Body of Jehovah's Witnesses
Where are the group elders located?	Brooklyn, New York
What are Jehovah witnesses best known for?	their door-to-door preaching
What do Jehovah Witnesses refuse?	military service and blood transfusions
What do Jehovah Witnesses consider the name Jehovah vital for?	proper worship
Why do Jehovah Witnesses reject inherent immortality of the soul, hellfire and Trinitarianism?	they consider to be unscriptural doctrines
Why don't Jehovah Witnesses celebrate the usual holidays and customs?	they consider to have pagan origins
When did Charles Taze Russell form a group?	1870
Where did Russell and others form their group?	Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
What was the purpose of Russell's group?	to study the Bible
1914 would mark the end of a 2520 year period known as what?	the Gentile Times
When Russell met Nelson H. Barbour in 1876, they jointly produced what book?	Three Worlds
When did Watch Tower supporters gather as autonomous congregations to study the Bible?	From 1879
How many congregations were founded?	Thirty
What did the congregations which continued to form during Russell's ministry remain?	self-administrative
When did Russell visit each of the congregations to provide the format he recommended to conduct their meetings?	during 1879 and 1880
Who presided over Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society in 1881?	William Henry Conley
When did Russell move the Society's headquarters to Brooklyn?	1909
What did Russell combine at the headquarters?	printing and corporate offices with a house of worship
What was the name of the residence where volunteers were housed?	Bethel
When did Russell die?	October 31, 1916
How many people worldwide were associated with Russell's movement by 1910?	about 50,000 people
Who was elected as the Watch Tower Society's president in January of 1917?	Joseph Franklin Rutherford
When did Rutherford release The Finished Mystery?	June 1917,
What had Rutherford been before being elected the group's president?	legal representative
Who did the Finished Mystery strongly criticize?	Catholic and Protestant clergy
What were Watch Tower Society directors jailed for?	sedition
Where as an international convention held in September of 1922?	Cedar Point, Ohio
What did Rutherford institute the appointment of in each congregation in 1919?	a director
What was a new emphasis made on at the international convention?	house-to-house preaching
What were all members instructed to report weekly to the Brooklyn headquarters?	preaching activity
How long was Rutherford's tenure as president of the Society?	twenty-five years
When did Rutherford introduce the new name for the Society?	July 26, 1931
What biblical passage was the name Jehovah's witnesses based on?	Isaiah 43:10
What system did Rutherford eliminate in 1932?	locally elected elders
Where were appointments in congregations worldwide made from?	the Brooklyn headquarters
From when was it taught that the little flock would not be the only people to survive Armageddon?	1932
What was the number of the little flock set at?	144,000
Where would the great multitude live?	a paradise restored on earth
All new converts to the movmeent since 1935 were considered part of what class?	great multitude
When was the start of the last days moved to in the mid-1930s?	1914
Who was appointed as the third president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in 1942?	Nathan Knorr
What did Knorr commission?	a new translation of the Bible
When was the full version of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures released?	in 1961
What was Knorr's presidency marked by the increasing use of?	explicit instructions guiding Witnesses
What was greater use of congregational judicial procedures used to enforce?	a strict moral code
From 1966, what did Witness publications and conventions think would happen in late 1975?	Christ's thousand-year reign
How many baptisms were there in 1974?	more than 297,000
How many active members were there in 1975?	two million
Why did membership decline in the late 1970s?	after expectations for 1975 were proved wrong
What did the Watch Tower Society admit in 1980?	its responsibility in building up hope
In 1976 whose power in Watch Tower Society was diminished?	president
When was the offices of restored to the Witness congregations?	1972
When did Knorr die?	1977
Starting in September 2014, who was responsible for making appointments in the Church?	traveling overseers
Who has been president of the Society since 2000?	Don A. Adams
How are Jehovah Witnesses organized?	hierarchically
What does the theocratic organization of Jehovah Witnesses reflect on Earth?	God's "visible organization"
What gender are all the members of the Governing Body?	male
How many members does the Governing Body consist of?	seven
Who does the Governing Body direct?	several committees
What does each congregation have?	a body of appointed unpaid male elders
Whose responsibility is it to conduct meetings and decide action for cases involving sexual misconduct?	Elders
Who appoints new elders?	a traveling overseer
What does the title of elder not signify?	a formal clergy-laity division
What ecclesiastical privilege may elders employ?	confession of sins
What is a requirement for being considered a member of Jehovah's Witnesses?	Baptism
What aren't considered valid when performed by other denominations?	previous baptisms
What do Witness publications say baptism symbolizes a person's personal dedication to?	God
Jehovah Witnesses' literature puts emphasis on the obedience to not only Jehovah but also to his what?	organization
Individuals must remain Jehovah Witnesses if they wish to receive what from God?	favor
What do Jehovah Witnesses believe their religion is a restoration of?	first-century Christianity
Who establishes the doctrines of the Jehovah Witnesses?	the Governing Body
Where does the Governing Body express its doctrinal position?	through publications published by the Watch Tower Society
How does God reveal his will and purpose?	gradually
What is the Jehovah Witnesses' leadership said to provide?	divine guidance
What is considered the inspired, inerrant word of God?	The entire Protestant canon
What do Jehovah Witnesses consider the science and history within the Bible to be?	accurate
Whose pronouncements within Jehovah Witnesses group are considered to carry almost as much weight as the Bible?	the Governing Body
What are members of Jehovah Witnesses cautioned against reading?	other religious literature
What is there no provision for members of the Jehovah Witnesses to do in relation to the official teachings?	criticize or contribute
Who do Jehovah Witnesses believe is God's only direct creation?	Jesus
What was Jesus a ransom sacrifice to pay for?	the sins of humanity
What do Jehovah Witnesses believe Jesus died on rather than a traditional cross?	a single upright post
Jesus is considered to be the only what between God and humanity?	intercessor and high priest
What biblical passage outlines Jesus' role as a mediator?	1 Timothy 2:5
Jehovah Witnesses believe who will go to heaven?	a "little flock"
Where will God resurrected the "other sheep" after Armageddon?	a cleansed earth
Jehovah Witnesses interrupted Revelation 14:1-5 to limit heaven goers to exactly what number?	144,000
Who is the final Judge of whether Jehovah Witnesses get to survive Armageddon?	God
What will people need to study for during Christ's millennial reign?	their final test at the end of the millennium
What do Jehovah Witnesses believe of God's kingdom?	a literal government in heaven
Who rules with Jesus Christ in heaven according to Jehovah Witnesses?	144,000 "spirit-anointed" Christians
What do the Jehovah Witnesses believe God will use the kingdom in heaven for?	accomplish his original purpose for the earth
What will the Earth be transformed into?	a paradise without sickness or death
When do Jehovah Witnesses believe the kingdom of heaven was established?	1914
One of Jehovah Witnesses' central teachings is that the world entered into its last days at what year?	1914
What do Jehovah Witnesses consider all other present day religions to be?	false
Who do Jehovah Witnesses think is out to destroy them?	the United Nations
Who needs to attack Jehovah Witnesses for God to begin the war of Armageddon?	Satan
What will be the end result of God's kingdom?	a fully tested, glorified human race
When will Jesus' presence end?	when he comes to bring a final judgment
What happened to Satan when Jesus started his rule?	ousted from heaven
How do Jehovah Witnesses believe that Jesus rules?	invisibly
How is the Greek word parousia translated when referring to Christ?	"coming"
On what date do Jehovah Witnesses believe Jesus Christ began his rule as a king in God's kingdom?	October 1914
How often did Jehovah Witnesses congregations meet prior to 2009?	three times each week
What are Jehovah Witnesses' gatherings opened and closed with?	songs (hymns) and brief prayers
How are Jehovah Witnesses assigned to congregations?	"territory" they usually reside
What do Jehovah Witnesses refer to their weekly services as?	meetings
Where do Jehovah Witnesses meet for worship and study?	Kingdom Halls
What are Jehovah Witnesses probably best known for by outsiders?	their efforts to spread their beliefs
How many languages is the Watch Tower Society literature published in?	700
What is the objective of Jehovah Witnesses' door to door ministry?	start a regular "Bible study"
When are Jehovah Witnesses advised to discontinue Bibles studies with students?	show no interest in becoming members
What are baptized members who fail to report a month of preaching termed as?	irregular
What is Jehovah Witnesses' view of divorce?	discouraged
What is an acceptable grounds for divorce for a Jehovah Witness?	adultery
What do Jehovah Witnesses considered remarriage when the reason for divorce wasn't adultery?	adulterous
Jehovah Witnesses will allow what in the event of extreme physical abuse or absolute endangerment of spirituality?	legal separation
Who administers formal discipline?	congregation elders
What is formed when a baptized member is accused of doing something serious enough for Jehovah Witnesses to take notice?	a judicial committee
What is the strongest form of discipline the Jehovah Witnesses' judicial committee can render?	Disfellowshipping
What do Jehovah Witnesses describe anyone who formally resign from the church as?	wicked
What are Jehovah Witnesses taught that avoiding social and spiritual interaction with disfellowshipped individuals does?	keeps the congregation free from immoral influence
Why do Jehovah Witnesses believe the Bible condemns mixing of religions?	can only be one truth from God
What are Jehovah Witnesses taught it's vital to remain?	"separate from the world."
What do Jehovah Witnesses believe is true of their religion and their religion alone?	represents true Christianity
What are Jehovah Witnesses taught association with worldly people presents to their faith?	danger
What does Jehovah Witnesses define the "world" to mean?	"the mass of mankind apart from Jehovah's approved servants"
Who is king of God's kingdom in heaven?	Christ
What do Jehovah Witnesses remain politically?	neutral
What are Jehovah Witnesses discouraged from doing?	voting
Why do Jehovah Witnesses forego religious holidays and birthdays or other celebrations?	they consider to honor people other than Jesus
What do Jehovah Witnesses feel all the traditional holidays reflect?	Satan's control over the world
What industries do Jehovah Witnesses avoid working in?	associated with the military
What may a Jehovah Witnesses' refusal to serve in the natural military service result in, in some countries?	their arrest and imprisonment
What do Jehovah Witnesses see themselves as, which transcends national boundaries and ethnic loyalties?	a worldwide brotherhood
What profession is Ronald Lawson?	Sociologist
What does Lawson suggest has contributed to the consistency of the sense of urgency in Jehovah Witnesses' apocalyptic message?	intellectual and organizational isolation
What biblical passage informs Jehovah Witnesses' refusal of blood transfusions?	Acts 15:28, 29
What is grounds for expulsion from Jehovah Witnesses, since 1961?	willing acceptance of a blood transfusion
What do Jehovah Witnesses accept in lieu of blood transfusions?	non-blood alternatives
What does Jehovah Witnesses' literature provide about non-blood medical procedures?	information
What are Jehovah Witnesses allowed to accept at their discretion?	blood plasma fractions
What pre-formatted durable power of attorney documents are provided by the Watch Tower Society to prohibit?	major blood components
What can Jehovah's Witnesses' members specify on the canned legal forms from the WTS?	allowable fractions and treatments they will personally accept
What cooperative arrangement did Jehovah's Witnesses establish?	Hospital Liaison Committees
The Hospital Liaison Committees serve to bridge between hospitals, medical professionals and who?	individual Jehovah's Witnesses
What term do Jehovah's Witnesses use for members actively involved in preaching?	publishers
How many publishers did the Jehovah's Witnesses have as of August 2015?	8.2 million
How many congregations did the Jehovah's Witnesses have in 2015?	118,016
Over how many hours had Jehovah's Witnesses spent preaching and in "Bible study" activity in 2015?	1.93 billion
What do Jehovah's Witnesses their worldwide growth rate to be?	1.5% per year
Where do the officially published membership statistics come from?	those who submit reports for their personal ministry
Only about half all Jehovah's Witnesses are actually considered what in the faith itself?	active
What did a 2008 US Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life survey discover about Jehovah's Witnesses' retention rate?	low
Only about what percentage of the people raised in the religion continue to identify themselves as Jehovah's Witnesses?	37%
What is the profession of James A. Beckford?	Sociologist
When did Beckford study the Jehovah's Witnesses?	1975
What did Beckford classify the Jehovah's Witnesses organizational structure as being?	Totalizing
What is the conviction that Jehovah's Witness leaders dispense absolute truth?	absolutism
What is the term for Jehovah's Witnesses' rejection of certain secular requirements and medical treatments?	world indifference
Jehovah's Witnesses in the United States ranked highest in people whose education extended no further than what?	high school graduation
Compared to other religions, Jehovah's Witnesses have the highest frequency of doing what with the Bible outside of religious services?	reading
What religion ranks highest in frequency of religious attendance?	Jehovah's Witnesses
Statistically, what is a Jehovah's Witnesses likely not to care about at all?	politics
What do few Jehovah's Witnesses earn?	a graduate degree
What has at times led to immense violence against Jehovah's Witnesses?	Political and religious animosity
Why have Jehovah's Witnesses sometimes been imprisoned?	doctrine of political neutrality and their refusal to serve in the military
Of the 20,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in Germany in 1933, how many were later imprisoned?	10,000
What were Jehovah's Witnesses identified by in Nazi concentration camps?	purple triangles
What countries ban the religious activities of Jehovah's Witnesses?	China, Vietnam and some Islamic states
Who were Jehovah's Witnesses accused of intentionally provoking in the 1930s and 1940s?	authorities and other religions
What authors have suggested Rutherford invited and cultivated opposition for the purpose of publicity?	Whalen, Harrison and Schnell
What did Rutherford hope to convince members about the persecution from the outside world?	evidence of the truth of their struggle
What did Watch Tower Society literature tell Jehovah's Witnesses they should never seek?	controversy
What should a Jehovah's Witnesses prefer to paying fines?	jail
What did Jehovah's Witnesses persistent legal challenges result in, in the United States?	reinforced judicial protections for civil liberties
What is religious conduct protected from the interference of?	federal and state
What right to abstain from do Jehovah's Witnesses exercise?	patriotic rituals and military service
What do patients have the right to refuse?	medical treatment
Where have cases in the Jehovah's Witnesses favor been heard outside of the U.S.?	Canada
Who establishes the doctrines of the Jehovah's Witnesses?	the Governing Body
What do the Jehovah's Witnesses religion not tolerate any of?	dissent
What happens to members who disagree with the religion's teachings?	expelled and shunned
Why should the counsel received from the Governing Body be trusted?	part of "God's organization"
Who do Jehovah's Witnesses believe introduced independent thinking?	Satan the Devil
What do former Jehovah's Witnesses members Heath and Gary Botting compare the culture of the religion to?	Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-four
Who describes the Jehovah's Witnesses' leadership as being totalitarian?	Alan Rogerson
How do the leaders of the Jehovah's Witnesses cultivate a system of unquestioning obedience?	disparaging individual decision-making
What do critics of the Jehovah's Witnesses accuse the religion's leaders of exercising over members?	"intellectual dominance"
What did former Governing Body member Raymond Franz argue the methods employed by the religion were all elements of?	mind control
What profession did Rodney Stark grow up to become?	Sociologist
What statement does Stark make about the leaders of the Jehovah's Witnesses?	"not always very democratic"
How do Jehovah's Witnesses see themselves in regards to the power structure of the church?	"part of the power structure rather than subject to it."
Another Sociologist, Andrew Holden, feels anyone who joins a movement such as the Jehovah's Witnesses has made a what?	informed choice
Holden acknowledges that defectors are seldom allowed a what from the church?	dignified exit
What is the New World Translation the most accurate translation of?	the Bibles most widely in use in the English-speaking world
What do many Bible scholars assume the differences in the New World Translation are the result of?	religious bias
BeDuhn clarifies that the differences are actually due to what?	greater accuracy
The NW often errs on the side of what type of translation?	literal, conservative
What insertion into the New Testament violates accuracy in favor of denominationally preferred expressions?	Jehovah
Who do Watch Tower Society publications claim God has used?	Jehovah's Witnesses
What have various Jehovah's Witnesses' publications made predictions about?	world events
What does God use Jehovah's Witnesses for?	to declare his will
What has God provided to Jehovah's Witnesses?	advance knowledge about Armageddon
What had some of the failed predictions of Jehovah's Witnesses been presented as?	"beyond doubt"
What does George D. Chryssides suggest the changing views and dates of the Jehovah's Witnesses can be attributed to changed understandings of?	biblical chronology
What accusations does the Watch Tower Society reject?	that it is a false prophet
What have Jehovah's Witnesses maintained we are living on the precipice of since their formation?	the end of time
How long ago was the foundation of the Jehovah's Witnesses movement?	around 140 years ago
What profession does Andrew Holden smugly self-identify as?	sociologist
What are Jehovah's Witnesses accused of concealing within their organization?	sexual abuse
Whose hands should elders leave allegations of sexual abuse in when the accused person denies wrongdoing?	Jehovah's
Who does Barbara Anderson feel the church's policy regarding sexual abuse protects?	pedophiles
What do Jehovah's Witnesses maintain they want to protect?	children
Jehovah's Witnesses do not sponsor activities when the result is the separation of whom?	children from parents
What has the Jehovah's Witnesses failure to report to authorities been criticized?	abuse allegations
Of the 1006 alleged perpetrators of child sexual abuse identified by Jehovah's Witnesses within their organization since 1950, how many were reported to secular authorities?	not one
Why are the Jehovah's Witnesses reluctant to alert authorities to abuse?	to protect its "crime-free" reputation
What have courts in both the UK and the US found the Watch Tower Society to have been for failing to protect children from sexual predators within the congregation?	negligent
How much has the Society reportedly paid to settle lawsuits without admitting any wrongdoing?	as much as $780,000 to one plaintiff
What was Eisenhower's nickname?	Ike
What was the middle name of Dwight Eisenhower?	David
In what year did Eisenhower's presidency begin?	1953
During the Second World War, what was the highest position (not rank) Eisenhower achieved?	Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in Europe
What was the name of the North African invasion Eisenhower oversaw?	Operation Torch
Along with reducing the federal deficit, what was Eisenhower's main policy priority as president?	keep pressure on the Soviet Union
What did Eisenhower threaten to use to end the Korean War?	nuclear weapons
Along with Guatemala, what country's government did Eisenhower order overthrown?	Iran
What country did Eisenhower neglect to assist in their military action in Vietnam?	France
In what year was the Formosa Resolution passed?	1955
Along with Israel, what countries' armies invaded Egypt in 1956?	British and French
In what year did the Soviets launch humanity's first artificial satellite?	1957
What organization did Eisenhower support after the Soviets launched the first artificial satellite?	NASA
On what date did Eisenhower deliver his presidential farewell address?	January 17, 1961
Where did Eisenhower send 15,000 military personnel in 1958?	Lebanon
Why political movement was named for Joseph McCarthy?	McCarthyism
What political theory did Eisenhower use to oppose McCarthy?	executive privilege
Who served as Eisenhower's vice president?	Nixon
What sort of conservative was Eisenhower?	moderate
What does DARPA stand for?	Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
What book did Eisenhower's parents read every day?	Bible
What Mennonite sect did Eisenhower's mother initially belong to?	River Brethren
What is another name for the International Bible Students Association?	Jehovah's Witnesses
What university did Eisenhower attend?	West Point
What church did Eisenhower join in 1953?	Presbyterian
In what year did Eisenhower graduate from high school?	1909
What high school did Eisenhower go to?	Abilene
What was the name of Eisenhower's brother?	Edgar
In what year of high school did Eisenhower suffer a groin infection?	freshman
What high school year did Eisenhower have to repeat?	freshman
What was Eisenhower's job title during the first year his brother went to college?	night supervisor
Where did Eisenhower work during his brother's first year of college?	Belle Springs Creamery
Who was Eisenhower's senator?	Joseph L. Bristow
Why couldn't Eisenhower attend Annapolis?	beyond the age limit
In what year did Eisenhower matriculate to West Point?	1911
What was Doud Eisenhower's nickname?	Icky
What killed Icky Eisenhower?	scarlet fever
In what city was John Eisenhower born?	Denver
What was John Eisenhower's final rank in the military?	brigadier general
David Eisenhower married the child of what US President?	Nixon
What sport did Eisenhower notably enjoy?	golf
What color were Eisenhower's winter golf balls?	black
Who was the Chairman of Augusta National and friend to Eisenhower?	Clifford Roberts
What was Clifford Roberts by profession?	investment broker
When did Eisenhower join Augusta National?	1948
What was Eisenhower's favorite hobby other than golfing?	oil painting
What car did Eisenhower compare modern art to?	Tin Lizzie
What was the main type of oil painting painted by Eisenhower?	landscapes
Who notably painted a picture of Mamie Eisenhower?	Thomas E. Stephens
Who called Eisenhower's art "simple and earnest"?	Wendy Beckett
What was Eisenhower's favorite film?	Angels in the Outfield
Who was Eisenhower's favorite author?	Zane Grey
What genre did Zane Grey write in?	Western
Where did Eisenhower learn to play poker?	Abilene
At West Point, what game did Eisenhower play six nights a week for five months?	contract bridge
What military installation was Eisenhower assigned to when the United States entered the First World War?	Ft. Leavenworth
What unit did Eisenhower serve with at Camp Meade?	65th Engineers
To what rank was Eisenhower brevetted after being transferred to the tank corps?	Lieutenant Colonel
What famous military event occurred at the site of Camp Colt?	Pickett's Charge
In what state was Camp Meade located?	Maryland
How long before Eisenhower was to be transferred to France did World War I end?	week
What decoration did Eisenhower receive as a result of his First World War service?	Distinguished Service Medal
What notable Second World War commander disparaged Eisenhower for his lack of combat experience?	Montgomery
What was Eisenhower's Camp Meade unit equipped with?	tanks
When did Eisenhower leave Camp Meade?	1922
Along with Patton, who was a notable interwar tank leader?	Sereno E. Brett
What was the traditional doctrine on the use of tanks?	supportive role for the infantry
What happened when Eisenhower was threatened with a court martial for his support for offensive tank tactics?	he relented
What role did Eisenhower serve under Fox Conner?	executive officer
Where did Eisenhower serve under Conner?	Panama Canal Zone
What notable military treatise was authored by von Clausewitz?	On War
During what period did Eisenhower attend the Command and General Staff College?	1925–26
How many people were in Eisenhower's class at the Command and General Staff College?	245
Who was the head of the American Battle Monuments Commission during this period?	Pershing
During the 1920s, for what federal department did Milton Eisenhower work?	Agriculture
In what year did Eisenhower graduate from the Army War College?	1928
What was the office held by George Mosely?	Assistant Secretary of War
What was Eisenhower's rank in 1933?	Major
What event made war planning difficult in this period?	Great Depression
What position was held by General MacArthur at this point in time?	Army Chief of Staff
What encampment was attacked in 1932 by soldiers including Eisenhower?	Bonus March
What sort of people did the Bonus March consist of?	veterans
What rank was Eisenhower promoted to in 1936?	lieutenant colonel
Who was president of the Philippines circa 1939?	Manuel L. Quezon
What is the current name of the capital city that was under construction in the Philippines in 1939?	Quezon City
What license did Eisenhower receive in 1939?	pilot's
How did Eisenhower respond to the offer to become a Philippine police chief?	declined
What unit did Eisenhower serve with upon his return to the United States?	15th Infantry
At what military installation was the 15th Infantry based?	Fort Lewis
In the spring of 1941, who commanded IX Corps?	Kenyon Joyce
In what city was the 3rd Army based in June of 1941?	San Antonio
What event contributed to Eisenhower receiving a promotion to brigadier general?	Louisiana Maneuvers
To what body was Eisenhower assigned after Pearl Harbor was attacked?	General Staff in
Who headed the WPD before Eisenhower?	Leonard T. Gerow
What body replaced the War Plans Division?	Operations Division
What was Eisenhower's title in the Operations Division?	Assistant Chief of Staff
Who was the Chief of Staff who promoted Eisenhower?	George C. Marshall
As of May 1942, who commanded the Army Air Forces?	Henry H. Arnold
To what city did Eisenhower travel to May 1942?	London
What appointment did Eisenhower receive on June 23, 1942?	Commanding General, European Theater of Operations
Who commanded the English theater in May 1942?	James E. Chaney
To what rank was Eisenhower promoted on July 7, 1942?	lieutenant general
What appointment did Eisenhower receive in November of 1942?	Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force of the North African Theater of Operations
What was the code name of the North African campaign?	Operation Torch
At what location was the North African campaign planned?	Rock of Gibraltar
How many years before Eisenhower's command had a non-Briton commanded Gibraltar?	200
What geographic area was the primary objective of Eisenhower?	Tunisia
Who initially served as High Commissioner of North Africa?	François Darlan
Who killed François Darlan?	Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle
Who served as High Commissioner of North Africa after Darlan's death?	Henri Giraud
On what day did Darlan die?	December 24
What was Rommel's rank?	Generalfeldmarschall
Who commanded II Corps before being removed by Eisenhower?	Lloyd Fredendall
Who commanded the UK's Eighth Army?	Bernard Montgomery
When did Eisenhower receive authority over the British Eighth Army?	February 1943
What did Eisenhower command after he commanded ETOUSA?	NATOUSA
What did the Allies invade after they conquered North Africa?	Sicily
What was the invasion of mainland Italy called?	Operation Avalanche
What was the initial ratio of Axis to Allied divisions in Italy?	2 to 1
How many divisions did the Germans add to Italy?	19
Until he was deposed, who was the leader of Italy?	Mussolini
Other than Eisenhower, who was considered for the appointment of Supreme Allied Commander in Europe?	Marshall
What did SHAEF stand for?	Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force
Who appointed Eisenhower as Supreme Allied Commander in Europe?	Roosevelt
What was the Allied invasion of Normandy called?	Operation Overlord
When did Operation Overlord take place?	June 1944
Who refused to provide Eisenhower with landing craft?	Ernest J. King
What concern did Churchill have in regard to Eisenhower's pre-invasion bombing plan?	civilian casualties
What did Patton do that first caused Eisenhower to reprimand him?	slapped a subordinate
What were the French resistance to be used for in advance of the invasion of France?	covert and sabotage operations
Who was the leader of French forces in this period?	de Gaulle
When did the Normandy invasion occur?	June 6, 1944
How long after the Normandy invasion did the landings in Southern France occur?	month
When did the war in Europe end?	May 8, 1945
How many divisions involved in the Allied invasion of Europe did Eisenhower visit?	every
After what possible event would the speech called one of the greatest in history have been delivered?	if the invasion failed
What unit did Montgomery command?	21st Army Group
What general commanded the 12th US Army Group?	Bradley
What geographic portion of the front did the Sixth US Army Group operate on?	south
Who was the Sixth US Army Group's commander?	Devers
What supply port was opened late in 1944?	Antwerp
What European rank was equivalent to that of General of the Army?	Field Marshal
On what date did Eisenhower receive his General of the Army appointment?	December 20, 1944
Along with Montgomery, with whom did Eisenhower disagree on strategy?	Churchill
What Soviet military leader was a counterpart of Eisenhower?	Zhukov
What rank was held by de Gaulle?	General
When did the Battle of the Bulge begin?	December 1944
What German city did the British wish to conquer?	Berlin
Along with Roosevelt and Churchill, what political leader decided upon the division of Germany?	Stalin
What nation's military conquered Berlin?	Soviet
What date saw the surrender of Nazi Germany?	May 7, 1945
What was Eisenhower's title after Germany's surrender?	Military Governor of the U.S. Occupation Zone
In what structure was Eisenhower's headquarters in the US Occupation Zone?	IG Farben Building
In what city was the headquarters of the US Occupation Zone located?	Frankfurt am Main
Aside from the US, what other countries had occupation zones in Germany?	Britain, France and the Soviet Union
What agreement was not applicable to Disarmed Enemy Forces?	Geneva Convention
Who was Chief of Staff of the Army before Eisenhower?	Marshall
About how many soldiers demobilized after the war ended?	millions
What president ignored Eisenhower's recommendations in regard to atomic weapons?	Truman
What was Eisenhower's position on the use of nuclear weapons against Japan?	opposed
What city did Eisenhower notably visit in 1945?	Warsaw
When was it suggested to Eisenhower that he might one day become president?	June 1943
Along with dogcatcher, what political job did Eisenhower specifically not want to be considered for?	Grand High Supreme King of the Universe
What role did Eisenhower believe he could not fulfill if he was believed to want to become involved in politics?	Army Chief of Staff
What general was considered a potential Republican presidential candidate in 1948?	MacArthur
At what meeting did Truman tell Eisenhower that he would assist him in running for president?	Potsdam Conference
What state's delegates were considering supporting Eisenhower in 1948?	New Hampshire
How old would Eisenhower be in 1956?	66
Why was it unlikely that Eisenhower would run for president in 1956?	too old
Who was it assumed would win the election of 1948?	Thomas E. Dewey
What position did Eisenhower occupy in 1948?	President of Columbia University
Where is Columbia University located?	New York City
What was the title of Eisenhower's memoir?	Crusade in Europe
What group of schools did Columbia University belong to?	Ivy League
What body ruled the Eisenhower was not a professional writer?	Department of the Treasury
While Eisenhower was president of Columbia, what group did he also work with?	Council on Foreign Relations
What was Blanche Wiesen Cook in relation to Eisenhower?	biographer
Along with business and government, what leaders did Eisenhower see meeting at the Council on Foreign Relations?	professional
What sort of analysis did Eisenhower first experience with the Council on Foreign Relations?	economic
What position was held by James Forrestal?	Secretary of Defense
What position did Eisenhower informally hold?	Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
After becoming sick, where did Eisenhower recover?	Augusta National Golf Club
What was the name of Columbia University's alumni association?	Columbia Associates
When did Eisenhower vacation for two months outside New York?	July 1949
Aside from his university work, where did Eisenhower gain useful contacts?	American Assembly
What Continental Oil leader was Eisenhower tied to?	Leonard McCollum
What was the political orientation of Columbia's teachers?	liberal
What state was Frank Abrams' oil company located in?	New Jersey
From where did H.J. Porter hale?	Texas
When was Eisenhower's resignation of Columbia turned down?	December 1950
What role did Eisenhower fill after leaving Columbia?	Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
On what date did Eisenhower leave active duty in the military?	May 31, 1952
What job did Eisenhower hold after his second tenure as president of Columbia?	President of the United States
When did Eisenhower become President of the United States?	January 20, 1953
Who was President of the United States prior to Eisenhower?	Truman
Truman wanted Eisenhower to run for the presidency as a member of what party?	Democratic
Who did the Republicans want to block with an Eisenhower candidacy in 1952?	Robert A. Taft
What was Taft's political office?	Senator
Who was Eisenhower's campaign manager in 1952?	Henry Cabot Lodge
In what part of the country, previously neglected by Republican presidential candidates, did Eisenhower campaign?	South
Along with Korea and Communism, what issue did Eisenhower attack Truman on?	corruption
What was the strategy called that was used by Eisenhower's campaign?	K1C2
How did Eisenhower claim Eastern Europe should be liberated?	peaceful means
What was the home state of Joseph McCarthy?	Wisconsin
Where did Eisenhower claim he would end the war?	Korea
During the campaign, from where was it claimed Nixon had received money improperly?	a secret trust
What topic did Eisenhower not discuss during the campaign?	NATO
In what century was Eisenhower born?	19th
Who was the oldest man to become President prior to Eisenhower?	James Buchanan
What did Eisenhower have in common with presidents Taylor, Grant, Taft and Hoover?	did not have prior elected office
How many times had Eisenhower been elected to office prior to becoming president?	never
How old was Truman in 1948?	64
Who was Eisenhower's budget director?	Joseph M. Dodge
Along with Lucius Clay, who advised Eisenhower on cabinet appointments?	Herbert Brownell
What woman was a member of Eisenhower's cabinet?	Oveta Culp Hobby
Along with George Humphrey, what cabinet official did Eisenhower have a close relationship with?	John Foster Dulles
What quip was used to describe Eisenhower's cabinet?	Eight millionaires and a plumber
What war did Eisenhower want to end as president?	Korean
What type of cabinet meeting did Eisenhower hold for the first time ever?	pre-inaugural
Policy in regard to what country was discussed at Eisenhower's first cabinet meeting?	Russia
What type of policy was the focus of Eisenhower's inaugural address?	foreign
How did Eisenhower describe his political views?	progressive conservative
How many people were added to the Social Security rolls by Eisenhower?	ten million
What New deal program did Eisenhower particularly support?	Social Security
What cabinet agency did Eisenhower make Social Security a part of?	Department of Health, Education and Welfare
What policy in regard to the military did Eisenhower see to completion?	integration
What wing of the GOP was Eisenhower opposed to?	right
In what year were the first federal elections after Eisenhower became president?	1954
What type of Republican did Eisenhower characterize himself as?	moderate, progressive
Prior to the 1954 elections, who had majorities in Congress?	Republicans
Upon election, how many terms did Eisenhower believe he would serve?	one
In what year did Eisenhower have a heart attack?	1955
When did Eisenhower make an announcement stating that he would run for a second term?	February 1956
Who did Eisenhower want as his 1956 running mate?	Robert B. Anderson
Who did Eisenhower defeat in the 1956 presidential election?	Adlai Stevenson
What event led Eisenhower to want to improve highways in the US?	the U.S. Army's 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy
What German transportation project influenced Eisenhower on highways?	autobahn
When did Eisenhower sign the law to create the Interstate Highway System?	June 1956
Along with military benefits, what did Eisenhower see as the benefit of the highway project?	economic growth
Why did Congress hold up the highway bill?	issuance of bonds to finance the project
What agreements did the GOP Old Guard want Eisenhower to abandon?	Yalta
Why did the Old Guard say Eisenhower should void the Yalta Agreements?	beyond the constitutional authority of the Executive Branch
What world leader died in March of 1953?	Joseph Stalin
What speech did Eisenhower give after Stalin died?	Chance for Peace
Who called the Chance for Peace speech the best one Eisenhower gave as president?	Stephen Ambrose
What did Eisenhower reduce as he increased nuclear weapons stockpiles?	conventional forces
What was the policy of increasing nuclear weapons while decreasing conventional forces called?	New Look
When did Eisenhower begin to cut the defense budget?	1953
Along with NSC 162/2, what influenced the development of the New Look policy?	Project Solarium
Why did nuclear arms negotiations with Russia fail prior to 1955?	refusal of the Russians to permit any sort of inspections
In what city did the US and Russia conduct nuclear talks in 1955?	London
Who refused to permit nuclear weapons inspections in the wake of the 1955 talks?	Eisenhower
In May of 1955, a treaty was signed giving independence to what country?	Austria
What was the plan Eisenhower presented at the Geneva Conference called?	Open Skies
What country did Eisenhower believe communists would conquer if they took over Guatemala?	Mexico
The domino theory was applied to Central America and what other region?	Southeast Asia
In what year was Eisenhower's EDC rejected?	1954
What country was made a full partner in NATO as the result of the failure of EDC?	West Germany
According to Eisenhower, all of Southeast Asia would become communist if the communist insurgency won in what country?	Vietnam
Who was the director of the CIA?	Dulles
What was the code name of the overthrow of the Iranian government?	Operation Ajax
What CIA operation toppled the Guatemalan government?	Pbsuccess
What company made the U-2?	Lockheed
Under what president did the Bay of Pigs Invasion take place?	John F. Kennedy
What make and model aircraft was Air Force Flight 8610?	Lockheed C-121 Constellation
What aircraft had an incident with Air Force Flight 8610?	Eastern Airlines Flight 8610
What call sign does an Air Force aircraft have when a president is traveling on it?	Air Force One
What was the name of the Lockheed C-121 Constellation that carried Eisenhower?	Columbine II
In what year was Eisenhower involved in an incident while flying?	1953
What caused Eisenhower to kickstart the US space program?	Soviet launch of Sputnik
What was the legal status of the U-2 flyovers?	illegal
Along with the U-2 flyovers, what did Eisenhower try to legitimize with the Open Skies Policy?	Project Genetrix
What was the name of the civilian space agency created by Eisenhower?	NASA
With whom did Eisenhower try to improve relations?	American scientists
Where did the Chinese begin to increase forces after Eisenhower entered the White House?	Kaesong sanctuary
What did Eisenhower threaten to do if there was no armistice in Korea?	use nuclear force
Along with the Joint Chiefs and SAC, what body was involved with formulating plans for nuclear war with China?	National Security Council
What event led to decreased Russian support for China?	death of Stalin
What was SAC an abbreviation of?	Strategic Air Command
The boundary line of what year formed the 1953 armistice line?	1950
In what month in 1953 did the armistice come into being?	July
Who was the President of South Korea at the time of the armistice?	Syngman Rhee
What American official notably opposed the armistice?	Secretary Dulles
Who described the armistice as Eisenhower's greatest presidential accomplishment?	Ambrose
Along with the British and Israelis, what forces invaded Egypt in 1956?	French
What was the combined Israeli-British-French invasion in response to?	Suez Crisis
Who was the leader of Egypt at the time of the Suez Crisis?	Gamal Abdel Nasser
Who invaded Hungary in 1956?	Soviet
What year saw the publication of Eisenhower's memoirs?	1965
What war was being fought by France in 1953?	First Indochina War
What was John W. O'Daniel's nickname?	Iron Mike
Who convinced Eisenhower not to intervene in Vietnam?	Matthew Ridgway
Who was providing supplies to the Vietnamese communists fighting against France?	China
How large of a military deployment did Ridgway say would be necessary in Vietnam?	massive
Aside from bombers, what aid did Eisenhower provide to the French?	non-combat personnel
What did American bombers drop on Vietnam?	napalm
When did Dien Bien Phu fall to the communists?	May 1954
Along with the Vice President and NCS head, who urged Eisenhower to intervene after the fall of Dien Bien Phu?	Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
What arguably impossible conditions did Eisenhower set for further intervention on behalf of the French?	allied participation and congressional approval
What is SEATO?	Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
Along with the United States, the United Kingdom and France, who formed SEATO?	New Zealand and Australia
What was the purpose of SEATO?	defense of Vietnam against communism
What group did France split Vietnam with?	Communists
Who met in peace talks with France at Geneva?	Chinese
What was South Vietnam called in 1955?	Free Vietnam
Who was the first ambassador to South Vietnam?	J. Lawton Collins
When did Eisenhower first send military advisers to South Vietnam?	February 1955
Who was the leader of South Vietnam in 1954?	Ngo Dinh Diem
Along with Free Vietnam, what was another term for South Vietnam?	Republic of Vietnam
How many days did the President of South Vietnam visit the US for in 1957?	ten
Where was a parade held for the President of South Vietnam?	New York City
How many soldiers did Eisenhower ultimately send to Vietnam?	900
Who was Secretary of State in 1957?	John Foster Dulles
According to Dulles, why was Diem made president of Vietnam?	there were no better alternatives
When was a U-2 downed over the Soviet Union?	May 1, 1960
What was the downed U-2 gathering intelligence in advance of?	East–West summit conference
What was the rank of the pilot of the downed U-2?	Captain
Where was the East-West summit to have taken place?	Paris
What did the Eisenhower administration refer to the downed U-2 as?	weather research aircraft
Where did the Eisenhower administration say that the downed U-2 was intended to be flying?	Turkey
According to the cover story, what did the "weather research" pilot have trouble with?	oxygen equipment
What happened to Powers in the Soviet Union?	trial
What did Khrushchev refer to the U-2 as?	spy-plane
Along with Eisenhower, Macmillan and de Gaulle, what leader attended the Four Powers Paris Summit?	Nikita Khrushchev
What did Khrushchev demand that Eisenhower do?	apologize
Along with reducing nuclear weapons, what was to have been the topic of conversation at the Four Power Paris Summit?	Berlin
What did Eisenhower blame for ruining the summit?	stupid U-2 business
In what year was the Four Power Paris Summit intended to take place?	1960
Which president initially began to desegregate the US military?	Truman
When did the desegregation of the United States Armed Forces begin?	1948
When did Eisenhower deliver his first State of the Union?	February 1953
What control did Eisenhower use to push through desegregation?	military spending
In what geographical area did Eisenhower promise to end desegregation in his State of the Union address?	District of Columbia
Who did Eisenhower tell DC officials to integrate?	school children
What was the first civil rights act proposed to Congress by Eisenhower?	Civil Rights Act of 1957
In what year did Eisenhower propose his second civil rights act?	1960
What sort of commission did the Civil Rights Act of 1957 establish?	Civil Rights Commission
Under the Civil Rights Act of 1957, what federal department contained a civil rights office?	Justice
What state refused to integrate its schools in 1957?	Arkansas
What military unit was sent from outside of Arkansas to oversee desegregation?	101st Airborne Division
What Arkansas militia unit did Eisenhower federalize in 1957?	Arkansas National Guard
Who was the governor of Arkansas in 1957?	Orval Faubus
How many black students were escorted by the 101st Airborne to Little Rock Central High School?	nine
In what year did Joseph McCarthy declare that the federal government was employing communists?	1953
What did Eisenhower do when he was encouraged to respond to McCarthy's accusations?	he refused
Why did Eisenhower ignore McCarthy?	facilitate relations with Congress
What organization did Eisenhower want to keep from being one of McCarthy's targets?	Atomic Energy Commission
What was the AEC working on at this time?	H-bombs
What AEC scientists counseled delaying the development of the hydrogen bomb?	J. Robert Oppenheimer
What did Eisenhower do to Oppenheimer after he said that the hydrogen bomb should be delayed?	removed him from the agency and revoked his security clearance
What did McCarthy threaten to do in May of 1955?	issue subpoenas to White House personnel
What tradition was fostered by Eisenhower's reaction to McCarthy's subpoena threats?	executive privilege
Eisenhower denied McCarthy access to the personnel of what branch of the federal government?	Executive
Who won a Senate majority in 1954?	Democrats
After the 1954 election, who was the Speaker of the House?	Sam Rayburn
Who was made Senate Majority Leader after the 1954 election?	Lyndon B. Johnson
What state were Johnson and Rayburn from?	Texas
Who was Speaker of the House between 1953 and 1955?	Joe Martin
What did Martin think Eisenhower did too much of in his relations with Congress?	worked too much through subordinates
As a result of Eisenhower's actions toward Congress, what did Martin think Congress often gave him?	reverse of what he has desired
Who did Martin think Eisenhower should have made better use of?	Republicans of consequence
What were Harlan and Stewart's party affiliations?	Republicans
What party did Brennan belong to?	Democrat
Who did Eisenhower nominate for Chief Justice?	Warren
What sort of decisions did Warren favor on the Supreme Court?	liberal
Along with liberals, who was Eisenhower trying to appeal to with the Warren pick?	law-and-order conservatives
Where did Eisenhower pick up the habit of smoking?	West Point
How many cigarettes did Eisenhower smoke daily at West Point?	two or three packs
When did Eisenhower stop smoking completely?	March 1949
Who was Eisenhower's employer when he gave up smoking?	Columbia
Who was the cardiologist who treated Eisenhower after his heart attack?	Paul Dudley White
What caused Eisenhower's stroke of 1957?	left ventricular aneurysm
Where was Eisenhower when he suffered a stroke in 1957?	cabinet meeting
What couldn't Eisenhower move as a result of his stroke?	right hand
What is Crohn's disease?	chronic inflammatory condition of the intestine
Why did Eisenhower need surgery on June 9, 1956?	bowel obstruction
What August 1965 event caused Eisenhower to drop out of public life?	heart attack
For what ailment did Eisenhower receive surgery in 1966?	cholecystitis
What did Eisenhower have removed via surgery on December 12, 1966?	gallbladder
In what year did Eisenhower die?	1969
How many heart attacks did Eisenhower have between 1955 and 1969?	seven
Who did Eisenhower endorse for president in 1960?	Richard Nixon
Who was the Democratic candidate for president in 1960?	John F. Kennedy
How old was Eisenhower in 1960?	70
Who was the youngest person elected to the United States presidency?	Kennedy
Who won the US presidential election of 1960?	Kennedy
On what date did Eisenhower deliver his farewell speech?	January 17, 1961
In his farewell speech, what complex did Eisenhower warn the American people of?	military–industrial
What war did Eisenhower talk about in his Address to the Nation?	Cold
What term did Eisenhower use to describe the character of communism?	atheistic
From where did Eisenhower deliver his farewell speech?	Oval Office
What town did Eisenhower retire to after his presidency?	Gettysburg
What Pennsylvania county did Eisenhower grow up in?	Dauphin
Who did Eisenhower donate his farm to in 1967?	National Park Service
What did Barry Goldwater call Eisenhower?	dime-store New Dealer
Who was the Republican presidential candidate in 1964?	Barry Goldwater
How old was Eisenhower when he died?	78
At what facility did Eisenhower die?	Walter Reed Army Medical Center
What was Eisenhower's cause of death?	congestive heart failure
What was Eisenhower's date of death?	March 28, 1969
What Christian denomination did Eisenhower belong to?	Episcopal
When did Eisenhower's funeral train arrive in Abilene, Kansas?	April 2
What was the cost of Eisenhower's casket?	$80
At what location was Eisenhower buried?	Eisenhower Presidential Library
What color jacket was Eisenhower buried in?	green
When did Mamie Eisenhower die?	1979
In popular memory, what sport was Eisenhower known for playing?	golf
What did critics feel that Eisenhower should have opposed in public?	McCarthyism
Where was Central High school located?	Little Rock
How did critics characterize Kennedy in comparison to Eisenhower?	vigorous young successor
What nation was considered the leader in the nuclear arms race?	Soviet Union
From where did Eisenhower get the idea of a White House Chief of Staff?	United States Army
Who was the last president not to appoint a Chief of Staff?	Lyndon Johnson
Along with Ford, what president initially didn't appoint a Chief of Staff but later did?	Jimmy Carter
What 19th century informal political office did the modern role of White House Chief of Staff correspond to?	President's Private Secretary
How many appreciation medals were minted?	9,858
In what city were the appreciation medals minted?	Philadelphia
During what period were the appreciation medals minted?	September 1958 through October 1960
What were Eisenhower's initials?	D.D.E.
How many appreciation medals were destroyed by the Bureau of the Mint?	1,451
What is the formal name of the Interstate Highway System?	Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways
Along with Germany and Switzerland, what country contained an autobahn during the Second World War?	Austria
What is another name for Eisenhower Expressway?	Interstate 290
When were "Eisenhower Interstate System" signs first posted along highways?	1993
What major city is Interstate 290 close to?	Chicago
At what Augusta hole was the Eisenhower Pine located?	17th
How many meters away from the Masters tee on Augusta's 17th was the Eisenhower Pine?	192
What did Eisenhower want to be done to the Eisenhower Pine?	cut down
What damaged the Eisenhower Pine in February 2014?	ice storm
In what year did Eisenhower propose that the pine tree named after him be removed?	1956
How many boroughs are in NYC?	five
Where is the Bronx positioned among NYC boroughs?	northernmost
What is the Bronx's population?	1,438,159
How large is the Bronx?	42 square miles (109 km2)
What is unique about the Bronx's location?	Of the five boroughs, the Bronx is the only one on the U.S. mainland
Who is the Bronx named for?	Jonas Bronck
What did Bronck do?	created the first settlement as part of the New Netherland colony
When did Bronck settle in the New York area?	1639
What native tribe lived in the New York area?	Lenape
What types of music the Bronx famous for?	Latin music and hip hop
How poor is part of the Bronx?	one of the five poorest Congressional Districts in the United States
What neighborhoods of the Bronx are more affluent?	Riverdale, Fieldston, Spuyten Duyvil, Schuylerville, Pelham Bay, Pelham Gardens, Morris Park and Country Club
When did the South Bronx lose quality of life?	the late 1960s and the 1970s
What crime problem happened in the Bronx in the 70s?	arson
When was Jonas Bronck born?	1600
When did Bronck reach the New York area?	spring of 1639
Where did Bronck emigrate from?	Småland, Sweden
What entity did Bronck get his land from?	the Dutch West India Company
How much land did Bronck eventually own?	500 acres
What is the Bronx's county name?	The County of Bronx
What is the Bronx's borough name?	Borough of the Bronx
When was the Bronx created?	1874
When was the Bronx added to?	1898
What county was the Bronx split off from?	Westchester
When did farmers build a bridge over the Harlem River?	1759
Why did farmers build a bridge over the Harlem River?	tolls were resented
What strategic advantage did the Bronx's location have?	between New England and New York
When was Kingsbridge built?	1693
Who owned Kingsbridge?	Frederick Philipse
How many counties did New York originally have?	12
Parts of which towns became part of the Bronx?	Yonkers, Eastchester, and Pelham
When was West Farms created?	1846
When was Morrisania created?	1855
When was the town of Kingsbridge created?	1873
When did New York City annex Kingsbridge?	1873
When did New York City annex West Farms?	1873
When did New York City annex Morrisania?	1873
When did New York City annex part of Pelham?	1895
When did New York City annex part of Eastchester?	1895
When was the Bronx's boom period?	1900–29
What was the Bronx's population in 1900?	200,000
What was the Bronx's population in 1929?	1.3 million
When did the Bronx's income declined?	1950–85
When did the Bronx's economy regrow?	starting in the late 1980s
How many Jews lived in the Bronx in 1937?	592,185
How many Jews lived in the Bronx in 2011?	54,000
What led to the Bronx's population growth?	Extensions of the New York City Subway
What immigrant groups were the most prevalent in the Bronx?	Irish Americans, Italian Americans and especially Jewish Americans
How much of the Bronx was Jewish in 1937?	43.9%
What is redlining?	a reduction in the real-estate listings and property-related financial services (such as mortgage loans or insurance policies) offered in some areas
What might have encouraged landlords to abandon or destroy buildings?	rent control laws
What example city service was cut back on in the Bronx?	fire-fighting
What crime was common in the Bronx in the 1970s?	arson
Why did some landlords burn their own buildings?	it was more lucrative to get insurance money than to refurbish or sell a building in a severely distressed area
Where were poverty and unemployment the worst in the Bronx?	South Bronx
What city plan helped redevelop the Bronx?	"Ten-Year Housing Plan"
How many units are in the Nehemiah Homes?	about 1,000
Who built the Nehemiah Homes?	Groups affiliated with churches in the South Bronx
Who led the Melrose Commons project?	Nos Quedamos
How many bank branches were in the Bronx by 2007?	149
What award did the Bronx receive in 1997?	All America City
Who gave the Bronx an award in 1997?	the National Civic League
How were window decals used in the Bronx in the 1980s?	pictures of potted plants and drawn curtains were placed in the windows of abandoned buildings
How many housing units were built in the Bronx in 2002-2007?	33,687
How much was invested in housing in the Bronx in 2002-2007?	$4.8 billion
What is Kingsbridge Armory being turned into?	Kingsbridge National Ice Center
What was the largest armory in the world?	Kingsbridge Armory
Where is a La Quinta being built in the Bronx?	the Mott Haven waterfront
How much would a Concourse Yard platform cost?	US$350–500 million
How much development space would a Concourse Yard platform provide?	2,000,000 square feet
What's on the other side of the Hudson from the Bronx?	Alpine, Tenafly and Englewood Cliffs
What county is Tenafly in?	Bergen County
What state is Alpine in?	New Jersey
What's on the other side of the Harlem River from the Bronx?	Manhattan
What's on the other side of the East River from the Bronx?	Queens
Where is the Bronx's highest point?	in the northwest corner, west of Van Cortlandt Park and in the Chapel Farm area near the Riverdale Country School
What part of the Bronx formerly a salt marsh?	southeastern
What are the Bronx's four low peninsulas?	Hunt's Point, Clason's Point, Screvin's Neck and Throg's Neck
What is Rodman's Neck between?	Pelham Bay Park in the northeast and City Island
How long is the Bronx's shoreline?	75 square miles
When did NYC buy land for its parks?	1888
How many types of trees are in Crotona Park?	28
How large is Crotona Park's lake?	3.3-acre
When was the Jerome Park Reservoir built?	in the 1890s
What do the NY Botanical Gardens preserve?	the last patch of the original hemlock forest that once covered the entire county
What is Screvin's Neck also called?	Castle Hill Point
In what river does the Bronx have 4 peninsulas?	East River
What is NYC's largest park?	Pelham Bay Park
Where is Pelham Bay Park?	along the Westchester-Bronx border
What parts of the Bronx have more hills?	western
What parts of West Bronx are more affluent?	Riverdale and Fieldston.
What is NYC's 4th-largest park?	Van Cortlandt Park
Where is Van Cortlandt Park?	along the Westchester-Bronx border
What is the Grand Concourse?	a wide boulevard
Why has the supposed size of the 'South Bronx' grown?	The name has been used to represent poverty in the Bronx and applied to progressively more northern places
When was Fordham Road being used as the limit of the South Bronx area?	by the 2000s
Which river is the eastern edge of the South Bronx?	The Bronx River
Which stadium is in the South Bronx?	Yankee Stadium
Which direction does the Cross Bronx Expressway run through the South Bronx?	east to west
What in the Bronx has been compared to Broadway?	The Hub
What is the main retail area of the South Bronx?	The Hub–Third Avenue Business Improvement District
Which streets demarcate The Hub BID?	East 149th Street, Willis, Melrose and Third Avenues
What is The Hub's nickname?	"the Broadway of the Bronx"
What shape is The Hub?	bow-tie
How much land was the Gateway Center at Bronx Terminal Market built on?	17 acres
How much did the Gateway Center at Bronx Terminal Market cost?	$500 million
How many floors does the Gateway Center at Bronx Terminal Market's parking garage have?	six
How many cars can the Gateway Center at Bronx Terminal Market's parking garage hold?	2,600
What part of Manhattan are the West Bronx's streets similar to?	northernmost part of upper Manhattan
What is the lowest street number seen in the Bronx?	132nd
What was the Bronx called in the mid-19th century?	the Northside
When was the Bronx added to NYC?	the mid-19th century
How much of the Bronx's population is Hispanic?	53.5%
How much of the Bronx's population is non-Hispanic White?	10.9%
How much of the Bronx's population is non-Hispanic Black?	30.1%
How much of the Bronx's population is non-Hispanic Asian?	3.4%
How much of the Bronx's population is non-Hispanic multiracial?	1.2%
How much of the Bronx speaks Spanish at home?	46.29%
How much of the Bronx speaks English at home?	44.02%
How much of the Bronx speaks African languages at home?	2.48%
How much of the Bronx speaks French at home?	0.91%
How much of the Bronx speaks Chinese at home?	0.50%
How much of the Bronx is white (including Hispanic) as of 2009?	22.9%
How much of the Bronx was non-Hispanic white as of 1980?	12.1%
How much of the Bronx was non-Hispanic white as of 2009?	34.4%
How many white people live in the Bronx?	320,640
How many non-Hispanic white people live in the Bronx?	168,570
How much of the Bronx's population is black (including Hispanic)?	35.4%
How much of the Bronx's population is black (not including Hispanic)?	30.8%
How many Bronx residents called themselves "Sub-Saharan African" in 2009?	Over 61,000
What percent of Bronx residents called themselves "Sub-Saharan African" in 2009?	4.4%
How many people in the Bronx are black (not including Hispanic)?	430,600
What percent of the Bronx is Hispanic and Latino Americans?	52.0%
What percent of the Bronx is Puerto Rican?	23.2%
What percent of the Bronx is Mexican?	5.2%
What percent of the Bronx is Cuban?	0.7%
What percent of the Bronx is Asian?	3.6%
How many multiracial people live in the Bronx?	over 41,800
What percent of the Bronx has mixed Caucasian and African American heritage?	0.5%
What percent of the Bronx is multiracial?	3.0%
What percent of the Bronx has mixed Caucasian and Asian heritage?	0.1%
What percent of the Bronx has mixed Caucasian and Native American heritage?	0.2%
When was the 'one man, one vote' decision?	1964
Which amendment contains the Equal Protection Clause?	Fourteenth
When were Borough Presidents created?	1898
When was the Board of Estimate found unconstitutional?	1989
Why was the Board of Estimate found unconstitutional?	Brooklyn, the most populous borough, had no greater effective representation on the Board than Staten Island, the least populous borough
When did Carrion Jr. retire as Borough President?	March 1, 2009
When was Carrion Jr. first elected Borough President?	2001
When was Carrion Jr. re-elected Borough President?	2005
Who succeeded Carrion Jr.?	Rubén Díaz, Jr.
When was Diaz Jr. elected?	April 21, 2009
In the 2008 primary, how much of the Bronx vote did Clinton get?	61.2%
In the 2008 primary, how much of the Bronx vote did Obama get?	37.8%
In the 2008 primary, how much of the Bronx vote did McCain get?	54.4%
In the 2008 primary, how much of the Bronx vote did Huckabee get?	8.2%
In the 2008 primary, how much of the Bronx vote did Romney get?	20.8%
Who did the Bronx support for President in 1928?	Al Smith
How much of the Bronx's vote in 1916 did Hughes get?	42.6%
How much of the Bronx's vote in 1916 did Wilson get?	42.6%
How much of the Bronx's vote in 1916 did Benson get?	7.3%
How much of the Bronx's vote in 1948 did Truman get?	55%
Who was the only Republican Mayor candidate to win the Bronx since 1914?	Fiorello La Guardia
Who did the Bronx vote against for mayor in 1997?	Rudolph Giuliani
Who did the Bronx vote against for mayor in 2005?	Michael Bloomberg
What party was Hillquit?	Socialist
How much of the Bronx vote did Hillquit get in 1917?	over 31%
How many students attended the Bronx public noncharter schools as of 2000?	nearly 280,000
How many students attended the Bronx public and private schools as of 2000?	333,100
Which religious organizations run private schools in the Bronx?	the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York and Jewish organizations
Which entity runs the Bronx's public noncharter schools?	The New York City Department of Education
What percent of the Bronx population has a high school diploma, as of 2000?	62.3%
What percent of the Bronx population has a university degree, as of 2000?	14.6%
What percent of the Brooklyn population has a high school diploma, as of 2000?	68.8%
What percent of the Staten Island population has a high school diploma, as of 2000?	82.6%
What percent of the Manhattan population has a university degree, as of 2000?	49.4%
Which of NYC's prestigious nonreligious private schools are in the Bronx?	Fieldston, Horace Mann, and Riverdale Country School
Where is the Validus Prepatory Academy?	The Bronx
Where is the High School for Violin and Dance?	The Bronx
Where is the School for Excellence?	The Bronx
Where is the DeWitt Clinton High School?	The Bronx
When did NYC begin splitting up the large Bronx high schools?	1990s
Which Bronx schools have been closed or made smaller?	John F. Kennedy, James Monroe, Taft, Theodore Roosevelt, Adlai Stevenson, Evander Childs, Christopher Columbus, Morris, Walton, and South Bronx High Schools
What type of schools is NYC now working on shrinking?	large middle schools
When did a PBS documentary air about the Bronx's music history?	2006
What PBS documentary covered the Bronx's music history?	"From Mambo to Hip Hop: A South Bronx Tale"
Where did DJ Kool Herc hold parties?	1520 Sedgwick Avenue
Who produced 'From Mambo To Hip Hop'?	City Lore
Where is 1520 Sedgwick?	just north of the Cross Bronx Expressway and hard along the Major Deegan Expressway
Who were the Herculoids?	Herc, Coke La Rock, and DJ Clark Kent
What is 'The Boogie Down'?	The Bronx
Where is Big Pun from?	the Bronx
What types of music did hip hop emerge from?	funk, disco and soul
Who started BDP?	KRS-One
When did the first Yankee Stadium open?	1923
Where was the first Yankee Stadium?	on 161st Street and River Avenue
How many times have the Yankees won the World Series?	27
Which historic great players have played at Yankee Stadium?	Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio, Whitey Ford, Yogi Berra, Mickey Mantle, Reggie Jackson, Derek Jeter and Mariano Rivera
What league are the NY Yankees in?	Major League Baseball
Where are many of the Bronx's playwrights from?	Latin America and Africa
How many seats does the Pregones' new theater have?	130
What does the Pregones specialize in?	Latin American work
When did the Pregones' new theater open?	2005
Where is the Pregones' new theater?	on Walton Avenue in the South Bronx
What types of art does the Bronx Museum of the Arts focus on?	20th century and contemporary art
How large are the Bronx Museum of the Arts' galleries?	11,000 square feet
When did the Bronx Museum of the Arts open?	1971
How many works are in the Bronx Museum of the Arts' permanent collection?	more than 800
Who designed the Bronx Museum of the Arts' 2006 expansion?	Arquitectonica
When was the Lorelei Fountain written about?	1838
Where was Heinrich Heine born?	Düsseldorf
When was Heine born?	1797
When did Heine die?	1856
What ethnicity is Carl Schurz?	German-American
When did Herter die?	1917
When was Herter born?	1846
What was Herter's career?	sculptor
Where was Herter's Heine memorial placed in 1899?	164th Street and the Grand Concourse, or Joyce Kilmer Park
Where was Herter's Heine memorial moved in 1999?	161st Street and the Concourse
Who designed the City Island Historical Society and Nautical Museum's building?	C. B. J. Snyder
Where is the NY Maritime College?	Fort Schuyler
What was the City Island Historical Society and Nautical Museum's building originally?	a former public school
What is 'Scullers' Row'?	the Harlem River
Which river is near the New York Botanical Gardens?	Bronx River
What does the Inner City Press now focus on?	national issues
Who is the Riverdale Press's editor?	Bernard Stein
Why did Stein win a Pulitzer?	for his editorials about Bronx and New York City issues
When did Stein win a Pulitzer?	1998
Where did Stein graduate from?	the Bronx High School of Science
What channel in the Bronx does Cablevision run?	News 12 The Bronx
Where is the official city TV station broadcast from?	Bronx Community College
What is the Bronx's only 4-year CUNY college?	Herbert H. Lehman College
When was 'From This Day Forward' released?	1946
Where was 'From This Day Forward' set?	Highbridge
When was 'The Catered Affair' released?	1956
What did 'The Catered Affair' explore?	working class Bronx life
What was 'Summer of Sam' about?	an Italian-American Bronx community
Where was arson a big problem in the Bronx?	the South Bronx
When was the phrase "The Bronx is burning" first widespread?	1974
Who made a documentary called "The Bronx is burning"?	BBC
Who published an editorial called "The Bronx is burning"?	New York Times
Who made a film called 'Bronx Burning'?	Edwin Pagan
When was 'The Warriors' movie released?	1979
When was 'The Wanderers' published?	1974
When was 'A Bronx Tale' released?	1993
When was 'The Wanderers' movie released?	1979
When was 'The Wanderers' published?	1974
When was 'The Wanderers' movie released?	1979
When was 'The Warriors' movie released?	1979
When was 'A Bronx Tale' released?	1993
When was 'Fort Apache' released?	1981
When was 'Fuga dal Bronx' released?	2005
What origin was 'Escape 2000'?	Italian
When was 'True Love' released?	1989
What genre was 'True Love'?	comedy
Who starred in 'True Love'?	Annabella Sciorra and Ron Eldard
When did "Awakenings" come out?	1990
Whose real story is 'Awakenings' based on?	Oliver Sacks
What is Sacks' career?	neurologist
When was 'A Kind of Alaska' performed?	1985
Who wrote 'A Kind of Alaska'?	Harold Pinter
When was 'City Boy: The Adventures of Herbie Bookbinder' published?	1948
How much of 'City Boy: The Adventures of Herbie Bookbinder' is set in the Bronx?	about half
Who wrote 'City Boy: The Adventures of Herbie Bookbinder'?	Herman Wouk
When was 'The Grand Concourse' published?	2007
Who wrote 'The Grand Concourse'?	Jacob M. Appel
Who wrote 'Bonfire of the Vanities'?	Tom Wolfe
When was 'Bonfire of the Vanities' published?	1987
Who was the main character of 'Bonfire of the Vanities'?	Sherman McCoy
What race was Sherman McCoy?	white
Where did McCoy get lost?	off the Major Deegan Expressway in the South Bronx
What can be seen as of essential importance to a practiced of humanism?	human beings
What is a common tenant of humanism?	freedom and progress
 What can be credited for the changes in the definition of humanism?	intellectual movements
These days humanism could be viewed as a form of what?	secularism
Instead of turning to a spiritual or divine source practicers of humanism turn to what?	science
What was humanism once considered the same as?	philanthropy
Who has disagreed with this connotation of the word?	Gellius
In which period did Gellius gain fame?	Italian Renaissance
Who is credited with clarifying and making the term humanitas commonplace?	Cicero
What is the characteristic that most separates humans from animals?	speech
 At the time of the French Revolution what previous focus of humanism was removed?	supernatural
Protestantism differs from Humanism in its focus is on what?	supernatural
What do current tenants humanism have their origins in?	18th-century Enlightenment
What was a name for humanism believers who emerged in the late 19th and early 20th centuries?	Religious Humanism
 In what year did the term humanism gain yet another layer of meaning?	1808
Who can be credited with assisting the word humanism with finding a home in the English language?	Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer
Who was responsible for yet another definition of the philosophy in 1856?	Georg Voigt
What nation was highly receptive to the new definition of this concept?	Italy
During which period was the philosophy of humanism next updated?	French Enlightenment
What was the criticism of Humanism made by conservatives of the time?	idolatry of humanity
Who continued to support the belief system despite its critics?	liberal reformers and radicals
Who felt that humanism would surely be a major "religion" today?	Ernest Renan
What was the main difference between humanism and the religions of the time?	centred on humankind
What well known socialist adopted the usage of this term in Germany?	Karl Marx
Who did benevolent believers in humanism turn to for ideas about the philosophy?	Greek philosophers
Where did the learned believers place their focus?	linguistic and cultural disciplines
Which ancient text provides an example of the humanist way of thinking?	Gathas of Zarathustra
When was this writing penned?	1,000 BCE – 600 BCE
When was this writing penned?	afterlife
What well know scholar was inspired by Humanism?	Voltaire
Who was known as being a founder of humanism thought in China?	Yellow Emperor
What early adopter and developer of is associated with Confucianism?	Duke of Zhou
What early adopter and developer of is associated with Confucianism?	Book of History
Who is known for the thought that humanity is the most important thing in the world?	Wu of Zhou
When were humanism beliefs mixed with another philosophy by a Taoist thinker?	6th century BCE
What is an example of Humanism based philosophy that focused on ethics?	Silver Rule of Confucianism
Who can be credited with saying essentially humans are the gods of gods?	Ji Liang
Where could you read this information?	Zuo Zhuan
Who was one of the first Greeks to adopt a humanistic outlook?	Thales of Miletus
Where did this type of thinking next travel to?	Athens
Who first introduced the idea that matter is made of atoms?	Democritus
Who was the first person to provide education opportunities to females?	Epicurus
When did the first wave of Humanism reach Europe?	Middle Ages and the Early Modern period
Who was thought to be the original believer of humanism in of the Renaissance period?	Petrarch
The study and following of classical writers was said to be a solution to what issue?	Cicero
The study and following of classical writers was said to be a solution to what issue?	age of Darkness
 What is one religious text that was thought to eventually lead to a peace between all?	the Jewish Kabbalah
Who gave followers of Humanism the ability to think out of bounds?	Renaissance Church authorities
Who gave followers of Humanism the ability to think out of bounds?	era of universal agreement
What cities may have influenced the beliefs of Gemistus Pleto?	Florence, Venice, and Rome
How were humanist able to identify the development of humanist thought?	Latin literary texts
What was included in this quest for knowledge of the belief system?	Patristic literature
If your were unsure of the authenticity of an ancient text how could you verify it?	philology
What caused a large migration of Greek refuges in the 1450s?	Byzantine Empire
What caused a large migration of Greek refuges in the 1450s?	Greek manuscripts
When are these texts first able to reach a large amount of people?	1517
When are these texts first able to reach a large amount of people?	Erasmus
 Erasmus can be said to have lit the match that sparked a radical change in thinking in his era along with who?	Lefèvre d'Étaples
What text still remained without the type of thorough review that others texts had received by the 18th century?	the Bible
 What author had a great impact in Rome?	P. Terentius Afer
Who was able to spread the idea of equality among all through his words?	Terence
From where did this school of thought emerge?	the Greeks
Who again issued the same type of challenge centuries later	Seneca
What was the name of the main belief Terence offered	universalism
Who felt that looking to these ancient documents for new ideas was not the way to mover forward?	A. C. Crombie
 Closer examination of what information allowed for further progress in scientific knowledge?	technical writings
What group was neutral about this issue as they felt the subject unimportant?	Renaissance humanists
 When did even the scholars and professors began to at least end to examine the works of Aristotle?	16th century,
Who felt that the further examination and knowledge of studies in the arena of humanism could further art?	Leonardo da Vinci
Who helped to further the movement away from Scholasticism of the time?	Juan Luis Vives
Where did this initiate?	universities
What type of philosophy was essential to this forwarding of thought?	Aristotelian
Who was able to reconcile their religious beliefs with those of humanism?	Early humanists
What phrase that has come to be associated with a lack of faith was not seen as an issue for Christians?	secular
During what time period did secular have a more neutral connotation?	Renaissance
Petrarch felt that although he tried to do his own form of good whose life may have more meaning?	Gherardo
What abolitionist was greatly affected by the writings of Comte?	Harriet Martineau
What type of idea did he pose which was focused on facets of humanism?	atheistic
What main idea did the English believers of Comte's philosophy take from his writings?	religion of humanity
What currently used word was based in ideas from this philosopher?	altruism
What 19th century author associated his works with humanism?	F.C.S. Schiller
When was the first public group for Humanist founded?	1929
Who created this group?	Charles Francis Potter
When did Charles Potter and Clara Potter publish their first writings on Humanism?	1930
Who wotked with Carl Rogers on humanistic phycology?	Abraham Maslow
What is human phycology?	psychological perspective
In what century did humanistic phycology rise in prominence?	20th century
They introduced it in response to what?	psychoanalysis
What groups thoughts did he seek to include?	Western Unitarian Conference
Who became responsible in part for the editing of The New Humanist?	Raymond B. Bragg,
How many cornerstones of this new way of thinking or religion were presented>	15
What was the name of the material that was produced from this groups and the opinions of others?	Humanist Manifesto
What was the main action of humanism during the Renaissance>	cultural and educational reform
When did a new term for those who followed Humanism emerge?	late fifteenth century
Where was one main concentration of Humanism?	Naples
What was the new term for believers of Humanism philosophy?	umanisti
What was it about the utilitatian beliefs that humanism believers did not like?	narrow pedantry
What group that had been to this point neglected was included in this thought?	women
What foundation of study allowed for the accomplishment of the goal of a scholarly people?	humanities
Was the humanism of the time limited to scholars?	pervasive cultural mode
What is contemporary humanism optimistic about?	capacity of people
What is the main goal of humanism optimistic?	human flourishing
What is human flourishing?	making life better
What doesnt conetemporary humanism  believe about human nature?	purely good
What was included in religious humanism that was similiar to other religion?	religious rituals
When did practicers of religious humanism form under the name Humanism?	19th and early 20th centuries
Who founded a religion whose cornerstone was deism?	Jacques Hébert
During what time was a religious state replaced in the Notre Dame cathedral with a symbol of Humanism?	1793
Who was one early naysayer of Humanism?	Ezra Pound
What was the main reason they disagreed with the beliefs?	sentimental
Who stated Humanism creates of people placeholder?	Timothy Laurie
Who stated that this argument was in fact support of Humanism?	Kate Soper
In what year was the book humanism published?	1997
In what century was the horrific wars?	20th century
What is the only alternative to bigotry and persecution on many occasions?	humanism
Who wrote the book humanism?	Tony Davies
Who quoted the line of Terence most notably?	Seneca
What allowed for a deeper understanding and personal exploration of older philosophers theories?	ancient manuscripts
Who was the most influential supporter of the ideals of Terence?	Saint Augustine
Who were the Humanists in agreement with about using these manuscripts in their quests for pure Christian living?	Church fathers
What writing was considered a bridge between two other major writings?	The Age of Reason
Which century was the first writing from?	18th-century
Who states imply that humans are their own Gods?	Feuerbach
What was the origin of the second writing?	German
The initial state of earth was what?	molten
What formed on the outside of the earth after it cooled?	a solid crust
How does the mass of the moon compare to earth?	about 10% of the Earth's mass
What created a primordial atmosphere on earth?	Outgassing and volcanic activity
Ice from what source helped to create earths oceans?	comets
Powerful volcanism contributed to cause early earth to be in what state?	molten
What occurred in the atmosphere of the earth after the crust was formed?	water began accumulating
What size of object may have created the moon?	Mars
When water was creating the oceans what was happening to atmospheric water vapor?	Condensing
During what time period was the Archean era?	4,000 to 2,500 million years ago
During what period did the earths crust cooling allow the creation of plates?	Archean
It is believed that a very warm earth would lead to more recycling of what?	crustal material
What might have a very hot earth stopped from occurring?	cratonisation and continent formation
What do some believe accounts for the small amount of Archean rocks?	erosion and subsequent tectonic events
What are Archean rocks composed of, in general?	metamorphized deep-water sediments
What type of formation is indicated by low and high grade metamorphic rocks?	Greenstone
From where did high grade Archean rocks originate?	volcanic island arcs
Low grade metamorphic rocks are composed of what, generally?	deep-sea sediments
What is a greenstone belt?	sutured protocontinents
During what time period did the Proterozoic era occur?	2,500 to 541 million years ago
What era came before the Proterozoic era?	Archean
In what type of sea did typical Proterozoic geology come to be?	shallow epicontinental seas
What type of continental behavior was unique to the Proterozoic?	rapid continental accretion
What is the name for the large super continent that broke apart 750 million years ago?	Rodinia
During what period was the Paleozoic era?	541 to 252 million years ago
How many periods of geology are within the Paleozoic era?	six
The Permian is an example of what?	geologic periods
After what continental event did the Paleozoic begin?	breakup of a supercontinent called Pannotia
What continent was formed at the end of the Paleozoic?	Pangaea
At what rough time did the Cambrian era start?	541.0 ± 1.0 Ma.
What were the continents of the Cambrian area believed to have formerly been a part of?	Pannotia
What continent moved to the southern-most part of the earth in the Cambrian era?	Gondwana
What continent ranged over the majority of the southern hemisphere of earth in the Cambrian?	Panthalassa
Baltica and Sibera are examples of what thing, during the Cambrian era?	independent continents
How long ago did the Ordovician period begin?	485.4 ± 1.9 Ma.
Which event precipitated the Ordovician period?	the Cambrian-Ordovician extinction
What was the name of the large southernmost continent during the Ordovician?	Gondwana
Which ocean decreased in size with the movement of Baltica in the Ordovician?	Iapetus Ocean
What continent fractured off Gondwana in the direction of Laurentia?	Avalonia
What type of climate was normal in the Ordovician period?	stable greenhouse conditions
What ice age signaled the end of the normal climate in the Ordovician period?	the Hirnantian faunal stage
Oxygen from what kind of fossil were used to date the Hirnantian faunal stage?	brachiopods
How many years is the Hirnantian faunal stage believed to have lasted?	0.5 to 1.5 million years
What started to develop on Gondwana as it moved over the south pole?	ice caps
When was the Silurian period believed to have begun?	443.8 ± 1.5 Ma.
Compared to the Ordovician glaciation, how big were the ice caps on Gondwana during the Silurian?	less extensive
What did the melting of ice on Gondwana add to?	a rise in sea levels
Which supercontinent formed during the Silurian?	Euramerica
Which ocean ranged the majority of the northern hemisphere in the Silurian period?	Panthalassa
During what time period was the Devonian era?	419 to 359 Ma.
Which continent was formed from the meeting of Laurentia and Baltica?	Euramerica (or Laurussia)
Which sedimentary beds were created in the dry areas of Euramerica in the Devonian period?	Old Red Sandstone
What was the largest ocean referred to that existed in the Devonian period?	Panthalassa
Which mountains associated with the USA were formed near the equator on  Pangaea during the Devonian?	the northern Appalachian Mountains
What occurred to the level of the sea when the Devonian period was finished?	A global drop
During which period were epicontinental seas created?	Carboniferous
What was on the land at 30 degrees latitude north in the carboniferous period?	lush coal swamps
What was the result in the decline in sea level in the middle of the Carboniferous period?	a major marine extinction
The Pennsylvania period is separated by the drop in Carboniferous era sea levels from what other period?	Mississippian Period
What geologic events took place when Pangea combined during the Carboniferous?	mountain building
What was the continent that came to be North America and Europe called during the Carboniferous?	Laurussia
What was the effect of Laurussia impacting Gondwana in North America?	the Alleghenian orogeny
The mountains forming to the southwest of the Appalachians in the Carboniferous are known as what?	the Ouachita Mountains
Which two large oceans existed during the Carboniferous period?	the Panthalassa and Paleo-Tethys
What supercontinent prevailed during the Permian era?	Pangaea
What was the largest ocean during the Permian called?	Panthalassa
There was an ocean between Gondwana and Asia in the Permian, what was it?	Paleo-Tethys Ocean
The moving of which continent contributed to the decrease in size of the Paleo-Tethys?	Cimmeria
During which period was the Tehtys Ocean dominant?	the Mesozoic Era
Which ocean name is translated to mean "all the sea?"	Panthalassa
What process obscures information aboutt he ocean during the Triassic period from inspection?	subduction of oceanic plates
What was occurring to Pangaea in the late Triassic?	Pangaea was rifting
Which sediements in the US are an indication of the break up of Pangaea?	Newark Supergroup
What type of terrestrial animals are found from the Triassic period?	terrestrial vertebrates
During what years was the Jurassic period?	201.3 ± 0.2 to 145.0 Ma.
Which supercontinent came apart in the Jurassic period?	Pangaea
The Gulf of Mexico formed in the rift between North America and what other land mass?	Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula
At what point did the South Atlantic ocean begin to open?	Cretaceous Period
Which late Jurassic cultural sites are famous in Europe?	lagerstätten of Holzmaden and Solnhofen
The current continents were formerly known as what continent?	Pangaea
Which oregenies followed the Nevadan in the Cretaceous?	Sevier and Laramide
South America was formerly which continent?	Gondwana
The rifting in the Cretaceous had what result on the oceans?	raising eustatic sea levels
Antarctica was a part of what supercontinent?	Gondwana
During the height of the Cretaceous transgression how much of the earths land mass was under water?	one-third
What type of rock was the Cretaceous notable for forming the most amount of?	Phanerozoic
The Cretaceous is a part of which geologic era?	Phanerozoic
Where can one find the Smoky Hill Chalk Member?	North America
Where are the Deccan Traps?	India
How many years long was the Cenozoic Era?	66 million years
Which extinction marked the beginning of the Cenozoic Era?	Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event
What geologic period are we in currently?	Cenozoic Era
At the end of which era had the continents taken roughly their current shape?	Mesozoic
The collision of the Indian sub continent and the Asian plate created which mountain range?	the Himalayas
How many continents did Laurasia break into?	three
In the Paleocene period Greenland was joined to which continent?	North America
What mountain chain in the Cretaceous was lifted as a result of the Laramide oregeny?	the Rocky Mountains
In which period did North and South america join?	Neogene
Which ocean was closed when Africa moved northward during the Paleocene?	Tethys
During what years did the Eocene period take place?	56 million years ago - 33.9 million years ago
Australia was connected to which other continent at the start of the Eocene?	Antarctica
How long ago did Antarctica and Australia split?	around 45 Ma
Around how many years ago is the current ice age pattern believed to have begun?	40 million years
The mixing of equatorial currents with Antarctic waters in the Eocene resulted in what?	keeping global temperatures high
during which period did mountains form in the western part of North America?	Eocene
In the Eocene, in Europe, which sea ceased to be?	Tethys Sea
The Mediterranean sea is a remaining part of which sea from the Eocene?	Tethys Sea
What began to form in the flat basins in North America during the Eocene?	huge lakes
Which oregeny was created when India collided with Asia?	the Himalayan orogeny
What permanent structure formed on Antarctica?	ice cap
The lift of which mountain range in Europe was the result of the African plate moving north into the Eurasian?	the Alps
During what period was there a land bridge joining Europe and North America?	Oligocene
In the Oligocene period South America broke free from what other continent?	Antarctica
Which current resulted in the cooling of Antarctica?	the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
The formation of which mountain range was the result of of what zone along the Pacific Ocean side of South America?	the Andes
Which continent was India colliding with in the Miocene?	Asia
When Africa was colliding with Eurasia which seaway ceased to be during the Miocene?	The Tethys Seaway
Between what period of time did the Tethys disappear?	19 and 12 Ma
Which crisis occured towards the end of the Miocene period?	Messinian salinity crisis
What is the link between North and South America called?	the Isthmus of Panama
In which period did North and South America become linked?	Pliocene
The Mediterranean was created by the collision of Europe and what?	Africa
What period came after the Pliocene?	the Quaternary Period
The Pliocene saw the end of what fauna in South America?	marsupial faunas
How long ago did the last glacial period end?	about 10,000 years ago
During what period did sea levels rice 115 feet?	Holocene
By what height did sea levels rise at the end of the last glacial period?	35 metres (115 ft)
Glaciars from what period depressed the height of northern lands by 591 feet?	Pleistocene
What sea did the Hudson Bay used to be a part of?	Tyrrell Sea
What does the state want a police force to do?	enforce the law, protect property, and limit civil disorder
What are gendarmerie?	military units charged with civil policing
What are police usually separate from?	military or other organizations involved in the defense of the state against foreign aggressors
How are police usually paid?	through taxes
When were police used to protect the class system?	late 18th and early 19th centuries
What kind of service are police?	public sector
What problem do many police forces have?	corruption
How are police usually paid?	through taxes
What kind of service are police?	public sector
When were police used to protect the class system?	late 18th and early 19th centuries
What problem do many police forces have?	corruption
Which Chinese kingdoms developed law enforcement?	Chu and Jin
What period was the Chu kingdom in?	Spring
What period was the Jin kingdom in?	Autumn
Which countries adopted the 'prefecture system' from China?	Korea and Japan
What did ancient China call its police?	prefects
What war ended in 1479?	War of the Castilian Succession
Who formed Spain's first national police force?	Ferdinand and Isabella
What was Spain's first national police force called, in Spanish?	Santa Hermandad
What does Santa Hermandad mean?	Holy Brotherhood
When did Spain suppress local police units?	1835
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?	The Marshal of France and the Constable of France
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?	Great Officers of the Crown of France
What was the Marshal's force called?	the Marshalcy
What was the Constable's force called, in English?	the Constabulary
What was the Constable's force called, in French?	Connétablie
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?	The Marshal of France and the Constable of France
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?	Great Officers of the Crown of France
What was the Marshal's force called?	the Marshalcy
What was the Constable's force called, in English?	the Constabulary
What was the Constable's force called, in French?	Connétablie
In what year did Paris get a police force?	1667
Who created Paris's police force?	King Louis XIV
What was the largest European city in 1667?	Paris
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in English?	lieutenant general of police
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in French?	lieutenant général de police
Who was Paris's first head of police?	Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie
How many commissioners worked under Reynie?	44
How many policing districts was Paris divided into?	16
When was Paris's police system expanded to the rest of France?	October 1699
When were police inspectors added to Paris's police?	1709
When did the French language adopt the word 'police'?	in the 18th century
Which dictionary said police were 'a symbol of foreign oppression'?	Britannica 1911
What language did French borrow the word 'police' from?	English
When were the Marine Police created in the UK?	1798
What was the first use of 'police' in the UK?	the appointment of Commissioners of Police for Scotland in 1714
Who convinced the West Indies merchants in London to establish police?	Patrick Colquhoun
Where did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?	docks
When did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?	1797
How much cargo had been being stolen from West Indies merchants in London each year?	£500,000
How did Colquhoun praise the French police?	"the greatest degree of perfection"
What was the initial size of the Thames River Police force?	50
How many dock workers were the Thames River Police policing?	33,000
How many dock workers did Colquhoun say were criminals?	11,000
When was the Thames River Police made a public service?	28 July 180
How much cargo theft did the Thames River Police prevent in its first year?	£122,000
How did the Bow Street group pay their employees?	stipendiary system
Who started the Bow Street detectives?	Henry and John Fielding
Who came up with the concept of the 'new' police?	Robert Peel
How did the Thames River Police pay their employees?	full-time, salaried officers prohibited from taking private fees
What schedule did the Thames River Police employees work?	full-time
Which law established Glasgow's police?	Glasgow Police Act
When was Glasgow's police force established?	1800
Which law established Ireland's police?	Irish Constabulary Act
When was Ireland's police force established?	1822
What was Ireland's police force called?	Royal Irish Constabulary
Who was the 'father of modern policing'?	Peel
Whose philosophy influenced Peel?	Jeremy Bentham
What political position did Bentham think police should have?	neutral
How did Peel standardize police?	as an official paid profession
How did Peel organize police?	in a civilian fashion
When was the Metropolitan Police Act passed?	1829
What did the Metropolitan Police Act say police were a subset of?	the judicial system
Where was the 'Continental model' of police from?	France
What part of the government did French police work under?	the authority of the monarch
When did Rio get its first police investigator?	1566
How had the Rio police grown by the 17th century?	most captaincies already had local units with law enforcement functions
When did Minas Gerais get a cavalry regiment?	July 9, 1775
Where did the Portuguese royal family move in 1808?	Brazil
Who invaded Portugal in 1808?	French
When did Canada get its first police?	1729
What was Canada's first police force?	Royal Newfoundland Constabulary
When was the Toronto police created?	1834
When was the Montreal police created?	1838
When were the first Mounties created?	1873
What were the Old West's local police options?	poorly resourced sheriffs and temporarily organized posses
Which military branch helped the Old West's inadequate local police?	The Army
Which military branch did the Pinkertons exceed at their height?	Army
Which private contractor acted as police for businesses?	Pinkerton National Detective Agency
Which countries' scholars developed the contemporary police concept?	German and French
When was the 'Treatise on the Police' published?	1705
What was the 'Treatise on the Police' called in French?	Traité de la Police
Who wrote the 'Treatise on the Police'?	Nicolas Delamare
What was von Hornigk's career?	Political economist and civil servant
Which economic theory did Foucault say supported the police?	mercantilist theory
How did Foucault describe the social duty of police?	procuring abundance
Who wrote about Polizeiwissenschaft?	Foucault
Why did the functions of police grow beyond law enforcement to urban planning?	because of the miasma theory of disease; thus, cemeteries were moved out of town, etc.
Who wrote 'Preventive Police'?	Edwin Chadwick
When was 'Preventive Police' published?	1829
Where was 'Preventive Police' published?	London Review
What did Chadwick say police should be focused on?	prevention
What was the alternative to prevention?	a deterrent of punishment
What do some police departments make detectives go back to periodically?	patrol duties
Where do some think the most important police work happens?	on patrol
How do patrol officers affect crime?	prevent crime by their presence
When did Nadelmann write about global policing?	1993
When did Sheptycki write about global policing?	1995
What terms have been used to describe policing beyond one country?	international policing, transnational policing, and/or global policing
When did Deflem write about cross-border policing?	2002
What groups did European police work against across borders in the 19th century?	anarchist agitators and other political radicals
Which police force monitored Karl Marx?	Prussian
What international police agency was created before WW2?	Interpol
In what era did cross-border policing increase?	post–Cold War
Where did Sheptycki study police cooperation?	the English Channel region
When did Sheptycki write about police cooperation?	2002
When did the Channel region establish routine cross-border policing?	1968
When was the Schengen Treaty signed?	1992
What did the Schengen Treaty do for policing?	formalized aspects of police information exchange across the territory of the European Union
Where has cross-border policing been most under-studied?	outside of Europe
Who compared transnational police information and intelligence sharing practices?	Alain
What kind of policing has become common practice?	Intelligence-led
What problems did Sheptycki say 'organizational pathologies' have caused for police?	make the functioning of security-intelligence processes in transnational policing deeply problematic
What paradox did Sheptycki point out?	the harder policing agencies work to produce security, the greater are feelings of insecurity
Where has transnational policing become more important?	in United Nations peacekeeping
Who wrote about police development-aid in 2007?	Goldsmith and Sheptycki
What kind of countries get assistance with policing?	weak, failed or failing states
What concern did Hills raise about power imbalances?	With transnational police development-aid the imbalances of power between donors and recipients are stark
What concern did Hills raise about police models?	there are questions about the applicability and transportability of policing models between jurisdictions
Who wrote the Global Accountability Report for 2007?	Lloyd, et al.
Why is transnational policing so unaccountable?	this is a secretive area and one not open to civil society involvement
How accountable is Interpol?	22%
What is the least-accountable IGO?	Interpol
What should non-lethal weapons properly be called?	"less than lethal" or "less-lethal"
What are common less-lethal weapons?	batons, tear gas, riot control agents, rubber bullets, riot shields, water cannons and electroshock weapons
What is supposed to be the last resort for police?	The use of firearms or deadly force
What is South Africa's "shoot-to-kill" policy?	allows police to use deadly force against any person who poses a significant threat to them or civilians
Where can police shoot fleeing convicts?	Brazil
How do modern police often communicate?	radio
Where do police have radios?	carried both on the person and installed in vehicles
Why do police use radios?	to co-ordinate their work, share information, and get help quickly
What have computers in police cars enabled for investigation?	criminal background checks on persons of interest to be completed in a matter of seconds
What have computers in police cars enabled for reporting?	updating officers' daily activity log and other, required reports on a real-time basis
When do police often use unmarked cars?	primarily for sting operations or apprehending criminals without alerting them to their presence
What use of unmarked cars is controversial?	for traffic law enforcement
Why did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?	it endangered motorists who might be pulled over by people impersonating police officers
When did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?	1996
Why do some cops use bicycles to patrol?	they allow for more open interaction with the public
How do bicycles help catch some suspects?	their quieter operation can facilitate approaching suspects unawares and can help in pursuing them attempting to escape on foot
What do police use to control motorcyclist events?	Motorcycles
Who was O.W. Wilson a student of?	August Vollmer
Who introduced education requirements for US police?	August Vollmer
Why did Wilson rotate officers between communities?	to reduce their vulnerability to corruption
Where did Wilson reduce police corruption?	Wichita, Kansas, and later in the Chicago Police Department
How did Wilson recruit more qualified police?	an aggressive recruiting drive with higher police salaries
What does Miranda provide?	safeguards against self-incriminating statements made after an arrest
What does the 5th Amendment protect against?	self-incrimination
Which amendment prevents self-incrimination?	Fifth
When was the Terry v. Ohio case?	1968
Which two parts did Terry v. Ohio divide seizure into?	investigatory stop and arrest
What is an investigatory stop's search limited to?	what [is] minimally necessary to determine whether [a suspect] is armed
What is the legal status of UK police officers?	constables
What can only Inspector-ranked UK officers do?	authorize a search of a suspect's house
What can only Superintendent-ranked UK officers do?	authorize a suspect's detention beyond 24 hours
What powers of a new UK police officer are the same as a Commissioner's?	arrest
Why do some police acts limit when police can interfere without court orders?	To ensure that the police would not interfere in the regular competencies of the courts of law
What could be impeded without police interference?	the realization of the private right
How could police help the owner when a restaurant guest doesn't pay because their wallet got stolen?	establish a restaurant guest's identity and forward it to the innkeeper
What does Punjab mean?	five waters
How many provinces does Pakistan have?	four
How large is Punjab?	205,344 square kilometres (79,284 square miles)
What is Punjab's population?	91.379.615
What is Punjab's biggest city?	Lahore
What plain is Punjab in?	the alluvial plain of the Indus River
What are the Indus River's tributaries?	the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, and Sutlej rivers
How much of Pakistan's large-scale manufacturing is in Punjab?	39.2%
How much of Pakistan's small-scale manufacturing is in Punjab?	70%
What crops does Punjab grow?	wheat and cotton
How large is Punjab compared to the other three provinces?	second largest
What is Pakistan's largest province?	Balochistan
How many square miles is Punjab?	79,284
What Indian states are on the east side of Punjab, Pakistan?	Punjab and Rajasthan
What Pakistani province is south of Punjab?	Sindh
Which province in Pakistan borders the other 3 provinces?	Punjab
What is Pakistan's capital?	Islamabad
How many rivers are in Punjab, Pakistan?	five
What is the easternmost river in Punjab?	Sutlej
How much of Pakistan's population lives in Punjab?	Nearly 60%
How many departments does the Punjab administration have?	48
Who heads each government department?	a Provincial Minister (Politician) and a Provincial Secretary
Who do the Provincial Ministers report to?	the Chief Minister
Who do the Provincial Secretaries report to?	the Chief Secretary of Punjab
What rank is the Chief Secretary?	usually a BPS-22 Civil Servant
What was Punjab formerly known as?	Panchanada
What ancient civilization lived in Punjab?	the Indus Valley Civilization
When was Punjab part of the Indus Valley Civilization?	more than 4000 years ago
What was the major Indus city in Punjab?	Harrapa
What were bricks taken from Harrapa for the construction of?	the Lahore-Multan railroad
Who has invaded Punjab?	Greeks, Kushans, Scythians, Turks, and Afghans
Who founded Taxila?	son of Taksh the son Bharat who was the brother of Ram
What is said to be the world's oldest university?	Takshashila University
Who was Chanakya?	great Vedic thinker and politician
What empire was Taxila a center of learning of?	the Maurya Empire
Where did Alexander the Great conquer in 10 days?	Drangiana, Arachosia, Gedrosia and Seistan
From which direction did Alexander enter Punjab?	northeasterly
What wealth did Alexander hope to find?	riches in gold, gems and pearls
Who were the Aspii?	mountaineers
Who were the Cathians?	the people of Multan
What religion did Punjab become?	Muslim
What did missionary Muslims build in Punjab?	dargahs
Who led the Umayyad army?	Muhammad bin Qasim
Where did the Umayyads conquer?	Sindh and Southern Punjab
Who did the Umayyads defeat?	Raja Dahir
Who was Raghunath Rao?	the general of the Hindu Maratha Empire
Who did Rao conquer in 1758?	Lahore and Attock
When was the Third Battle of Panipat?	1761
Who ruled most of the eastern part of Peshawar?	Maratha
Who captured part of the Maratha Empire in 1761?	Ahmad Shah Abdali
When did Sikhism begin?	mid-fifteenth century
In which empire did many Hindus become Sikhs?	Mughal empire
When did Ahmad fight at Akora Khattak?	December 1826
When did Ahmad fight at Balakot?	1831
Who won at Balakot?	the professional Sikh Army
When did Ranjit Singh die?	summer of 1839
What did Ranjit Singh's death cause?	political chaos
When was part of Punjab annexed into British India?	1849
When was the Second Anglo-Sikh War?	1849
What was the last territory added to British India?	the Sikh Empire
When did India and Pakistan fight in Punjab?	1965 and 1971
What is Kahuta an important location for?	Pakistan's nuclear program
Where does Punjab have major military bases?	Sargodha and Rawalpindi
When did India and Pakistan begin serious peace talks?	2004
Who visits Nankana Sahib?	Sikh pilgrims
When do monsoons traditionally happen in Punjab?	by May
When did Punjab's weather pattern become unpredictable?	since the early 1970s
How hot do newspapers say it has gotten in Punjab?	51 °C
What was the record heat spike in Multan?	54 °C
When was the record heat spike in Multan?	June 1993
What is Punjab's major language?	Punjabi
How is Punjabi written?	in a Shahmukhi script
What is the largest ethnic group in Pakistan?	Punjabis
What minimum percent of each Punjab district speaks Punjabi natively?	89%
Where is Saraiki usually spoken?	south Punjab
Who elects the Chief Minister?	the Provincial Assembly of the Punjab
In what year did Sharif become CM?	2009
When was Sharif re-elected CM?	11 May 2013
What kind of legislature is the Provincial Assembly?	unicameral
How many seats are in the Provincial Assembly?	371
How much has Punjab's economy grown since 1972?	quadrupled
How much of Pakistan's GDP came from Punjab in 2000?	54.7%
How much of Pakistan's GDP came from Punjab in 2010?	59%
What manpower does Punjab provide?	largest pool of professionals and highly skilled (technically trained) manpower in Pakistan
How much did Punjab's economy grow in 2008-09?	6%
What geographic feature does Punjab not have?	coastline
What medical product does Punjab manufacture?	surgical instruments
What transportation products does Punjab manufacture?	bicycles and rickshaws
How much of Pakistan's paper products does Punjab manufacture?	90%
How much of Pakistan's sugar does Punjab manufacture?	69%
What kind of climate does Punjab have?	tropical wet and dry
Who built Punjab's irrigation system?	the British
What are Punjab's largest crops?	Wheat and cotton
What are Punjab's secondary crops?	rice, sugarcane, millet, corn, oilseeds, pulses, vegetables, and fruits such as kinoo
What calendar do Punjab's farmers use?	the Hindu calendar
What kind of problem caused riots in June 2012?	electricity
How long were cities without electricity in June 2012?	20–22 hours a day
Where were there riots in June 2012?	Gujranwala, Toba Tek Singh, Faisalabad, Sialkot, Bahawalnagar and communities across Khanewal District
Which energy companies' offices were attacked by rioters?	Fesco, Gepco and Mepco
What kind of inscriptions decorate Punjab's burial places?	Calligraphic inscriptions from the Quran
When did Rukn-e-Alam die?	1320 AD
When did Gardezi die?	1150 AD
When was Ahangar's tomb built?	sixteenth century
What color tile was used in Ahangar's tomb?	blue
What are urs?	fairs held at the shrines of Sufi saints
When are urs held?	the death anniversary of the saint
What genre of music is played at urs?	folk
Where is Buksh's shrine?	Lahore
Where is Zakria's shrine?	Multan
What is Punjab's biggest festival?	The national horse and cattle show
Where is the national horse and cattle show held?	Lahore
What happens at the national horse and cattle show?	sports, exhibitions, and livestock competitions
What famous tomb is in Lahore?	Jahangir's Tomb
Where was Nanak born?	Nankana Sahib
Who was the first Sikh Guru?	Guru Nanak
What famous hill stations are in Punjab?	Murree, Bhurban, Patriata and Fort Munro
What famous mosque is in Punjab?	Badshahi Mosque
Who are some well-known Punjab poets?	Sultan Bahu, Bulleh Shah, Mian Muhammad Baksh, and Waris Shah
What is Allah Ditta Lona Wala's career?	folk singers
Who is the 'Queen of Music'?	Malika-i-Mauseequi
When was Alam Lohar an important Punjabi folk singer?	from 1930 until 1979
What kind of music does Malika Pukhraj perform?	Ghazals and folk songs
What do Punjab folk songs often reflect?	the rains, sowing and harvesting seasons
Who sings about the joy of living?	Luddi, Bhangra and Sammi
What does Heer Ranjha sing about?	Love
What kind of music does Roshen Ara Begum perform?	Ghazals and folk songs
Of the huge amount of microorganisms, how many cause disease in otherwise healthy individuals?	relatively few
Interplay between pathogens and defenses of hosts results in what?	Infectious disease
What does the severity of a disease resulting from a pathogen depend on?	ability of that pathogen to damage the host
What can a host's immune system do to a host?	cause damage
What do clinicians classify infectious microorganisms according to the status of?	host defenses
What is one way of proving that a given disease is infectious?	satisfy Koch's postulates
What must an infectious agent only be identified in to satisfy the first of Koch's postulates?	patients and not in healthy controls
What is Koch's second postulate?	patients who contract the agent also develop the disease
Why can't Koch's postulates be applied ethically for many human diseases?	because they require experimental infection of a healthy individual
What is the causative spirochete of syphilis?	Treponema pallidum
When are infectious diseases called contagious diseases?	when they are easily transmitted by contact with an ill person
What is a contagious disease a subset of?	infectious disease
What sets a contagious disease after from a standard infectious disease?	especially infective or easily transmitted
Diseases with vector transmission or sexual transmission don't often require what type of isolation?	medical
What is not always respected in popular use?	specialized connotation of the word "contagious"
When does infection begin?	when an organism successfully enters the body, grows and multiplies.
What group is not easily infected?	humans
What group of humans have increased susceptibility to chronic or persistent infections?	weak, sick, malnourished, have cancer or are diabetic
What individuals are particularly susceptible to opportunistic infections?	Individuals who have a suppressed immune system
What is it called when a pathogen grows within the host cells?	intracellular
What does wound colonization refer to?	nonreplicating microorganisms within the wound
What type of organisms exist and injure tissue in infected wounds?	replicating
What are all multcellular organisms colonized to some degree by?	extrinsic organisms
What's the difference between an infection and a colonization?	only a matter of circumstance
What species colonizes the mammalian colon?	anaerobic bacteria
Why is it difficult to now which chronic wounds are infected?	Because it is normal to have bacterial colonization
What is there limited quality data for evaluating despite the huge number of wounds seen in a clinical practice?	symptoms and signs
What is increased pain an indicator of?	infection
What does not rule out infection?	absence of pain
Disease can arise when an organism inflicts what on the host?	damage
What can a microorganism cause tissue damage by releasing a variety of?	toxins
What does the of toxin Clostridium tetani releases do?	paralyzes muscles
What releases toxins which product shock and sepsis?	staphylococcus
What percentage of people infected with polio develop disease?	less than 5%
Why do persistent infections occur?	body is unable to clear the organism after the initial infection
What are persistent infections characterized by the continual presence of?	the infectious organism
How can some viruses main a persistent infection?	by infecting different cells of the body
What never leave the body when acquired?	Some viruses
Where does the herpes virus hide?	in nerves
What does diagnosis of an infectious sometimes involve identifying?	an infectious agent either directly or indirectly
Many minor infectious diseases are diagnosed by what type of presentation?	clinical
How are minor infectious diseases treated?	without knowledge of the specific causative agent
What can be identified given sufficient effort?	all known infectious agents
Why is it often not worth bothering to identify an infectious agent?	greatly outweighed by the cost
How is diagnosis of infectious disease almost always initiated?	by medical history and physical examination
What does taking a culture of an infectious agent isolated from a patient allow?	detailed identification
What features of an infectious organism does a culture allow examining?	microscopic features
What can organisms be directly identified by?	its genotype
What technique can be used to produce images of internal abnormalities?	X-rays, CAT scans, PET scans or NMR
What type of culture is a principal tool used to diagnose infectious disease?	Microbiological
What type of medium is provided for a specific agent in a microbial culture?	growth
What are most pathogenic bacteria easily grown on?	nutrient agar
What is it called when a visible mound forms on the surface of a plate?	a colony
What is a region of dead cells resulting from viral growth called?	a "plaque"
What are live animals required by?	some microbes
What can Mycobacterium leprae and Treponema pallidum be grown in?	animals
What type of eggs may some viruses be grown in?	embryonated
What is Xenodiagnosis?	use of a vector to support the growth of an infectious agent
What is it difficult to demonstrate the presence of in Chagas disease?	the causative agent
What is microscopy used for?	diagnosis of infectious disease
What do virtually all culture techniques rely on at some point?	microscopic examination
What can samples obtained from patients viewed directly under?	light microscope
When is microscopy exquisitely specific?	when used in combination with antibody based techniques.
What can antibodies with artificial fluorescence be directed to do?	bind to and identify a specific antigens present on a pathogen
What do almost all cells readily stain with?	a number of basic dyes
Why do cells easily stain with dyes?	electrostatic attraction
What electronic charge do cellular molecules have?	negatively charged
What is Geimsa stain?	a dye
How many methods comprise standard approaches used to classify bacteria and diagnose disease?	Two
What needs to be isolated from infected tissue to provide a biochemical diagnosis of an infectious disease?	enzymes
What enzyme's presence is characteristic of specific types of viral infections?	RNA replicases
What does the protein hemagglutinin bind together?	red blood cells
Why are the presence of certain enymzes a tell tale sign of a virus?	humans can make neither RNA replicases nor reverse transcriptase
What methods are highly sensitive, specifc and rapid tests used to identify microorganisms?	Serological
What are serological tests based upon the ability of an antibody to do?	bind specifically to an antigen
What is the antigen bound to by the antibody usually?	a protein or carbohydrate made by an infectious agent
What does the binding set off that will result in something visibly obvious in various ways?	a chain of events
What is the causative agent of "strep throat"?	S. pyogenes
What are immunoassays?	Complex serological techniques
What type of signal do immunoassays produce?	electro - magnetic or particle radiation
What allows quantitation of the target antigen?	unknowns can be compared to that of standards
Immunoassays are able to detect what type of proteins?	generated by an infected organism in response to a foreign agent
What does the acronym PCR expand to?	polymerase chain reaction
What will be the ubiquitous gold standards of diagnostics in the near future?	PCR
What has the catalog of infectious agents grown to the point of?	virtually all of the significant infectious agents of the human population have been identified
What must an infectious agent do to cause disease?	grow within the human body
What are primers derived from the genomes of?	infectious agents
What technological ability with regards to detection is currently available?	ability to detect any infectious agent
What are the remaining blockades to the use or PCR as a standard tool of diagnosis?	cost and application
What are some diseases which won't benefit from PCR methods?	clostridial diseases
PCR can't detect the presence of any bacteria when what doesn't occur?	significant proliferation of the infectious agent
What is used in the treatment of AIDS?	AZT
How was the course of AIDS followed?	monitoring the composition of patient blood samples
What could be done by understanding how the disease was transmitted?	resources could be targeted to the communities at greatest risk
What did the genotypic identification of HIV later enable?	geographical origins of the virus
What is now commonly used to identify HIV in healthy people before the onset of the illnes?	Molecular diagnostics
What can wearing gowns and face masks help prevent?	infections from being passed from one person to another
What is the most important defense against the spread of unwanted organisms?	Frequent hand washing
Avoiding drugs and using condoms are other forms of what?	prevention
Why is it important to cook foods well?	prevention
What should one do with foods that have been left outside for a long time?	avoiding
Recognizing the different characteristics of various diseases is one way to do what?	prevent or slow down the transmission of infectious diseases
What are some critical disease characteristics that should be evaluated?	virulence, distance traveled by victims, and level of contagiousness
What virus' strains incapacitate their victims extremely quickly before killing them?	Ebola
Why is the initial stage of Ebola not very contagious?	victims experience only internal hemorrhaging
What does the low virulence of HIV allow victims to do?	travel long distances
Recognizing the effects of small-world networks allows one to decrease what?	transmission rate of infectious diseases
What type of interactions happen within groups of infected individuals in epidemics?	extensive interactions
What is a way of drastically reducing infection rates?	focus is on the prevention of transmission jumps
What is an example of a success implementation of preventing transmission jumps?	needle exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users
When was vaccination used to prevent the spread of the foot-and-mouth virus?	2001
What is resistance to infection known technically as?	immunity
When may immunity be acquired?	following a disease
What is knowledge of protective antigens more complete for?	primary pathogens
What does herd immunity offer to vulnerable people when a large enough proportion of the population has acquired immunity?	a measure of protection
Vaccination is a way in which what may be acquired?	immunity
What can the clearance of pathogens be influenced by in an individual?	genetic variants
What is the brand name Pegasys for?	Pegylated interferon-alpha-2b
What are patients carrying certain genetic variant alleles near the IL28B gene more likely to achieve?	sustained virological response
What type of drugs can suppress an infection when it attacks the body?	anti-infective
How many broad types of anti-infective drugs exist?	Several
What depends on the method an antibiotic is given?	severity and the type of infection
How are severe infections of the brain usually treated?	with intravenous antibiotics
How do antibiotics work?	slowing down the multiplication of bacteria or killing the bacteria
What are the top three killer diseases?	HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria
How much have deaths due to HIV/AIDS increased?	fourfold
What are some popular childhood diseases?	pertussis, poliomyelitis, diphtheria, measles and tetanus
Who makes up a large percentage of diarrheal deaths?	Children
What is the number 4 leading cause of death in the world?	lower respiratory infections
What medical field does the treatment of infectious diseases fall into?	field of Infectious Disease
Disease propagation can fall under the purview of what field of study?	Epidemiology
Who tends to initially diagnose an infection?	primary care physicians or internal medicine specialists
What is the non-medical mumbo jumbo term for pulmonologist?	lung physician
Who works with both patients and general practitioners to identify a disease?	infectious diseases specialist
What have a number of studies found a correlation between?	pathogen load in an area and human behavior
What is higher pathogen load associated with?	decreased size of ethnic and religious groups in an area
What does avoidance of other groups reduce?	pathogen transmission
What does more restricted sexual behavior result in?	Higher pathogen load
What may poor socioeconomic factors ultimately in part be due to?	high pathogen load preventing economic development.
What profession finds evidence of infection in fossil remains to be interesting?	paleopathologists
What do paleopathologists study?	occurrences of injuries and illness in extinct life forms
What has been discovered in the bones of carnivorous dinosaurs?	Signs of infection
What dinosaur's skull had pit-like wounds surrounded by swollen and porous bone?	Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis
How did tyrannosaurs become infected?	being bitten during a fight
What is the practice of killing or trapping any animal?	Hunting
Why do humans most commonly hunt wildlife?	food
What is there a distinction between lawful hunting and?	poaching
What is poaching?	illegal killing, trapping or capture of the hunted species
What is the species which is hunted referred to as?	prey
What is the practice of killing or trapping any animal called?	Hunting
When was lawful hunting distinguished from poaching?	2010s
Illegally killing, capturing or trapping an hunted species is called what?	poaching
Hunted species are usually referred to as what?	game or prey
What animals are usually hunted?	mammals and birds
What is it called to kill or trap an animal?	Hunting
What species are usually hunted?	mammals and birds
Why do humans hunt?	food, recreation, to remove predators
When was lawful hunting distinguished from poaching?	2010s
Species hunted are referred to as what?	game or prey
What does evidence suggest hunting may have been a factor in the extinction of?	holocene megafauna
What was the North American megafauna extinction coincidental with?	Younger Dryas impact event
What are humans thought to have played a significant role in, in Australia?	extinction of the Australian megafauna
When was Australian's megafauna widespread?	prior to human occupation
What along with multiple environmental factors led to the extinction of the holocene megafauna?	hunting
What replaced the holocene megafauna?	smaller herbivores
What event was coincidental with the North American megafauna extinction?	Younger Dryas impact event
What is thought to have played a significant role in the extinction of the Australian megafauna?	humans
What is undisputed about early humans?	were hunters
Hunting was important for the emergence of the Homo genus from what?	earlier Australopithecines
Production of stone tools and control of fire were also pushed forward by what?	hunting
What became a theme of stories and myths?	hunting
Hunting allowed what type of rituals?	dance and animal sacrifice
What is undisputed about earlier humans?	humans were hunters
What did hunting become a theme of?	stories and myths
Stone tools and control of fire are emphasised in what hypothesis?	hunting hypothesis
What type of lifestyle was prevalent in Siberia until the European Age of Discovery?	Hunter-gathering
Where does the hunter-gathering lifestyle persist, though in decline?	some tribal societies
Indigenous peoples of the Amazonas preserved what until the recent past?	paleolithic hunting-gathering
Who are the only remaining full-time hunter-gatherers in Africa?	the Hadza of Tanzania
Hunter-gathering lifestyles remained prevalent until when?	European Age of Discovery
What parts of the New World did the hunter-gathering lifestyles remain?	Sub-Saharan Africa, and Siberia, as well as all of Australia
Who are the only remaining full-time hunter-gatherers in Africa?	Hadza of Tanzania
What is Louis Binford's profession?	Archaeologist
What idea did Binford take issue with?	that early hominids and early humans were hunters
What did Binford conclude humans were instead of hunters?	scavengers
What idea did Blumenschine propose?	idea of confrontational scavenging
What does confrontational scavenging involve doing to other predators after they've made a kill?	challenging and scaring off
Who is the archaeologist that does not believe early humans were hunters?	Louis Binford
Louis Binford concluded what based on skeletal remains of consumed animals?	hominids and early humans were mostly scavengers
What did Robert Blumenschine propose?	confrontational scavenging
Louis Binford's idea is popular among whom?	archaeologists and paleoanthropologists
Confrontational scavenging involves doing what to other predators?	challenging and scaring off
What was a significant contributor to the human food supply?	hunting
What did the supplementary meat from hunting include?	protein, bone for implements, sinew for cordage, fur, feathers, rawhide and leather
What was the leather from hunting used for?	clothing
Rocks and spears are examples of some of man's earliest what?	hunting weapons
Where is hunting still vital?	marginal climates
Hunt was a significant contributor to what?	human food supply
Where is hunting still vital?	marginal climates
Why is hunting still vital in marginal climates?	unsuited for pastoral uses or agriculture
How are the skins of sea mammals useful for people in the Arctic trap?	make kayaks, clothing, and footwear
What are kings often depicted as on ancient reliefs?	hunters
What are the kings portrayed as hunting?	big game
How was the cultural importance of hunting in ancient societies represented?	by deities
What could the mythological association of prey species with divinity be a form of?	hunting restrictions
What might the meaning of Euripides' tale be seen as a caution against?	disrespect of prey
Kings were depicted as hunting what big game from a chariot?	lions
What is often related to hunting?	Taboos
Deities represent what importance?	cultural and psychological
What tale is seen as cautions against disrespecting prey or impudent boasting?	Euripides' tale of Artemis and Actaeon
Who in medieval Europe obtained the sole rights to hunt in certain areas of a feudal territory?	the upper class
What was game in the  areas used by the upper class used as a source of?	food and furs
What legends show the importance of the proprietary view of game as held by the nobles?	Robin Hood
What is one of the primary charges against the outlaws in the legend?	they "hunt the King's deer
Who in medieval Europe obtained the sole rights to hunt in certain areas of a feudal territory?	the upper class
What did Anglophone settles take gloried pride in?	democratically in hunting for all
What was game in the  areas used by the upper class used as a source of?	food and furs
What legends show the importance of the proprietary view of game as held by the nobles?	Robin Hood
What is one of the primary charges against the outlaws in the legend?	they "hunt the King's deer
What did Anglophone settles take gloried pride in?	democratically in hunting for all
In medieval Europe who obtained sole rights to hunt in certain areas?	upper class
What was the game in feudal territory was used as?	food and furs
Who provided the game obtained in feudal territory?	professional huntsmen
The importance of can be seen in what legends?	Robin Hood
Who did Anglophone colonies democratically glorify hunting for?	all
What kind of occupation do Hindu scriptures describe hunting as being?	acceptable
What is one of the names of the god Shiva?	Mrigavyadha
What is the translation of Mrigavyadha?	"the deer hunter"
What does Shiva destroy in human beings?	animal instincts
What talent does Dasharatha have?	hunt in the dark
What scriptures describe hunting as and acceptable occupation?	Hindu
Godly figures have engaged in what activity?	hunting
Mrigavyadha means what?	deer hunter
Mrigavyadha destroys animal instinct in who?	human beings
What happened after Krishna was accidentally wounded by an arrow of a hunter?	died
Who has hunting been forbidden to since early Christian times?	Roman Catholic Church clerics
Who forbid to all servants of God hunting?	Corpus Juris Canonici
What pope was the Fourth Council of the Lateran held under?	Pope Innocent III
What does the decree of the Council of Trent imply?	not all hunting is illicit
What type of hunting is unlawful?	clamorosa
Who was forbidden to hunt in early Christian time?	Roman Catholic Church clerics
What forbid hunting in the woods with hounds and keeping hawks or falcons?	Corpus Juris Canonici
Who held the Fourth Council of the Lateran?	Pope Innocent III
How is the the decree of the Council of Trent is worded?	mildly
Who stated quiet hunting is allowed?	Council of Trent
What distinction is undoubtedly permissible?	between lawful and unlawful hunting
What can a bishop absolutely prohibit?	all hunting
Where did synods prohibit all hunting at?	Milan, Avignon, Liège, Cologne, and elsewhere
What did Benedict XIV declare about decrees prohibiting hunting?	not too severe
Who can prohibit hunting to the clerics?	bishop
Declaration that decrees are not severe was done by who?	Benedict XIV
What did Synods at Milan, Avignon, Liege, Cologne, and elsewhere do?	prohibit all hunting to the clerics
What does New Zealand have?	strong hunting culture
What was the only land mammal native to New Zealand?	bats
Why were game animals introduced by acclimatisation societies?	to provide New Zealanders with sport and a hunting resource
Why did the population of pigs and rabbits explode in New Zealand?	no natural predators
What do government agencies view the animals as?	pests
What country has a strong hunting culture?	New Zealand
What were the the only land mammal in New Zealand?	bats
What is New Zealand made up of?	islands
Game animals were introduced here by whom?	acclimatisation societies
What resulted having no natural predators for the animals introduced?	their population exploded
What was hunting regarded as in British India?	regal sport
What does the Indian word "shikaris" mean in English?	big-game hunters
What did British officers maintain whole corps of?	shikaris
Why did the regals recruit low-ranking local tribes when hunting?	because of their traditional knowledge of the environment and hunting techniques
What could a Bengal tiger be hunted from the back of?	an elephant
Where was hunting reguarded as a regal sport?	British India
What is hunted from the back of an elephant?	Bengal tigers
Who did British officers maintain?	shikaris
Who were the shikaris headed by?	master of the hunt
Why were low-ranking local tribes recruited?	because of their traditional knowledge of the environment and hunting techniques
What norms are generally antagonistic to hunting?	Regional social
What sect lays special emphasis on conservation of particular species?	Bishnoi
What bans the killing of all wild animals in India?	Wildlife Protection Act of 1972
Who may permit a person to hunt animals in India despite it being banned?	the Chief Wildlife Warden
Whose property does the body of any wild animal killed or wounded become?	government
Who lay special emphasis on conservation of particular species?	Bishnoi
What bans the killing of all wild animals?	India's Wildlife Protection Act
What year was this protection act put into place?	1972
Who can permit a person to hunt wild animals?	Chief Wildlife Warden
What happens to the body of the wild animal killed?	becomes government property
What type of hunting is most closely associated with the UK?	fox hunting
How do the English hunt foxes?	on horseback with hounds
In England, what is hunted when "shooting" is called for?	birds
Why were foxes originally hunted?	form of vermin control to protect livestock
How is deer stalking with rifles carried out?	on foot without hounds, using stealth
What hunting is done on horseback with hounds?	fox
Hunting horseback with hound is associated with whom?	United Kingdom
In Victorian times a popular social activity was?	fox hunting
What is carried out on foot without hounds?	Deer stalking
Hounds were used for what purpose?	to pursue
What does shooting in Britain require little questing for?	game
About how many birds are released onto shooting estates every year in the UK?	thirty-five million
What kind of affairs can shoots be?	elaborate
Who uses swinging sticks or flags to drive game out?	"beaters"
What is the Glorious Twelfth in the UK?	open season for grouse
About how many birds are released onto shooting estates every year?	thirty-five million
Who swings sticks or flags to drive game out?	beaters
When does open season for grouse begin in the UK?	12 August
What is the UK definition of game is governed by?	Game Act 1831
Why are assistants used?	help load shotguns
What law primarily regulates hunting?	state
What additional type of law applies in the case of migratory birds and endangered species?	environmental
What varies widely from state to state?	Regulations
What do some states make a distinction between?	protected species and unprotected species
What do hunters of protected species require in all states?	a hunting license
How is hunting regulated?	by state law
Migratory birds and endangered species are protected by what law?	United States environmental law
What hunters require a hunting license in all states?	Hunters of protected species
What is sometimes a prerequisite of obtaining a hunting license?	hunting safety course
What is required when hunting big game?	a "tag" for each animal harvested
Tags are purchased in addition to what?	the hunting license
What is typically limited to an individual?	number of tags issued
A wildlife management unit is a place where what may be restricted to?	Tags
What kind of stamp is required to hunt migratory waterfowl?	duck
When hunting big game what is typically required?	tag
What must be purchased with hunting license is comes in a limited number?	Tags
How are tags assigned if there are more hunters than game?	by lottery
What is required of hunting migratory waterfowl?	duck stamp
Who issues requirement for hunting migratory waterfowl?	Fish and Wildlife Service
How is gun usage typically regulated?	game category, area within the state, and time period
What often specify a minimum caliber or muzzle energy for firearms?	Regulations for big-game hunting
Why is the use of rifles often banned?	safety reasons
Why may regulations ban the use of lead in ammunition?	environmental concerns
Why are specific seasons for bow hunting established?	limit competition with hunters using more effective weapons
Why are the use of rifles banned?	safety reasons
How is gun useage regulated?	by game category
What is specified in big-game hunting?	minimum caliber
What is hunting in the U.S. not associated with?	any particular class or culture
What percentage of Americans supported legal hunting in 2006?	seventy-eight percent
What percentage of Americans actually hunted at the beginning of the 21st century?	just six percent
What percentage of Midwesterners hunted?	twelve percent
How much did the number of hunters over the age of sixteen decline in the period between 1996-2006?	ten percent
What percentage of Americans support legal hunting?	seventy-eight percent
What percentage of Americans actually hunted at the beginning of the 21st century?	six percent
South Easterners hunted at what rate?	five percent
Midwesterners hunted at what rate?	twelve percent
What years did hunting decline?	1996–2006
When do hunting regulations date from in the US?	19th century
What do some modern hunters see themselves as?	conservationists and sportsmen
What organizations provide hunter education and help protect the future of the sport?	Local hunting clubs and national organizations
Ducks Unlimited and the Delta Waterfowl are examples of groups representing what?	a specific hunting interest
What do many hunting groups participate in doing at the federal and state level?	lobbying
What do modern hunters see themselves as?	conservationists and sportsmen
Who provides hunter education?	Local hunting clubs
What do hunting groups also participate in?	lobbying the federal government and state government
What century is U.S. regulations dates from?	19th
How much money is distributed to state agencies to support wildlife management programs each year?	$200 million
How much money has the sale of Federal Duck Stamps raised since 1934?	over $700 million
How many acres can the money raised from the sale of federal duck stamps help purchase?	5,200,000 acres
What do states use some of the money from hunting licenses to assist with?	management of game animals
What is a key task of state park rangers and game wardens?	to enforce laws and regulations related to hunting
Who are federal excise taxes are distributed to?	state agencies
What do the taxes support?	wildlife management programs
How much has Federal Duck Stamps raised?	$700 million
What does land has Federal Duck Stamp money helped purchase?	5,200,000 acres
Park rangers and game wardens enforce laws and regulations related to what?	hunting
What is varmint hunting an American phrase for?	selective killing of non-game animals seen as pests
What does varmint hunting achieve?	selective control of pests
What detrimental effects are varmint species often responsible for visiting on?	crops, livestock, landscaping, infrastructure, and pets.
Where has a non-native rodent known as a nutria become very destructive?	Louisiana
What has the state of Louisiana done to combat the nutria?	initiated a bounty program
What is phrased for selective killing of non-game animals.	Varmint hunting
What was once considered a varmint but is now protected?	wolves
What is the non-native varmint of Louisiana?	nutria
What did Louisiana initiate to control the varmint population?	bounty program
When was internet hunting introduced?	2005
How did Internet hunting allow people to hunt?	using remotely controlled guns
Who criticized the practice of Internet hunting?	hunters
What did hunters feel hunting over the Internet violated?	principles of fair chase
What has the NRA always maintained that being in the field with your firearm is?	an important element of hunting tradition
What allows people to hunt over the internet?	Internet hunting
When was this type of hunting introduced?	2005
How is this type of hunting done?	hunt over the Internet using remotely controlled guns
What was the principle was this type of hunting said to violate?	fair chase
Who spoke on this violation?	National Rifle Association (NRA)
Approximately how many sport hunters applied for hunting licences in recent years?	12,000
Where is there a very active tradition of hunting of small to medium-sized wild game?	Trinidad and Tobago
What is there a very lucrative and thriving black market for?	poached wild game
What is hunting pressure from?	high
What very active tradition Trinidad and Tabago have?	hunting of small to medium-sized wild game
What animal aids in the hunting?	hounds
What population has extirpated?	red brocket deer
What do hunters pay to obtain hunting license?	very small fees
What does hunting give resource managers an important tool?	managing populations
What is carrying capacity in most circumstances determined by?	combination habitat and food availability,
What do some environmentalists assert reintroducing predators would achieve?	same end
How is hunting an important tool for resource managers?	managing populations
What happens if a population exceeds the carrying capacity of their habitat?	threaten the well-being of other species
How can hunting actually increase the population of predators?	by removing territorial bounds that would otherwise be established
What do some hunting advocates assert that is indirectly reduced among animals when intraspecific competition has been reduced?	mortality
What would environmentalists have done, instead of hunting?	(re)introducing predators
What is an important tool in managing populations?	Hunting
What is carrying capacity determined by?	combination habitat and food availability
What can it increase the population of?	predators
What did sport hunters in the 19th century purse game for?	trophy
What was the head of an animal displayed as?	sign of prowess
What happened to the rest of the animal?	s typically discarded
What did some churches disapprove of?	such waste
What countries frowned upon this hunting?	Nordic
What was the only goal for many European sport hunters in the 19th century?	a trophy
What types of trophies would hunters keep as trophies to be displayed as a sign of their prowess?	the head or pelt of an animal
In what countries was the hunting for trophies frowned upon, back in the day and in modern times?	Nordic
What was hunting in North American in the 19th century used to supplement?	food supplies
What destinations did sport hunting see elaborate travel to in the pursuit of trophies?	Africa, India and other places
What century was game hunted as a trophy?	19th
What countries is trophy hunting frowned upon?	Nordic
What did North America primarily hunt for?	food supplies
What sport of hunting is in Africa?	safari method
What Continent did the biological Conservation state trophy hunting is of major importance to the conservation of?	Africa
What does hunting create economic incentives for?	conservation
What did another study show that less than 3% of reached the local level?	expenditures
What type of studies does the Biological Conservation journal publish?	scientific
Why is trophy hunting important to conservation in Africa?	creating economic incentives for conservation over vast areas
Trophy hunting can include areas which would likely be unsuitable for what other types of ecotourism?	photographic
How much of a trophy hunters' expenditures actually reach the local level, according to another study?	less than 3%
What thus is the level of economic incentive and benefit?	minimal
What is of major importance in Africa?	trophy hunting
What does trophy hunting create in Africa?	economic incentives for conservation
How much of trophy hunters expenditures actually reach the local level?	less than 3%
What do a variety of industries benefit from?	hunting
Where is it estimated that a hunter spends fifty to one hundred times that of the average ecotourist?	Tanzania
Where does the average safari hunter stay in?	tented camps
Advocates argue these hunters allow for what type of activities?	anti-poaching
What do a variety of industries obtain benefit from?	hunting
In what country is it estimated that a safari hunter spends fifty to one hundred times what an average ecotourist does?	Tanzania
What type of accommodations does the average photographer touring Tanzania seek?	luxury
Where does the typical safari hunter hang his hat at night?	in tented camps
Where can safari hunters go which are uninviting to the less hardcore ecotourist?	remote areas
How much does a safari hunter spend compared to an average ecotourist?	fifty to one hundred times
What does the photo tourist seek?	luxury accommodation
Where does a safari hunter usually stay?	tented camps
What hunters allow for anti-poaching activities?	Safari hunters
Hunting has significant financial impact in what country?	the United States
What do many companies specialize in apropos to hunting?	equipment or speciality tourism
"There's an app for that!",  what have been different technologies been created to do?	assist hunters
What broad range of backgrounds do today's hunters come from?	economic, social, and cultural
How much money did the thirteen million hunters spend on their sport in 2001?	over $20.5 billion
What type of financial impact does hunting have on the U.S.?	significant financial impact
What has been developed in the U.S. to help hunters?	different technologies
One technology that is available for hunters in the U.S. is?	iPhone applications
How much did hunters spend in 2001?	over $20.5 billion
What do the proceeds from hunting assist with?	preservation of wildlife habitat
What has excessive hunting contributed heavily to?	the endangerment, extirpation and extinction of many animals
What do Steller's sea cow, the bluebuck, and the Javan tigers all have in common?	extinction
Why have poachers killed endangered animals?	primarily for commercial sale or sport.
How have the North American cougar and Asian elephant been hunted?	to endangerment or extinction
How is excessive hunting related to the extinction of species?	contributed heavily
What contributes to endangerment?	excessive hunting
What have poachers contributed to hunting?	endangerment
Who signed the Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act?	President Franklin D. Roosevelt
When did Roosevelt sign the Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act?	16 March 1934
What does the Act require all hunters over the age of sixteen to do?	an annual stamp purchase
What do 98% of all the funds generated by the stamp sales go to?	the purchase or lease of wetland habitat
How much of the nation's endangered species is it estimated benefits from the protection afford by the Duck Stamp funds?	one third
What act was signed in 1934?	Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act
What President signed this act?	Franklin D. Roosevelt
What is the requirement of the act?	annual stamp purchase by all hunters over the age of sixteen
What do the stamps depict?	wildlife artwork
What percentage of the endangered species seek food and shelter in areas protected using Duck Stamp Funds.	one third
How much money has the sale of Federal Duck Stamps generated since 1934?	$670 million
How many acres has the sale of Federal Duck Stamps helped to purchase or lease since 1934?	5,200,000 acres
What do the stamps give the purchaser a license to do?	hunt migratory birds
Who accounts for eighty-seven percent of the sale of duck stamps?	hunters
Who manages the distribution of the funds obtained by the sale of the stamps?	Migratory Bird Conservation Commission
How much money has been generated due to the Duck Stamp act?	$670 million
How much land has the Duck Stamp Act help purchase?	5,200,000 acres
What do the Duck Stamps serve as?	license to hunt migratory birds
What percent of sales are contributed by hunters?	eighty-seven
Who manages distribution of funds?	Migratory Bird Conservation Commission (MBCC)
What large species of antelope once made its home in the desert areas of the Middle East?	The Arabian oryx
Why did sport hunters find the Arabian oryx to be a worthwhile quarry to hunt?	the species' striking appearance
When did the Arabian oryx become extinct in the wild due to sport hunting?	1972
How did hunters obliterate the advantage bestowed upon the oryx by evolution?	use of automobiles and high-powered rifles
What animal has made a miraculous comeback and been upgraded from "extinct in the wild" to "vulnerable"?	Arabian oryx
What is a species of large antelope?	Arabian oryx
What did the large antelope species once inhabit?	much of the desert areas of the Middle East
What destroyed the Arabian oryx only advantage of speed.	automobiles and high-powered rifles
When did the Arabian oryx become extinct?	1972
What contributed to the Arabian oryx rise from extinct to vulnerable?	conservation efforts
What type of creature is the American bison?	a large bovid
What did the American bison inhabit much of prior to the 1800s?	western North America
What did market hunters leave the parts of the bison they didn't need to do?	rot
What was the population of bison herds around prior to being eliminated by thousands of market hunters?	several million
What is the current status of bison?	near-threatened
What did large herds of bison attract?	market hunters
What part of North America did the bison live?	western
Why were the bison killed?	for their hides
What did hunter do with the rest of the bison?	leaving the rest to rot
What do bison still remain?	near-threatened
Why has Botswana been forced to ban trophy hunting altogether?	a precipitous wildlife decline
What plummeting numbers of this species caused a decline in predator numbers?	antelope
What species saw its numbers rising while elephant numbers remained stable?	hippopotamus
What factors other than trophy hunting are responsible for the decline of wildlife in Botswana?	poaching, drought and habitat loss
What other African country has also recently banned trophy hunting?	Uganda
What Botswana was resently forced to do?	ban trophy hunting
What animal declined across Botswana?	antelope
What animal numbers have increased in Botswana?	hippopotamus
What animal numbers remain stable in Botswana?	elephant
What else is partly to blame for the declining number of animals in Botswana and Uganda?	poaching
What country is Kathmandu the capital of?	Nepal
What does Upa-Mahanagar mean in English?	Sub-Metropolitan City
Along with "KTM," what is another nickname of Kathmandu?	tri-city
How many people lived in Kathmandu in 2011?	975,453
How many square kilometers in size is Kathmandu?	49.45
About how long has Kathmandu existed?	2000
What suggests that Kathmandu is as old as it is?	inscriptions
What is Kathmandu's majority religion?	Hinduism
What do most Kathmandu residents speak?	Nepali
What secondary language do educated people in Kathmandu speak?	English
What does काष्ठ mean in English?	wood
What is the English translation of Mandap?	covered shelter
What do Newar speakers call Kasthamandap temple?	Maru Satal
Who was responsible for the construction of Kasthamandap temple?	King Laxmi Narsingh Malla
On what date was Maru Satal destroyed?	25 April 2015
What is the ancient name of Kathmandu?	Kasthamandap Mahanagar
How does कान्तिपुर transliterate into English?	Kantipur
Who is also called Kanti?	Lakshmi
How do you say place in Sanskrit?	pur
What is the English translation of Mahanagar?	great city
According to legend, what body of water once existed on the site of Kathmandu?	lake
What animals notably resided in Nagdaha?	snakes
Who was the founder of Manjupattan?	Bodhisatwa Manjusri
What type of creature was Banasur?	demon
Who was Banasur's murderer?	Krishna
Who was the founder of the Kirata dynasty?	Yalamber
What geographical part of Kathmandu did Yambu once occupy?	northern
Speakers of what languages sometimes call Kathmandu Yambu?	Sino-Tibetan
Where in Kathmandu was Yengal located?	southern half
What religion did the Sankhu monastery belong to?	Buddhist
Who won the war between the Licchavis and the Kiratas?	Licchavis
Who did the migrating Shakyas pretend to be?	Koliyas
What sect of Buddhism is the only remaining one based in Sanskrit?	Newar
Who killed the Shakyas?	Virudhaka
Under the Licchavi dynasty, what name was typically used to refer to Yengal?	Dakshin Koligram
Kathmandu resulted from the merger of what two settlements?	Dakshin Koligram
Who is Kathmandu's historical founder?	Gunakamadeva
Who did Chandrahrasa belong to?	Manjushri
How many barracks guarded ancient Kathmandu?	eight
Trade between what two countries typically went through ancient Kathmandu?	India and Tibet
Who ruled Nepal after the Licchavi?	Malla
Along with Khas, who attacked Nepal in the early Malla period?	Turk Muslims
What fraction of Kathmandu's population died in an ancient earthquake?	third
Along with the Mangriha, what Licchavi-era building was destroyed in an ancient earthquake?	Kailashkut Bhawan
What notable Nepali figure died in a Kathmandu earthquake?	Abhaya Malla
How many cities were present in the Kathmandu Valley in the late Malla period?	four
In the waning years of the Malla dynasty, what fortified cities existed in the Kathmandu Valley?	Kantipur, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, and Kirtipur
What cultures influenced Nepal in the later Malla era?	India, Tibet, China, Persia, and Europe
What is an example of a book of medicine from the Malla period?	Haramekhala
When does Amarkosh date to?	1381
Who won the Battle of Kathmandu?	Gorkha Kingdom
What battle inaugurated the conquering of the Kathmandu Valley by the Gorkha?	Kirtipur
How many stories high was the Basantapur tower?	nine
What European country did Bhimsen Thapa oppose?	Great Britain
How many stories made up the Dharahara tower?	nine
What river is south of Kathmandu?	Bagmati
What geographic portion of the Kathmandu Valley houses Kathmandu?	northwestern
About how many feet above sea level is Kathmandu?	4,600
How large is Kathmandu in terms of square miles?	19.56
Where does the Lalitpur Sub-Metropolitan City stand in relation to the Bagmati River?	south
How many rivers travel through Kathmandu?	eight
Where did the canal that once terminated in Kathmandu originate?	Nagarjuna hill
How many feet high are the mountains from which the Bagmati flows?	4,900–9,800
How many districts make up the Kathmandu Valley urban area?	three
What are Madhyapur Thimi, Kirtipur and Bhaktapur?	municipalities
How many sub-metropolitan cities are present in the districts that make up the Kathmandu valley?	1
About how many people live in a square kilometer in Gonggabu VDC?	20,000
What is another term for VDCs?	villages
What is the Kathmandu Valley's average temperature in winter, in degrees Fahrenheit?	50.2
Along with a subtropical highland climate, what climate classification covers Kathmandu?	humid subtropical climate
What is the Köppen abbreviation for a humid subtropical climate?	Cwa
How many meters up is the Cool Temperate Zone?	2,100–3,300
How many significant climate regions exist in Nepal?	Five
What sort of temperature is typical on a Kathmandu morning?	cool
About what percentage of Kathmandu's annual rainfall falls during the monsoon months?	65
On what date in 2013 was it 15.4 degrees Fahrenheit in Kathmandu?	January 10
In what months does the monsoon occur in Nepal?	June to August
In what year did the most rain in recorded history fall on Kathmandu?	2003
What religion proliferated throughout Central Asia in part due to the efforts of Lhasa Newar merchants?	Buddhism
Existing between what two countries contributed to Kathmandu becoming a center of trade?	India and China
Other than trade, what was the traditional basis of Kathmandu's economy?	agriculture
Approximately what portion of Nepal's GDP is produced by the Kathmandu metropolitan area?	one third
What do Kathmandu residents earn per capita each year?	$2200
What is the GDP of Kathmandu?	6.5billion
What percentage of Kathmandu's economy is trade?	21
What portion of Kathmandu's economy consists of agriculture?	9%
Approximately when did the Nepalese tourism industry begin?	1950
What city was connected to Kathmandu via the Tribhuvan Highway?	Raxaul
When did construction on the Tribhuvan Highway begin?	1956
What is the most significant industry in Nepal?	tourism
Along with Buddhists, what religion's devotees visit Kathmandu?	Hindu
How many tourists visited Kathmandu in the period 1961-62?	6,179
What event led to an increase in tourism in 2009?	end of the Maoist insurgency
What Nepalese mountains are claimed to attract tourists?	Himalayas
What Kathmandu neighborhood is noted for its abundance of tourists?	Thamel
What neighborhood is also known as Jhamel?	Jhamsikhel
What is the traditional name for Freak Street?	Jhochhen Tol
What tourists first brought attention to Jhocchen Tol?	hippies
How many stars is Kathmandu's Grand Hotel?	four
What type of hotel is Aloha Inn?	three-star
De L'Annapurna is an example of what sort of hotel?	five-star
What attractions are present at Hotel Yak & Yeti and the Hyatt Regency?	casinos
How many sectors make up the Kathmandu metropolitan area?	five
What sector of Kathmandu doesn't have the word 'sector' in its name?	City Core
What is the purpose of Kathmandu being divided into 35 wards?	civic administration
How many members of the Council received their positions via nomination rather than election?	20
How many hectares in size is Kathmandu's ward 26?	4
What is Kathmandu's fire department called?	Barun Yantra Karyalaya
What year saw the founding of Kathmandu's fire department?	1937
When did Bhaktapur receive coverage from the fire department?	1944
How many fire trucks did West Germany donate to Kathmandu?	seven
What is the mission of FAN?	raising public awareness about fire and improving safety
What was the population of Kathmandu in 1991?	427,045
About how many people are likely to live in Kathmandu in 2021?	1,319,597
How dense was the population of Kathmandu in 1991?	85
How many acres of land did the KMC control in 2001?	20,300
What percentage of Kathmandu residents are Chettris?	18.5
What is the third largest ethnic group in Kathmandu?	Khas Brahmins
What are Kathmandu's primary religions?	Hinduism and Buddhism
What Kathmandu industry is particularly known for its English speakers?	service
Along with Nepali, what is Kathmandu's main language?	Nepal Bhasa
What religion does Changunarayan belong to?	Hindu
What Buddhist monuments are present at Boudhanath?	stupas
How many acres are the Kathmandu valley monument zones?	466.9
In hectares, how large is the Kathmandu valley monument buffer zone?	239.34
When did the Kathmandu valley monuments receive WHS status?	2006
Where is a Durban Square located that is not preserved?	Kirtipur
What is the oldest dynasty to be represented with buildings in Kathmandu's Durbar Square?	Licchavi
How many temples are present in Kathmandu's Durbar Square?	50
When did a notable earthquake occur that damaged Kathmandu's Durbar Square?	April 2015
How many kingdoms have buildings present in the Durbar Square of Kathmandu?	four
What is Durga called in Nepali?	Taleju
How long is Kumari believed to incarnate Taleju?	until she menstruates
Who was the Royal Kumari as of late 2008?	Matina Shakya
What type of government did Nepal have after the monarchy?	Maoist
When was the Pashupatinath Temple built?	5th century
What faith does the Pashupatinath Temple serve?	Hindu
What is another name for Pashupati?	Lord Shiva
Prior to the secularization of Nepal, who was the country's national god?	Lord Pashupatinath
Who damaged the Pashupatinath Temple in the 14th century?	Mughal invaders
What people make up the majority of Pashupatinath followers?	Hindus
In what part of India do the Pashupatinath priests originate?	South
What dynasty did Yaksha Malla belong to?	Malla
Who supposedly encouraged the usage of Karnataka Brahmin priests at Pashupatinath Temple?	Adi Shankaracharya
What is another term for Bharatam?	Unified India
To what religion is Boudhanath holy?	Buddhist
What do the Newars call Boudhanath?	Khāsti
What is Boudhanath called in Nepali?	Bauddha or Bodhnāth
How far is Boudhanath from Kathmandu in miles?	7
When did UNESCO make Boudhanath a World Heritage Site?	1979
Who is pictured on the stupa's base?	Dhyani Buddha Amitabha
What is Ajima the deity of?	smallpox
What are gompas?	monasteries
Visitors from what faith routinely visit the stupa?	Tibetan Buddhist
What mantra is engraved on the stupa's prayer wheels?	om mani padme hum
In what part of Kathmandu is Swayambhu located?	northwestern
What faith does Swayambhu belong to?	Buddhist
Other than Buddhists, who worships at Swayambhu?	Hindus
In how many directions does the Buddha of Swayambhu look?	four
In Swayambhu, what is present in the small area above the tiers?	gajur
Kathmandu valley contains art made of metal, terracotta, wood and what other substance?	stone
What is the most typical type of art in the Kathmandu valley?	icons
In what year could Nepal be said to have been discovered by the outside world?	1950
What types of deities are Bhavani and Durga?	Mother Goddesses
What is Sri-Lakshmi a deity of?	wealth
By tradition, what notable figure came to Nepal 250 years before the birth of Christ?	Ashoka
When did the Licchavi period end?	900
What is another name for the Licchavi period?	classical
Along with the National Museum of Nepal, what notable Nepalese museum is present in Kathmandu?	Natural History Museum of Nepal
From what time period are the oldest artifacts in Kathmandu museums?	5th century
Along with Buddhism, what religion has had a significant influence on Nepal?	Hinduism
What Kathmandu valley area was named a World Heritage Site by UNESCO?	Monument Zones
How many Monument Zones are present in the Kathmandu valley?	seven
In what area of Kathmandu is the National Museum?	western
What stupa is close to the National Museum?	Swayambhunath
Who built the building that contains the National Museum?	Bhimsen Thapa
When was the National Museum founded?	1928
What does Chhauni Silkhana mean?	the stone house of arms and ammunition
When did Tribhuvan die?	1955
What was the birth year of King Mahendra?	1920
How many museums are in the Hanumandhoka Palace?	three
Who was the penultimate king of Nepal?	Birendra
During what era was the Hanumandhoka Palace constructed?	medieval
Where in Kathmandu is Narayanhity Palace Museum located?	north-central
In what year was Narayanhity constructed?	1970
Whose marriage led to the construction of Narayanhity?	Birenda Bir Bikram Shah
How many acres is the Narayanhity Palace?	74
What god is Narayana?	Vishnu
What is the Taragaon Museum dedicated to?	modern history of the Kathmandu Valley
Who is the designer of the Taragaon Museum?	Carl Pruscha
In what year was the Taragaon Museum built?	1971
What stupa is located close to the Taragaon Museum?	Boudhnath
What was the Taragaon Museum prior to being a museum?	hostel
Contemporary Kathmandu art combines traditional influences with what type of art?	modern
How many types are Nepali works of art typically divided into?	two
What do the Tibetans call traditional idealistic paintings?	Thangkas
What UK charity works on behalf of Kathmandu art?	Kathmandu Contemporary Art Centre
What do the Nepalese call Thangkas?	Paubhas
Where can one find the Srijana Contemporary Art Gallery?	Bhrikutimandap Exhibition grounds
The Moti Azima Gallery contains objects that might be found in a Nepalese house of what time period?	medieval
What art gallery is located close to the Durbarmarg Royal Palace?	J
Where can the Nepal Art Council Gallery be found?	Babar Mahal
In which of Nepal's art galleries can one take an art class?	Srijana Contemporary Art Gallery
How many volumes are contained in Nepal's National Library?	70,000
Along with Hindi, Sanskrit, Nepali and English, the National Library contains books in what language?	Nepal Bhasa
What government department is located in the same building as the Kaiser Library?	Ministry of Education
How many volumes does the Kaiser Library contain?	45,000
Who did the Kaiser Library's books previously belong to?	Kaiser Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana
Where can the National Dance Theatre be found in Kathmandu?	Kanti Path
What year saw the beginning of the Aarohan Theater Group?	1982
What gathering is the work of the Gurukul School of Theatre?	Kathmandu International Theater Festival
Who constructed the theater in Hanumandhoka Durbar Square?	Durbar Conservation and Promotion Committee
What meat is very rarely eaten in Kathmandu?	beef
What animal does buff come from?	water buffalo
What people are particularly known for eating buff?	Newars
What cuisine notably makes use of pork?	Kirat
What do Kathmandu residents typically eat for breakfast?	Momo or Chowmein
How many restaurants in the western style were present in Kathmandu circa 1955?	one
What chain restaurants are present in Kathmandu?	Pizza Hut and KFC
How is the egg in American chop suey prepared?	fried
Along with locals and tourists, who eats at Kathmandu's restaurants?	expatriates
Along with Nepali, Indian and Chinese cuisines, what cuisine has been a focus of Kathmandu restaurants?	Tibetan
What beverage is consumed by more people in Kathmandu, coffee or tea?	tea
How might a western traveler find the tea served in Kathmandu?	extremely weak
What is used to make thwon?	rice
What are bhattis?	alcohol serving eateries
What goes through a fermentation process to create tongba?	millet or barley
To what era do a majority of Kathmandu's festivals date back to?	Malla
Before the modern era, who mostly celebrated Kathmandu festivals?	Newars
In what direction out of Kathmandu did the Khas originate from?	west
What does Ghode mean?	horse
In relation to Kathmandu, where do the Tibetans hale?	north
In addition to Hindus, who regards the Bagmati River as sacred?	Buddhists
What is done with Hindus after they die?	cremated
What are done with the bodies of Kirants after death?	buried
In a Hindu funeral, who is typically the main mourner?	first son
Before Hindus are cremated, how many times are their bodies placed in the Bagmati?	three
In what century was Bhrikuti said to live?	7th
When did Araniko die?	1306
What religion did Araniko help to evangelize?	Buddhism
How many Newar Buddhist monasteries are present in Kathmandu?	108
Approximately how many monasteries in the Kathmandu area are run by Tibetan Buddhists?	fifty
What type of religion is Kirant Mundhum?	animistic
Who follows the Kirant Mudhum faith?	Kirat people
Who worshipped at Wanga Akash Bhairabh in ancient times?	Kirats
What is another name for ancestor worship?	worship of Ajima
Where can a temple of the Jain faith be found?	Gyaneshwar
Kathmandu valley is home to about how many Baha'i?	300
Where is the Baha'i national office located in Nepal?	Shantinagar, Baneshwor
About what percentage of the Nepali population follows Islam?	4.2
About how many Christian houses of worship exist in Kathmandu?	170
Of what university is the Institute of Medicine a constituent college?	Tribhuwan
In what part of Kathmandu is the Institute of Medicine found?	Maharajgunj
When did the Institute of Medicine begin to offer education in medicine?	1978
What does KUSMS stand for?	Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences
What institution of tertiary education is known as NAMS?	National Academy of Medical Sciences
Along with cricket, what sport is highly popular among Nepali youth?	Football
What body oversees soccer in Nepal?	All Nepal Football Association
How many people can fit in Dasarath Rangasala Stadium?	25,000
In what part of Kathmandu is Dasarath Rangasala Stadium located?	Tripureshwor
Who assisted Nepal in renovating Dasarath Rangasala Stadium?	Chinese
As of 2004, how many kilometers of road existed in Nepal?	17,182
Why is travel in Kathmandu mainly via automobile or aircraft?	hilly terrain
What highway connecting Kathmandu to elsewhere in Nepal is currently being built?	BP
In what direction out of Kathmandu does the Prithvi Highway travel?	west
If one wished to travel north out of Kathmandu, what highway would be used?	Araniko
What is Nepal's primary airport for international travel?	Tribhuvan International Airport
Starting in the center of Kathmandu, how many kilometers must one travel to reach Tribhuvan International Airport?	6
How many airlines use Tribhuvan International for international flights?	22
From what city does Arkefly offer nonstop flights to Kathmandu?	Amsterdam
Who operates flights between Kathmandu and Istanbul?	Turkish Airlines
In what US state did Kathmandu first establish an international relationship?	Oregon
What was Yangon previously known as?	Rangoon
With what Belorussian city does Kathmandu have a relationship?	Minsk
In what year did Kathmandu create its initial international relationship?	1975
What is KMC an initialism of?	Kathmandu Metropolitan City
What is the capital of France?	Paris
Which city is known as the capital of France?	Paris
What French city serves as the nation's capital?	Paris
Paris is the capital of which country?	France
In which country is Paris the capital?	France
What is the political center of France?	Paris
What city is considered the heart of France?	Paris
Which city houses the French government and parliament?	Paris
Where is the Élysée Palace located, the residence of the French president?	Paris, the capital of France
What is the cultural capital of France?	Paris
What city is famous for the Eiffel Tower and is the capital of France?	Paris
Which capital city is situated on the Seine River?	Paris, France
What is the largest city and capital of France?	Paris
Where is the Louvre Museum located?	Paris, the capital of France
The Arc de Triomphe is found in which French capital city?	Paris
In which capital city can you visit Montmartre?	Paris, France
Which city is home to Notre-Dame Cathedral and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where would you find the famous Champs-Élysées avenue in France?	Paris, the capital
What city hosted the French Revolution and is the nation's capital?	Paris
Which capital city is renowned for its fashion industry?	Paris, France
What city is celebrated for its cuisine and serves as France's capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and a global art hub?	Paris
What French city is the center of the nation's history and politics?	Paris
Where is the Sorbonne University, one of France's oldest universities?	Paris, the capital
In which city did the 1889 World's Fair take place, unveiling the Eiffel Tower?	Paris, capital of France
Which city is known as the "City of Light" and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where did the Treaty of Paris, ending the American Revolution, take place?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and a UNESCO World Heritage Site?	Paris
Which capital city features the famous Left Bank and Latin Quarter?	Paris, France
What city is home to the French National Assembly?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for the Moulin Rouge?	Paris
Where is the French national opera house located?	Paris, the capital
What is the capital and most populous city of France?	Paris
Which city in France is a center for international diplomacy and politics?	Paris, the capital
Where is the Musée d'Orsay, famous for impressionist art, located?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and a hub for literature and philosophy?	Paris
In which city would you find the River Seine dividing the city into the Left and Right Banks?	Paris, the capital of France
What French capital city is internationally recognized for its romantic atmosphere?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was occupied during World War II?	Paris
Where is the French Institute, a center for science and the arts?	Paris, the capital
What city is the capital of France and hosts Fashion Week each year?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cafés and bistros?	Paris
Where is the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and has the famous River Seine?	Paris
What French city is the administrative and economic capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French Stock Exchange?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many famous artists?	Paris
Where is the Place de la Concorde, a famous square?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and has hosted the Summer Olympics?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of historic revolutions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a leading center for education?	Paris
Where was the Paris Peace Conference held after World War I?	Paris, France's capital
Which French city is the capital and contains the Musée Rodin?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and referred to as "Paname" by locals?	Paris
Where is the Grand Palais located, a major exhibition hall?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the main location for French cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the headquarters for UNESCO?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs based?	Paris, the capital
Which French capital city is a symbol of freedom and democracy?	Paris
Where was the storming of the Bastille, a key event in the French Revolution?	Paris, capital of France
What city is the capital of France and famous for its bridges over the Seine?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was once a Roman settlement called Lutetia?	Paris
Where is the Palais Garnier, a famous opera house?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and a center for luxury goods?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the Tuileries Garden located?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and the center of the French Enlightenment?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Commune in 1871?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its literary cafés?	Paris
Where can you find the Pantheon, a mausoleum for French heroes?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and hosts major international art exhibitions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French haute couture?	Paris
Where is the French National Library located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a center for scientific research?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless films and novels?	Paris
Where is the famous Montparnasse Tower?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cabarets?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major European transportation hub?	Paris
Where is the Centre Pompidou, a modern art museum?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and home to the oldest café, Le Procope?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables"?	Paris
Where is the French Academy located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the French Open tennis tournament?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place Vendôme?	Paris
Where is the famous Père Lachaise Cemetery?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the 1968 student protests?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and an epicenter for jazz music?	Paris
Where is the famous Rue de Rivoli shopping street?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French Impressionism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Tour de France finish line?	Paris
Where is the French Military School, École Militaire, located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in urban architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of the baguette?	Paris
Where is the famous Paris Opera Ballet based?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to many Nobel laureates?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Hemingway's "A Moveable Feast"?	Paris
Where is the Place des Vosges, the oldest square in Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French media?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the 1789 revolution?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Energy Agency?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its street artists?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Marathon?	Paris
Where is the French Senate located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home to the French Olympic Committee?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and boasts the world's largest art museum?	Paris
Where is the famous Place de la Bastille?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of countless historic treaties?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the most Michelin-starred restaurants?	Paris
Where is the Grand Mosque of Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and plays a key role in European politics?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the host of COP21 climate talks?	Paris
Where is the French Supreme Court, Cour de Cassation, located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the headquarters of many global organizations?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and features the historic Les Halles market?	Paris
Where is the famous French presidential palace?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French banking?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and was the setting for the film "Amélie"?	Paris
Where is the French Institute of Fashion located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French National Police headquarters?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of modern photography?	Paris
Where is the famous Latin Quarter?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Agreement?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless poets?	Paris
Where is the French Metro system headquartered?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the venue for major international summits?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place du Tertre?	Paris
Where is the French National School of Administration?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French journalism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and renowned for its art galleries?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of L'Académie française?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and known for its literary salons?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Fête de la Musique?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Culture based?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French gastronomy?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Balzac's novels?	Paris
Where is the French National Museum of Natural History?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of existentialism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its river cruises?	Paris
Where is the Parc des Princes stadium?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the oldest public zoo in France?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the heart of French revolutionary activity?	Paris
Where is the historical Saint-Germain-des-Prés?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a center for ballet and opera?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French comic art?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Chamber of Commerce?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for its art nouveau architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the famous Salon d'Automne art exhibition?	Paris
Where is the famous bookstore Shakespeare and Company?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the Promenade Plantée?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and known for its open-air markets?	Paris
Where is the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French films?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the oldest planned square, Place des Vosges?	Paris
Where is the famous Café de Flore?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French publishing?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the historic Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of Air France?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris International Agricultural Show?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Air Show?	Paris
Where is the French National Archives?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French luxury brands?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for philosophy and intellectual debate?	Paris
Where is the Musée Picasso located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its historic boulevards?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for "The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Space Agency?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Opéra Bastille?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major global tourist destination?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the European Space Agency?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Jazz Festival?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French writers?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the Grand Rex cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the famous Palais de Tokyo museum?	Paris
Where is the largest science museum in Europe, the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in the digital arts?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Motor Show?	Paris
Where is the famous Sainte-Chapelle?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the famous Orangerie Museum?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for French culinary schools?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Red Cross?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the French Revolution's first assembly?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Hôtel Ritz?	Paris
What is the capital of Germany?	Berlin
What is the capital of Italy?	Rome
What is the capital of Spain?	Madrid
What is the capital of Portugal?	Lisbon
What is the capital of Russia?	Moscow
What is the capital of Japan?	Tokyo
What is the capital of China?	Beijing
What is the capital of India?	New Delhi
What is the capital of Brazil?	Brasília
What is the capital of Argentina?	Buenos Aires
What is the capital of Canada?	Ottawa
What is the capital of Australia?	Canberra
What is the capital of United Kingdom?	London
What is the capital of Ireland?	Dublin
What is the capital of South Africa?	Pretoria
What is the capital of Egypt?	Cairo
What is the capital of Turkey?	Ankara
What is the capital of Greece?	Athens
What is the capital of Sweden?	Stockholm
What is the capital of Norway?	Oslo
What is the capital of Denmark?	Copenhagen
What is the capital of Finland?	Helsinki
What is the capital of Poland?	Warsaw
What is the capital of Hungary?	Budapest
What is the capital of Czech Republic?	Prague
What is the capital of Austria?	Vienna
What is the capital of Switzerland?	Bern
What is the capital of Netherlands?	Amsterdam
What is the capital of Belgium?	Brussels
What is the capital of Luxembourg?	Luxembourg
What is the capital of Romania?	Bucharest
What is the capital of Bulgaria?	Sofia
What is the capital of Serbia?	Belgrade
What is the capital of Croatia?	Zagreb
What is the capital of Slovenia?	Ljubljana
What is the capital of Slovakia?	Bratislava
What is the capital of Belarus?	Minsk
What is the capital of Ukraine?	Kyiv
What is the capital of Moldova?	Chisinau
What is the capital of Latvia?	Riga
What is the capital of Estonia?	Tallinn
What is the capital of Lithuania?	Vilnius
What is the capital of Georgia?	Tbilisi
What is the capital of Armenia?	Yerevan
What is the capital of Azerbaijan?	Baku
What is the capital of Kazakhstan?	Astana
What is the capital of Uzbekistan?	Tashkent
What is the capital of Turkmenistan?	Ashgabat
What is the capital of Kyrgyzstan?	Bishkek
What is the capital of Tajikistan?	Dushanbe
What is the capital of Mongolia?	Ulaanbaatar
What is the capital of Afghanistan?	Kabul
What is the capital of Pakistan?	Islamabad
What is the capital of Bangladesh?	Dhaka
What is the capital of Nepal?	Kathmandu
What is the capital of Bhutan?	Thimphu
What is the capital of Sri Lanka?	Colombo
What is the capital of Myanmar?	Naypyidaw
What is the capital of Thailand?	Bangkok
What is the capital of Vietnam?	Hanoi
What is the capital of Cambodia?	Phnom Penh
What is the capital of Laos?	Vientiane
What is the capital of Malaysia?	Kuala Lumpur
What is the capital of Singapore?	Singapore
What is the capital of Indonesia?	Jakarta
What is the capital of Philippines?	Manila
What is the capital of South Korea?	Seoul
What is the capital of North Korea?	Pyongyang
What is the capital of Taiwan?	Taipei
What is the capital of Hong Kong?	Hong Kong
What is the capital of Saudi Arabia?	Riyadh
What is the capital of United Arab Emirates?	Abu Dhabi
What is the capital of Qatar?	Doha
What is the capital of Bahrain?	Manama
What is the capital of Oman?	Muscat
What is the capital of Kuwait?	Kuwait City
What is the capital of Yemen?	Sana'a
What is the capital of Jordan?	Amman
What is the capital of Lebanon?	Beirut
What is the capital of Israel?	Jerusalem
What is the capital of Syria?	Damascus
What is the capital of Iraq?	Baghdad
What is the capital of Iran?	Tehran
What is the capital of Morocco?	Rabat
What is the capital of Algeria?	Algiers
What is the capital of Tunisia?	Tunis
What is the capital of Libya?	Tripoli
What is the capital of Sudan?	Khartoum
What is the capital of South Sudan?	Juba
What is the capital of Ethiopia?	Addis Ababa
What is the capital of Somalia?	Mogadishu
What is the capital of Kenya?	Nairobi
What is the capital of Uganda?	Kampala
What is the capital of Rwanda?	Kigali
What is the capital of Burundi?	Bujumbura
What is the capital of Tanzania?	Dodoma
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Zambia?	Lusaka
What is the capital of Zimbabwe?	Harare
What is the capital of Botswana?	Gaborone
What is the capital of Namibia?	Windhoek
What is the capital of Angola?	Luanda
What is the capital of Mozambique?	Maputo
What is the capital of Madagascar?	Antananarivo
What is the capital of Seychelles?	Victoria
What is the capital of Mauritius?	Port Louis
What is the capital of Ghana?	Accra
What is the capital of Ivory Coast?	Yamoussoukro
What is the capital of Burkina Faso?	Ouagadougou
What is the capital of Mali?	Bamako
What is the capital of Senegal?	Dakar
What is the capital of Guinea?	Conakry
What is the capital of Sierra Leone?	Freetown
What is the capital of Liberia?	Monrovia
What is the capital of Cameroon?	Yaoundé
What is the capital of Gabon?	Libreville
What is the capital of Republic of Congo?	Brazzaville
What is the capital of Democratic Republic of the Congo?	Kinshasa
What is the capital of Chad?	N'Djamena
What is the capital of Niger?	Niamey
What is the capital of Benin?	Porto-Novo
What is the capital of Togo?	Lomé
What is the capital of Equatorial Guinea?	Malabo
What is the capital of Central African Republic?	Bangui
What is the capital of Eritrea?	Asmara
What is the capital of Djibouti?	Djibouti
What is the capital of Eswatini?	Mbabane
What is the capital of Lesotho?	Maseru
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Cape Verde?	Praia
What is the capital of Guinea-Bissau?	Bissau
What is the capital of Gambia?	Banjul
What is the capital of Papua New Guinea?	Port Moresby
What is the capital of Fiji?	Suva
What is the capital of Samoa?	Apia
What is the capital of Tonga?	Nuku'alofa
What is the capital of Solomon Islands?	Honiara
What is the capital of Vanuatu?	Port Vila
What is the capital of New Zealand?	Wellington
What is the capital of Micronesia?	Palikir
What is the capital of Palau?	Ngerulmud
What is the capital of Marshall Islands?	Majuro
What is the capital of Kiribati?	Tarawa
What is the capital of Tuvalu?	Funafuti
What is the capital of United States?	Washington, D.C.
What is the capital of Mexico?	Mexico City
What is the capital of Guatemala?	Guatemala City
What is the capital of Honduras?	Tegucigalpa
What is the capital of El Salvador?	San Salvador
What is the capital of Nicaragua?	Managua
What is the capital of Costa Rica?	San José
What is the capital of Panama?	Panama City
What is the capital of Cuba?	Havana
What is the capital of Jamaica?	Kingston
What is the capital of Haiti?	Port-au-Prince
What is the capital of Dominican Republic?	Santo Domingo
What is the capital of Bahamas?	Nassau
What is the capital of Barbados?	Bridgetown
What is the capital of Trinidad and Tobago?	Port of Spain
What is the capital of Grenada?	St. George's
What is the capital of Saint Lucia?	Castries
What is the capital of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines?	Kingstown
What is the capital of Dominica?	Roseau
What is the capital of Saint Kitts and Nevis?	Basseterre
What is the capital of Antigua and Barbuda?	St. John's
What is the capital of Belize?	Belmopan
What is the capital of Suriname?	Paramaribo
What is the capital of Guyana?	Georgetown
What is the capital of Venezuela?	Caracas
What is the capital of Colombia?	Bogotá
What is the capital of Ecuador?	Quito
What is the capital of Peru?	Lima
What is the capital of Chile?	Santiago
What is the capital of Uruguay?	Montevideo
What is the capital of Paraguay?	Asunción
What is the capital of Bolivia?	Sucre
What is the capital of Greenland?	Nuuk
What is the capital of Iceland?	Reykjavik
What is the capital of France?	Paris
Which city is known as the capital of France?	Paris
What French city serves as the nation's capital?	Paris
Paris is the capital of which country?	France
In which country is Paris the capital?	France
What is the political center of France?	Paris
What city is considered the heart of France?	Paris
Which city houses the French government and parliament?	Paris
Where is the Élysée Palace located, the residence of the French president?	Paris, the capital of France
What is the cultural capital of France?	Paris
What city is famous for the Eiffel Tower and is the capital of France?	Paris
Which capital city is situated on the Seine River?	Paris, France
What is the largest city and capital of France?	Paris
Where is the Louvre Museum located?	Paris, the capital of France
The Arc de Triomphe is found in which French capital city?	Paris
In which capital city can you visit Montmartre?	Paris, France
Which city is home to Notre-Dame Cathedral and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where would you find the famous Champs-Élysées avenue in France?	Paris, the capital
What city hosted the French Revolution and is the nation's capital?	Paris
Which capital city is renowned for its fashion industry?	Paris, France
What city is celebrated for its cuisine and serves as France's capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and a global art hub?	Paris
What French city is the center of the nation's history and politics?	Paris
Where is the Sorbonne University, one of France's oldest universities?	Paris, the capital
In which city did the 1889 World's Fair take place, unveiling the Eiffel Tower?	Paris, capital of France
Which city is known as the "City of Light" and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where did the Treaty of Paris, ending the American Revolution, take place?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and a UNESCO World Heritage Site?	Paris
Which capital city features the famous Left Bank and Latin Quarter?	Paris, France
What city is home to the French National Assembly?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for the Moulin Rouge?	Paris
Where is the French national opera house located?	Paris, the capital
What is the capital and most populous city of France?	Paris
Which city in France is a center for international diplomacy and politics?	Paris, the capital
Where is the Musée d'Orsay, famous for impressionist art, located?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and a hub for literature and philosophy?	Paris
In which city would you find the River Seine dividing the city into the Left and Right Banks?	Paris, the capital of France
What French capital city is internationally recognized for its romantic atmosphere?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was occupied during World War II?	Paris
Where is the French Institute, a center for science and the arts?	Paris, the capital
What city is the capital of France and hosts Fashion Week each year?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cafés and bistros?	Paris
Where is the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and has the famous River Seine?	Paris
What French city is the administrative and economic capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French Stock Exchange?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many famous artists?	Paris
Where is the Place de la Concorde, a famous square?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and has hosted the Summer Olympics?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of historic revolutions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a leading center for education?	Paris
Where was the Paris Peace Conference held after World War I?	Paris, France's capital
Which French city is the capital and contains the Musée Rodin?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and referred to as "Paname" by locals?	Paris
Where is the Grand Palais located, a major exhibition hall?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the main location for French cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the headquarters for UNESCO?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs based?	Paris, the capital
Which French capital city is a symbol of freedom and democracy?	Paris
Where was the storming of the Bastille, a key event in the French Revolution?	Paris, capital of France
What city is the capital of France and famous for its bridges over the Seine?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was once a Roman settlement called Lutetia?	Paris
Where is the Palais Garnier, a famous opera house?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and a center for luxury goods?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the Tuileries Garden located?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and the center of the French Enlightenment?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Commune in 1871?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its literary cafés?	Paris
Where can you find the Pantheon, a mausoleum for French heroes?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and hosts major international art exhibitions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French haute couture?	Paris
Where is the French National Library located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a center for scientific research?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless films and novels?	Paris
Where is the famous Montparnasse Tower?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cabarets?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major European transportation hub?	Paris
Where is the Centre Pompidou, a modern art museum?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and home to the oldest café, Le Procope?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables"?	Paris
Where is the French Academy located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the French Open tennis tournament?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place Vendôme?	Paris
Where is the famous Père Lachaise Cemetery?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the 1968 student protests?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and an epicenter for jazz music?	Paris
Where is the famous Rue de Rivoli shopping street?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French Impressionism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Tour de France finish line?	Paris
Where is the French Military School, École Militaire, located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in urban architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of the baguette?	Paris
Where is the famous Paris Opera Ballet based?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to many Nobel laureates?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Hemingway's "A Moveable Feast"?	Paris
Where is the Place des Vosges, the oldest square in Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French media?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the 1789 revolution?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Energy Agency?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its street artists?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Marathon?	Paris
Where is the French Senate located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home to the French Olympic Committee?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and boasts the world's largest art museum?	Paris
Where is the famous Place de la Bastille?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of countless historic treaties?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the most Michelin-starred restaurants?	Paris
Where is the Grand Mosque of Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and plays a key role in European politics?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the host of COP21 climate talks?	Paris
Where is the French Supreme Court, Cour de Cassation, located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the headquarters of many global organizations?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and features the historic Les Halles market?	Paris
Where is the famous French presidential palace?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French banking?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and was the setting for the film "Amélie"?	Paris
Where is the French Institute of Fashion located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French National Police headquarters?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of modern photography?	Paris
Where is the famous Latin Quarter?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Agreement?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless poets?	Paris
Where is the French Metro system headquartered?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the venue for major international summits?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place du Tertre?	Paris
Where is the French National School of Administration?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French journalism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and renowned for its art galleries?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of L'Académie française?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and known for its literary salons?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Fête de la Musique?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Culture based?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French gastronomy?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Balzac's novels?	Paris
Where is the French National Museum of Natural History?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of existentialism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its river cruises?	Paris
Where is the Parc des Princes stadium?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the oldest public zoo in France?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the heart of French revolutionary activity?	Paris
Where is the historical Saint-Germain-des-Prés?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a center for ballet and opera?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French comic art?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Chamber of Commerce?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for its art nouveau architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the famous Salon d'Automne art exhibition?	Paris
Where is the famous bookstore Shakespeare and Company?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the Promenade Plantée?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and known for its open-air markets?	Paris
Where is the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French films?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the oldest planned square, Place des Vosges?	Paris
Where is the famous Café de Flore?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French publishing?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the historic Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of Air France?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris International Agricultural Show?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Air Show?	Paris
Where is the French National Archives?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French luxury brands?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for philosophy and intellectual debate?	Paris
Where is the Musée Picasso located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its historic boulevards?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for "The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Space Agency?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Opéra Bastille?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major global tourist destination?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the European Space Agency?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Jazz Festival?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French writers?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the Grand Rex cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the famous Palais de Tokyo museum?	Paris
Where is the largest science museum in Europe, the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in the digital arts?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Motor Show?	Paris
Where is the famous Sainte-Chapelle?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the famous Orangerie Museum?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for French culinary schools?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Red Cross?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the French Revolution's first assembly?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Hôtel Ritz?	Paris
What is the capital of Germany?	Berlin
What is the capital of Italy?	Rome
What is the capital of Spain?	Madrid
What is the capital of Portugal?	Lisbon
What is the capital of Russia?	Moscow
What is the capital of Japan?	Tokyo
What is the capital of China?	Beijing
What is the capital of India?	New Delhi
What is the capital of Brazil?	Brasília
What is the capital of Argentina?	Buenos Aires
What is the capital of Canada?	Ottawa
What is the capital of Australia?	Canberra
What is the capital of United Kingdom?	London
What is the capital of Ireland?	Dublin
What is the capital of South Africa?	Pretoria
What is the capital of Egypt?	Cairo
What is the capital of Turkey?	Ankara
What is the capital of Greece?	Athens
What is the capital of Sweden?	Stockholm
What is the capital of Norway?	Oslo
What is the capital of Denmark?	Copenhagen
What is the capital of Finland?	Helsinki
What is the capital of Poland?	Warsaw
What is the capital of Hungary?	Budapest
What is the capital of Czech Republic?	Prague
What is the capital of Austria?	Vienna
What is the capital of Switzerland?	Bern
What is the capital of Netherlands?	Amsterdam
What is the capital of Belgium?	Brussels
What is the capital of Luxembourg?	Luxembourg
What is the capital of Romania?	Bucharest
What is the capital of Bulgaria?	Sofia
What is the capital of Serbia?	Belgrade
What is the capital of Croatia?	Zagreb
What is the capital of Slovenia?	Ljubljana
What is the capital of Slovakia?	Bratislava
What is the capital of Belarus?	Minsk
What is the capital of Ukraine?	Kyiv
What is the capital of Moldova?	Chisinau
What is the capital of Latvia?	Riga
What is the capital of Estonia?	Tallinn
What is the capital of Lithuania?	Vilnius
What is the capital of Georgia?	Tbilisi
What is the capital of Armenia?	Yerevan
What is the capital of Azerbaijan?	Baku
What is the capital of Kazakhstan?	Astana
What is the capital of Uzbekistan?	Tashkent
What is the capital of Turkmenistan?	Ashgabat
What is the capital of Kyrgyzstan?	Bishkek
What is the capital of Tajikistan?	Dushanbe
What is the capital of Mongolia?	Ulaanbaatar
What is the capital of Afghanistan?	Kabul
What is the capital of Pakistan?	Islamabad
What is the capital of Bangladesh?	Dhaka
What is the capital of Nepal?	Kathmandu
What is the capital of Bhutan?	Thimphu
What is the capital of Sri Lanka?	Colombo
What is the capital of Myanmar?	Naypyidaw
What is the capital of Thailand?	Bangkok
What is the capital of Vietnam?	Hanoi
What is the capital of Cambodia?	Phnom Penh
What is the capital of Laos?	Vientiane
What is the capital of Malaysia?	Kuala Lumpur
What is the capital of Singapore?	Singapore
What is the capital of Indonesia?	Jakarta
What is the capital of Philippines?	Manila
What is the capital of South Korea?	Seoul
What is the capital of North Korea?	Pyongyang
What is the capital of Taiwan?	Taipei
What is the capital of Hong Kong?	Hong Kong
What is the capital of Saudi Arabia?	Riyadh
What is the capital of United Arab Emirates?	Abu Dhabi
What is the capital of Qatar?	Doha
What is the capital of Bahrain?	Manama
What is the capital of Oman?	Muscat
What is the capital of Kuwait?	Kuwait City
What is the capital of Yemen?	Sana'a
What is the capital of Jordan?	Amman
What is the capital of Lebanon?	Beirut
What is the capital of Israel?	Jerusalem
What is the capital of Syria?	Damascus
What is the capital of Iraq?	Baghdad
What is the capital of Iran?	Tehran
What is the capital of Morocco?	Rabat
What is the capital of Algeria?	Algiers
What is the capital of Tunisia?	Tunis
What is the capital of Libya?	Tripoli
What is the capital of Sudan?	Khartoum
What is the capital of South Sudan?	Juba
What is the capital of Ethiopia?	Addis Ababa
What is the capital of Somalia?	Mogadishu
What is the capital of Kenya?	Nairobi
What is the capital of Uganda?	Kampala
What is the capital of Rwanda?	Kigali
What is the capital of Burundi?	Bujumbura
What is the capital of Tanzania?	Dodoma
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Zambia?	Lusaka
What is the capital of Zimbabwe?	Harare
What is the capital of Botswana?	Gaborone
What is the capital of Namibia?	Windhoek
What is the capital of Angola?	Luanda
What is the capital of Mozambique?	Maputo
What is the capital of Madagascar?	Antananarivo
What is the capital of Seychelles?	Victoria
What is the capital of Mauritius?	Port Louis
What is the capital of Ghana?	Accra
What is the capital of Ivory Coast?	Yamoussoukro
What is the capital of Burkina Faso?	Ouagadougou
What is the capital of Mali?	Bamako
What is the capital of Senegal?	Dakar
What is the capital of Guinea?	Conakry
What is the capital of Sierra Leone?	Freetown
What is the capital of Liberia?	Monrovia
What is the capital of Cameroon?	Yaoundé
What is the capital of Gabon?	Libreville
What is the capital of Republic of Congo?	Brazzaville
What is the capital of Democratic Republic of the Congo?	Kinshasa
What is the capital of Chad?	N'Djamena
What is the capital of Niger?	Niamey
What is the capital of Benin?	Porto-Novo
What is the capital of Togo?	Lomé
What is the capital of Equatorial Guinea?	Malabo
What is the capital of Central African Republic?	Bangui
What is the capital of Eritrea?	Asmara
What is the capital of Djibouti?	Djibouti
What is the capital of Eswatini?	Mbabane
What is the capital of Lesotho?	Maseru
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Cape Verde?	Praia
What is the capital of Guinea-Bissau?	Bissau
What is the capital of Gambia?	Banjul
What is the capital of Papua New Guinea?	Port Moresby
What is the capital of Fiji?	Suva
What is the capital of Samoa?	Apia
What is the capital of Tonga?	Nuku'alofa
What is the capital of Solomon Islands?	Honiara
What is the capital of Vanuatu?	Port Vila
What is the capital of New Zealand?	Wellington
What is the capital of Micronesia?	Palikir
What is the capital of Palau?	Ngerulmud
What is the capital of Marshall Islands?	Majuro
What is the capital of Kiribati?	Tarawa
What is the capital of Tuvalu?	Funafuti
What is the capital of United States?	Washington, D.C.
What is the capital of Mexico?	Mexico City
What is the capital of Guatemala?	Guatemala City
What is the capital of Honduras?	Tegucigalpa
What is the capital of El Salvador?	San Salvador
What is the capital of Nicaragua?	Managua
What is the capital of Costa Rica?	San José
What is the capital of Panama?	Panama City
What is the capital of Cuba?	Havana
What is the capital of Jamaica?	Kingston
What is the capital of Haiti?	Port-au-Prince
What is the capital of Dominican Republic?	Santo Domingo
What is the capital of Bahamas?	Nassau
What is the capital of Barbados?	Bridgetown
What is the capital of Trinidad and Tobago?	Port of Spain
What is the capital of Grenada?	St. George's
What is the capital of Saint Lucia?	Castries
What is the capital of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines?	Kingstown
What is the capital of Dominica?	Roseau
What is the capital of Saint Kitts and Nevis?	Basseterre
What is the capital of Antigua and Barbuda?	St. John's
What is the capital of Belize?	Belmopan
What is the capital of Suriname?	Paramaribo
What is the capital of Guyana?	Georgetown
What is the capital of Venezuela?	Caracas
What is the capital of Colombia?	Bogotá
What is the capital of Ecuador?	Quito
What is the capital of Peru?	Lima
What is the capital of Chile?	Santiago
What is the capital of Uruguay?	Montevideo
What is the capital of Paraguay?	Asunción
What is the capital of Bolivia?	Sucre
What is the capital of Greenland?	Nuuk
What is the capital of Iceland?	Reykjavik
What is the capital of France?	Paris
Which city is known as the capital of France?	Paris
What French city serves as the nation's capital?	Paris
Paris is the capital of which country?	France
In which country is Paris the capital?	France
What is the political center of France?	Paris
What city is considered the heart of France?	Paris
Which city houses the French government and parliament?	Paris
Where is the Élysée Palace located, the residence of the French president?	Paris, the capital of France
What is the cultural capital of France?	Paris
What city is famous for the Eiffel Tower and is the capital of France?	Paris
Which capital city is situated on the Seine River?	Paris, France
What is the largest city and capital of France?	Paris
Where is the Louvre Museum located?	Paris, the capital of France
The Arc de Triomphe is found in which French capital city?	Paris
In which capital city can you visit Montmartre?	Paris, France
Which city is home to Notre-Dame Cathedral and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where would you find the famous Champs-Élysées avenue in France?	Paris, the capital
What city hosted the French Revolution and is the nation's capital?	Paris
Which capital city is renowned for its fashion industry?	Paris, France
What city is celebrated for its cuisine and serves as France's capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and a global art hub?	Paris
What French city is the center of the nation's history and politics?	Paris
Where is the Sorbonne University, one of France's oldest universities?	Paris, the capital
In which city did the 1889 World's Fair take place, unveiling the Eiffel Tower?	Paris, capital of France
Which city is known as the "City of Light" and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where did the Treaty of Paris, ending the American Revolution, take place?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and a UNESCO World Heritage Site?	Paris
Which capital city features the famous Left Bank and Latin Quarter?	Paris, France
What city is home to the French National Assembly?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for the Moulin Rouge?	Paris
Where is the French national opera house located?	Paris, the capital
What is the capital and most populous city of France?	Paris
Which city in France is a center for international diplomacy and politics?	Paris, the capital
Where is the Musée d'Orsay, famous for impressionist art, located?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and a hub for literature and philosophy?	Paris
In which city would you find the River Seine dividing the city into the Left and Right Banks?	Paris, the capital of France
What French capital city is internationally recognized for its romantic atmosphere?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was occupied during World War II?	Paris
Where is the French Institute, a center for science and the arts?	Paris, the capital
What city is the capital of France and hosts Fashion Week each year?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cafés and bistros?	Paris
Where is the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and has the famous River Seine?	Paris
What French city is the administrative and economic capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French Stock Exchange?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many famous artists?	Paris
Where is the Place de la Concorde, a famous square?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and has hosted the Summer Olympics?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of historic revolutions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a leading center for education?	Paris
Where was the Paris Peace Conference held after World War I?	Paris, France's capital
Which French city is the capital and contains the Musée Rodin?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and referred to as "Paname" by locals?	Paris
Where is the Grand Palais located, a major exhibition hall?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the main location for French cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the headquarters for UNESCO?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs based?	Paris, the capital
Which French capital city is a symbol of freedom and democracy?	Paris
Where was the storming of the Bastille, a key event in the French Revolution?	Paris, capital of France
What city is the capital of France and famous for its bridges over the Seine?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was once a Roman settlement called Lutetia?	Paris
Where is the Palais Garnier, a famous opera house?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and a center for luxury goods?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the Tuileries Garden located?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and the center of the French Enlightenment?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Commune in 1871?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its literary cafés?	Paris
Where can you find the Pantheon, a mausoleum for French heroes?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and hosts major international art exhibitions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French haute couture?	Paris
Where is the French National Library located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a center for scientific research?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless films and novels?	Paris
Where is the famous Montparnasse Tower?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cabarets?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major European transportation hub?	Paris
Where is the Centre Pompidou, a modern art museum?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and home to the oldest café, Le Procope?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables"?	Paris
Where is the French Academy located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the French Open tennis tournament?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place Vendôme?	Paris
Where is the famous Père Lachaise Cemetery?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the 1968 student protests?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and an epicenter for jazz music?	Paris
Where is the famous Rue de Rivoli shopping street?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French Impressionism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Tour de France finish line?	Paris
Where is the French Military School, École Militaire, located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in urban architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of the baguette?	Paris
Where is the famous Paris Opera Ballet based?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to many Nobel laureates?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Hemingway's "A Moveable Feast"?	Paris
Where is the Place des Vosges, the oldest square in Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French media?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the 1789 revolution?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Energy Agency?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its street artists?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Marathon?	Paris
Where is the French Senate located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home to the French Olympic Committee?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and boasts the world's largest art museum?	Paris
Where is the famous Place de la Bastille?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of countless historic treaties?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the most Michelin-starred restaurants?	Paris
Where is the Grand Mosque of Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and plays a key role in European politics?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the host of COP21 climate talks?	Paris
Where is the French Supreme Court, Cour de Cassation, located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the headquarters of many global organizations?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and features the historic Les Halles market?	Paris
Where is the famous French presidential palace?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French banking?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and was the setting for the film "Amélie"?	Paris
Where is the French Institute of Fashion located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French National Police headquarters?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of modern photography?	Paris
Where is the famous Latin Quarter?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Agreement?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless poets?	Paris
Where is the French Metro system headquartered?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the venue for major international summits?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place du Tertre?	Paris
Where is the French National School of Administration?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French journalism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and renowned for its art galleries?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of L'Académie française?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and known for its literary salons?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Fête de la Musique?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Culture based?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French gastronomy?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Balzac's novels?	Paris
Where is the French National Museum of Natural History?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of existentialism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its river cruises?	Paris
Where is the Parc des Princes stadium?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the oldest public zoo in France?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the heart of French revolutionary activity?	Paris
Where is the historical Saint-Germain-des-Prés?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a center for ballet and opera?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French comic art?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Chamber of Commerce?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for its art nouveau architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the famous Salon d'Automne art exhibition?	Paris
Where is the famous bookstore Shakespeare and Company?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the Promenade Plantée?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and known for its open-air markets?	Paris
Where is the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French films?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the oldest planned square, Place des Vosges?	Paris
Where is the famous Café de Flore?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French publishing?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the historic Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of Air France?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris International Agricultural Show?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Air Show?	Paris
Where is the French National Archives?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French luxury brands?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for philosophy and intellectual debate?	Paris
Where is the Musée Picasso located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its historic boulevards?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for "The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Space Agency?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Opéra Bastille?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major global tourist destination?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the European Space Agency?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Jazz Festival?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French writers?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the Grand Rex cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the famous Palais de Tokyo museum?	Paris
Where is the largest science museum in Europe, the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in the digital arts?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Motor Show?	Paris
Where is the famous Sainte-Chapelle?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the famous Orangerie Museum?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for French culinary schools?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Red Cross?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the French Revolution's first assembly?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Hôtel Ritz?	Paris
What is the capital of Germany?	Berlin
What is the capital of Italy?	Rome
What is the capital of Spain?	Madrid
What is the capital of Portugal?	Lisbon
What is the capital of Russia?	Moscow
What is the capital of Japan?	Tokyo
What is the capital of China?	Beijing
What is the capital of India?	New Delhi
What is the capital of Brazil?	Brasília
What is the capital of Argentina?	Buenos Aires
What is the capital of Canada?	Ottawa
What is the capital of Australia?	Canberra
What is the capital of United Kingdom?	London
What is the capital of Ireland?	Dublin
What is the capital of South Africa?	Pretoria
What is the capital of Egypt?	Cairo
What is the capital of Turkey?	Ankara
What is the capital of Greece?	Athens
What is the capital of Sweden?	Stockholm
What is the capital of Norway?	Oslo
What is the capital of Denmark?	Copenhagen
What is the capital of Finland?	Helsinki
What is the capital of Poland?	Warsaw
What is the capital of Hungary?	Budapest
What is the capital of Czech Republic?	Prague
What is the capital of Austria?	Vienna
What is the capital of Switzerland?	Bern
What is the capital of Netherlands?	Amsterdam
What is the capital of Belgium?	Brussels
What is the capital of Luxembourg?	Luxembourg
What is the capital of Romania?	Bucharest
What is the capital of Bulgaria?	Sofia
What is the capital of Serbia?	Belgrade
What is the capital of Croatia?	Zagreb
What is the capital of Slovenia?	Ljubljana
What is the capital of Slovakia?	Bratislava
What is the capital of Belarus?	Minsk
What is the capital of Ukraine?	Kyiv
What is the capital of Moldova?	Chisinau
What is the capital of Latvia?	Riga
What is the capital of Estonia?	Tallinn
What is the capital of Lithuania?	Vilnius
What is the capital of Georgia?	Tbilisi
What is the capital of Armenia?	Yerevan
What is the capital of Azerbaijan?	Baku
What is the capital of Kazakhstan?	Astana
What is the capital of Uzbekistan?	Tashkent
What is the capital of Turkmenistan?	Ashgabat
What is the capital of Kyrgyzstan?	Bishkek
What is the capital of Tajikistan?	Dushanbe
What is the capital of Mongolia?	Ulaanbaatar
What is the capital of Afghanistan?	Kabul
What is the capital of Pakistan?	Islamabad
What is the capital of Bangladesh?	Dhaka
What is the capital of Nepal?	Kathmandu
What is the capital of Bhutan?	Thimphu
What is the capital of Sri Lanka?	Colombo
What is the capital of Myanmar?	Naypyidaw
What is the capital of Thailand?	Bangkok
What is the capital of Vietnam?	Hanoi
What is the capital of Cambodia?	Phnom Penh
What is the capital of Laos?	Vientiane
What is the capital of Malaysia?	Kuala Lumpur
What is the capital of Singapore?	Singapore
What is the capital of Indonesia?	Jakarta
What is the capital of Philippines?	Manila
What is the capital of South Korea?	Seoul
What is the capital of North Korea?	Pyongyang
What is the capital of Taiwan?	Taipei
What is the capital of Hong Kong?	Hong Kong
What is the capital of Saudi Arabia?	Riyadh
What is the capital of United Arab Emirates?	Abu Dhabi
What is the capital of Qatar?	Doha
What is the capital of Bahrain?	Manama
What is the capital of Oman?	Muscat
What is the capital of Kuwait?	Kuwait City
What is the capital of Yemen?	Sana'a
What is the capital of Jordan?	Amman
What is the capital of Lebanon?	Beirut
What is the capital of Israel?	Jerusalem
What is the capital of Syria?	Damascus
What is the capital of Iraq?	Baghdad
What is the capital of Iran?	Tehran
What is the capital of Morocco?	Rabat
What is the capital of Algeria?	Algiers
What is the capital of Tunisia?	Tunis
What is the capital of Libya?	Tripoli
What is the capital of Sudan?	Khartoum
What is the capital of South Sudan?	Juba
What is the capital of Ethiopia?	Addis Ababa
What is the capital of Somalia?	Mogadishu
What is the capital of Kenya?	Nairobi
What is the capital of Uganda?	Kampala
What is the capital of Rwanda?	Kigali
What is the capital of Burundi?	Bujumbura
What is the capital of Tanzania?	Dodoma
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Zambia?	Lusaka
What is the capital of Zimbabwe?	Harare
What is the capital of Botswana?	Gaborone
What is the capital of Namibia?	Windhoek
What is the capital of Angola?	Luanda
What is the capital of Mozambique?	Maputo
What is the capital of Madagascar?	Antananarivo
What is the capital of Seychelles?	Victoria
What is the capital of Mauritius?	Port Louis
What is the capital of Ghana?	Accra
What is the capital of Ivory Coast?	Yamoussoukro
What is the capital of Burkina Faso?	Ouagadougou
What is the capital of Mali?	Bamako
What is the capital of Senegal?	Dakar
What is the capital of Guinea?	Conakry
What is the capital of Sierra Leone?	Freetown
What is the capital of Liberia?	Monrovia
What is the capital of Cameroon?	Yaoundé
What is the capital of Gabon?	Libreville
What is the capital of Republic of Congo?	Brazzaville
What is the capital of Democratic Republic of the Congo?	Kinshasa
What is the capital of Chad?	N'Djamena
What is the capital of Niger?	Niamey
What is the capital of Benin?	Porto-Novo
What is the capital of Togo?	Lomé
What is the capital of Equatorial Guinea?	Malabo
What is the capital of Central African Republic?	Bangui
What is the capital of Eritrea?	Asmara
What is the capital of Djibouti?	Djibouti
What is the capital of Eswatini?	Mbabane
What is the capital of Lesotho?	Maseru
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Cape Verde?	Praia
What is the capital of Guinea-Bissau?	Bissau
What is the capital of Gambia?	Banjul
What is the capital of Papua New Guinea?	Port Moresby
What is the capital of Fiji?	Suva
What is the capital of Samoa?	Apia
What is the capital of Tonga?	Nuku'alofa
What is the capital of Solomon Islands?	Honiara
What is the capital of Vanuatu?	Port Vila
What is the capital of New Zealand?	Wellington
What is the capital of Micronesia?	Palikir
What is the capital of Palau?	Ngerulmud
What is the capital of Marshall Islands?	Majuro
What is the capital of Kiribati?	Tarawa
What is the capital of Tuvalu?	Funafuti
What is the capital of United States?	Washington, D.C.
What is the capital of Mexico?	Mexico City
What is the capital of Guatemala?	Guatemala City
What is the capital of Honduras?	Tegucigalpa
What is the capital of El Salvador?	San Salvador
What is the capital of Nicaragua?	Managua
What is the capital of Costa Rica?	San José
What is the capital of Panama?	Panama City
What is the capital of Cuba?	Havana
What is the capital of Jamaica?	Kingston
What is the capital of Haiti?	Port-au-Prince
What is the capital of Dominican Republic?	Santo Domingo
What is the capital of Bahamas?	Nassau
What is the capital of Barbados?	Bridgetown
What is the capital of Trinidad and Tobago?	Port of Spain
What is the capital of Grenada?	St. George's
What is the capital of Saint Lucia?	Castries
What is the capital of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines?	Kingstown
What is the capital of Dominica?	Roseau
What is the capital of Saint Kitts and Nevis?	Basseterre
What is the capital of Antigua and Barbuda?	St. John's
What is the capital of Belize?	Belmopan
What is the capital of Suriname?	Paramaribo
What is the capital of Guyana?	Georgetown
What is the capital of Venezuela?	Caracas
What is the capital of Colombia?	Bogotá
What is the capital of Ecuador?	Quito
What is the capital of Peru?	Lima
What is the capital of Chile?	Santiago
What is the capital of Uruguay?	Montevideo
What is the capital of Paraguay?	Asunción
What is the capital of Bolivia?	Sucre
What is the capital of Greenland?	Nuuk
What is the capital of Iceland?	Reykjavik
What is the capital of France?	Paris
Which city is known as the capital of France?	Paris
What French city serves as the nation's capital?	Paris
Paris is the capital of which country?	France
In which country is Paris the capital?	France
What is the political center of France?	Paris
What city is considered the heart of France?	Paris
Which city houses the French government and parliament?	Paris
Where is the Élysée Palace located, the residence of the French president?	Paris, the capital of France
What is the cultural capital of France?	Paris
What city is famous for the Eiffel Tower and is the capital of France?	Paris
Which capital city is situated on the Seine River?	Paris, France
What is the largest city and capital of France?	Paris
Where is the Louvre Museum located?	Paris, the capital of France
The Arc de Triomphe is found in which French capital city?	Paris
In which capital city can you visit Montmartre?	Paris, France
Which city is home to Notre-Dame Cathedral and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where would you find the famous Champs-Élysées avenue in France?	Paris, the capital
What city hosted the French Revolution and is the nation's capital?	Paris
Which capital city is renowned for its fashion industry?	Paris, France
What city is celebrated for its cuisine and serves as France's capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and a global art hub?	Paris
What French city is the center of the nation's history and politics?	Paris
Where is the Sorbonne University, one of France's oldest universities?	Paris, the capital
In which city did the 1889 World's Fair take place, unveiling the Eiffel Tower?	Paris, capital of France
Which city is known as the "City of Light" and is the capital of France?	Paris
Where did the Treaty of Paris, ending the American Revolution, take place?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and a UNESCO World Heritage Site?	Paris
Which capital city features the famous Left Bank and Latin Quarter?	Paris, France
What city is home to the French National Assembly?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for the Moulin Rouge?	Paris
Where is the French national opera house located?	Paris, the capital
What is the capital and most populous city of France?	Paris
Which city in France is a center for international diplomacy and politics?	Paris, the capital
Where is the Musée d'Orsay, famous for impressionist art, located?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and a hub for literature and philosophy?	Paris
In which city would you find the River Seine dividing the city into the Left and Right Banks?	Paris, the capital of France
What French capital city is internationally recognized for its romantic atmosphere?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was occupied during World War II?	Paris
Where is the French Institute, a center for science and the arts?	Paris, the capital
What city is the capital of France and hosts Fashion Week each year?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cafés and bistros?	Paris
Where is the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and has the famous River Seine?	Paris
What French city is the administrative and economic capital?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French Stock Exchange?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many famous artists?	Paris
Where is the Place de la Concorde, a famous square?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and has hosted the Summer Olympics?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of historic revolutions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a leading center for education?	Paris
Where was the Paris Peace Conference held after World War I?	Paris, France's capital
Which French city is the capital and contains the Musée Rodin?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and referred to as "Paname" by locals?	Paris
Where is the Grand Palais located, a major exhibition hall?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the main location for French cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the headquarters for UNESCO?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs based?	Paris, the capital
Which French capital city is a symbol of freedom and democracy?	Paris
Where was the storming of the Bastille, a key event in the French Revolution?	Paris, capital of France
What city is the capital of France and famous for its bridges over the Seine?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and was once a Roman settlement called Lutetia?	Paris
Where is the Palais Garnier, a famous opera house?	Paris, the capital of France
What city is the capital of France and a center for luxury goods?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and home to the Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the Tuileries Garden located?	Paris, France's capital
What city is the capital of France and the center of the French Enlightenment?	Paris
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Commune in 1871?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its literary cafés?	Paris
Where can you find the Pantheon, a mausoleum for French heroes?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and hosts major international art exhibitions?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French haute couture?	Paris
Where is the French National Library located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a center for scientific research?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless films and novels?	Paris
Where is the famous Montparnasse Tower?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and known for its cabarets?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major European transportation hub?	Paris
Where is the Centre Pompidou, a modern art museum?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and home to the oldest café, Le Procope?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables"?	Paris
Where is the French Academy located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the French Open tennis tournament?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place Vendôme?	Paris
Where is the famous Père Lachaise Cemetery?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the 1968 student protests?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and an epicenter for jazz music?	Paris
Where is the famous Rue de Rivoli shopping street?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French Impressionism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Tour de France finish line?	Paris
Where is the French Military School, École Militaire, located?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in urban architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of the baguette?	Paris
Where is the famous Paris Opera Ballet based?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to many Nobel laureates?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Hemingway's "A Moveable Feast"?	Paris
Where is the Place des Vosges, the oldest square in Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French media?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the 1789 revolution?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Energy Agency?	Paris, France's capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its street artists?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Marathon?	Paris
Where is the French Senate located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the home to the French Olympic Committee?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and boasts the world's largest art museum?	Paris
Where is the famous Place de la Bastille?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of countless historic treaties?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the most Michelin-starred restaurants?	Paris
Where is the Grand Mosque of Paris?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and plays a key role in European politics?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the host of COP21 climate talks?	Paris
Where is the French Supreme Court, Cour de Cassation, located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the headquarters of many global organizations?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and features the historic Les Halles market?	Paris
Where is the famous French presidential palace?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the center for French banking?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and was the setting for the film "Amélie"?	Paris
Where is the French Institute of Fashion located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and home to the French National Police headquarters?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of modern photography?	Paris
Where is the famous Latin Quarter?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Agreement?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has inspired countless poets?	Paris
Where is the French Metro system headquartered?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the venue for major international summits?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Place du Tertre?	Paris
Where is the French National School of Administration?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French journalism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and renowned for its art galleries?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of L'Académie française?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and known for its literary salons?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Fête de la Musique?	Paris
Where is the French Ministry of Culture based?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French gastronomy?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for Balzac's novels?	Paris
Where is the French National Museum of Natural History?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of existentialism?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and famous for its river cruises?	Paris
Where is the Parc des Princes stadium?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the oldest public zoo in France?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the heart of French revolutionary activity?	Paris
Where is the historical Saint-Germain-des-Prés?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and a center for ballet and opera?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the home of French comic art?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the International Chamber of Commerce?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and famous for its art nouveau architecture?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the famous Salon d'Automne art exhibition?	Paris
Where is the famous bookstore Shakespeare and Company?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the Promenade Plantée?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and known for its open-air markets?	Paris
Where is the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French films?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the oldest planned square, Place des Vosges?	Paris
Where is the famous Café de Flore?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the hub for French publishing?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the historic Hôtel de Ville?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of Air France?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris International Agricultural Show?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the site of the Paris Air Show?	Paris
Where is the French National Archives?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of French luxury brands?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for philosophy and intellectual debate?	Paris
Where is the Musée Picasso located?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and renowned for its historic boulevards?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the setting for "The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Space Agency?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Opéra Bastille?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a major global tourist destination?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the European Space Agency?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Jazz Festival?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the birthplace of many French writers?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the Grand Rex cinema?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and has the famous Palais de Tokyo museum?	Paris
Where is the largest science museum in Europe, the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and a leader in the digital arts?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and hosts the Paris Motor Show?	Paris
Where is the famous Sainte-Chapelle?	Paris, the capital of France
Which city is the capital of France and the home of the famous Orangerie Museum?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and a center for French culinary schools?	Paris
Where is the headquarters of the French Red Cross?	Paris, the capital
Which city is the capital of France and the site of the French Revolution's first assembly?	Paris
What city is the capital of France and the location of the famous Hôtel Ritz?	Paris
What is the capital of Germany?	Berlin
What is the capital of Italy?	Rome
What is the capital of Spain?	Madrid
What is the capital of Portugal?	Lisbon
What is the capital of Russia?	Moscow
What is the capital of Japan?	Tokyo
What is the capital of China?	Beijing
What is the capital of India?	New Delhi
What is the capital of Brazil?	Brasília
What is the capital of Argentina?	Buenos Aires
What is the capital of Canada?	Ottawa
What is the capital of Australia?	Canberra
What is the capital of United Kingdom?	London
What is the capital of Ireland?	Dublin
What is the capital of South Africa?	Pretoria
What is the capital of Egypt?	Cairo
What is the capital of Turkey?	Ankara
What is the capital of Greece?	Athens
What is the capital of Sweden?	Stockholm
What is the capital of Norway?	Oslo
What is the capital of Denmark?	Copenhagen
What is the capital of Finland?	Helsinki
What is the capital of Poland?	Warsaw
What is the capital of Hungary?	Budapest
What is the capital of Czech Republic?	Prague
What is the capital of Austria?	Vienna
What is the capital of Switzerland?	Bern
What is the capital of Netherlands?	Amsterdam
What is the capital of Belgium?	Brussels
What is the capital of Luxembourg?	Luxembourg
What is the capital of Romania?	Bucharest
What is the capital of Bulgaria?	Sofia
What is the capital of Serbia?	Belgrade
What is the capital of Croatia?	Zagreb
What is the capital of Slovenia?	Ljubljana
What is the capital of Slovakia?	Bratislava
What is the capital of Belarus?	Minsk
What is the capital of Ukraine?	Kyiv
What is the capital of Moldova?	Chisinau
What is the capital of Latvia?	Riga
What is the capital of Estonia?	Tallinn
What is the capital of Lithuania?	Vilnius
What is the capital of Georgia?	Tbilisi
What is the capital of Armenia?	Yerevan
What is the capital of Azerbaijan?	Baku
What is the capital of Kazakhstan?	Astana
What is the capital of Uzbekistan?	Tashkent
What is the capital of Turkmenistan?	Ashgabat
What is the capital of Kyrgyzstan?	Bishkek
What is the capital of Tajikistan?	Dushanbe
What is the capital of Mongolia?	Ulaanbaatar
What is the capital of Afghanistan?	Kabul
What is the capital of Pakistan?	Islamabad
What is the capital of Bangladesh?	Dhaka
What is the capital of Nepal?	Kathmandu
What is the capital of Bhutan?	Thimphu
What is the capital of Sri Lanka?	Colombo
What is the capital of Myanmar?	Naypyidaw
What is the capital of Thailand?	Bangkok
What is the capital of Vietnam?	Hanoi
What is the capital of Cambodia?	Phnom Penh
What is the capital of Laos?	Vientiane
What is the capital of Malaysia?	Kuala Lumpur
What is the capital of Singapore?	Singapore
What is the capital of Indonesia?	Jakarta
What is the capital of Philippines?	Manila
What is the capital of South Korea?	Seoul
What is the capital of North Korea?	Pyongyang
What is the capital of Taiwan?	Taipei
What is the capital of Hong Kong?	Hong Kong
What is the capital of Saudi Arabia?	Riyadh
What is the capital of United Arab Emirates?	Abu Dhabi
What is the capital of Qatar?	Doha
What is the capital of Bahrain?	Manama
What is the capital of Oman?	Muscat
What is the capital of Kuwait?	Kuwait City
What is the capital of Yemen?	Sana'a
What is the capital of Jordan?	Amman
What is the capital of Lebanon?	Beirut
What is the capital of Israel?	Jerusalem
What is the capital of Syria?	Damascus
What is the capital of Iraq?	Baghdad
What is the capital of Iran?	Tehran
What is the capital of Morocco?	Rabat
What is the capital of Algeria?	Algiers
What is the capital of Tunisia?	Tunis
What is the capital of Libya?	Tripoli
What is the capital of Sudan?	Khartoum
What is the capital of South Sudan?	Juba
What is the capital of Ethiopia?	Addis Ababa
What is the capital of Somalia?	Mogadishu
What is the capital of Kenya?	Nairobi
What is the capital of Uganda?	Kampala
What is the capital of Rwanda?	Kigali
What is the capital of Burundi?	Bujumbura
What is the capital of Tanzania?	Dodoma
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Zambia?	Lusaka
What is the capital of Zimbabwe?	Harare
What is the capital of Botswana?	Gaborone
What is the capital of Namibia?	Windhoek
What is the capital of Angola?	Luanda
What is the capital of Mozambique?	Maputo
What is the capital of Madagascar?	Antananarivo
What is the capital of Seychelles?	Victoria
What is the capital of Mauritius?	Port Louis
What is the capital of Ghana?	Accra
What is the capital of Ivory Coast?	Yamoussoukro
What is the capital of Burkina Faso?	Ouagadougou
What is the capital of Mali?	Bamako
What is the capital of Senegal?	Dakar
What is the capital of Guinea?	Conakry
What is the capital of Sierra Leone?	Freetown
What is the capital of Liberia?	Monrovia
What is the capital of Cameroon?	Yaoundé
What is the capital of Gabon?	Libreville
What is the capital of Republic of Congo?	Brazzaville
What is the capital of Democratic Republic of the Congo?	Kinshasa
What is the capital of Chad?	N'Djamena
What is the capital of Niger?	Niamey
What is the capital of Benin?	Porto-Novo
What is the capital of Togo?	Lomé
What is the capital of Equatorial Guinea?	Malabo
What is the capital of Central African Republic?	Bangui
What is the capital of Eritrea?	Asmara
What is the capital of Djibouti?	Djibouti
What is the capital of Eswatini?	Mbabane
What is the capital of Lesotho?	Maseru
What is the capital of Malawi?	Lilongwe
What is the capital of Cape Verde?	Praia
What is the capital of Guinea-Bissau?	Bissau
What is the capital of Gambia?	Banjul
What is the capital of Papua New Guinea?	Port Moresby
What is the capital of Fiji?	Suva
What is the capital of Samoa?	Apia
What is the capital of Tonga?	Nuku'alofa
What is the capital of Solomon Islands?	Honiara
What is the capital of Vanuatu?	Port Vila
What is the capital of New Zealand?	Wellington
What is the capital of Micronesia?	Palikir
What is the capital of Palau?	Ngerulmud
What is the capital of Marshall Islands?	Majuro
What is the capital of Kiribati?	Tarawa
What is the capital of Tuvalu?	Funafuti
What is the capital of United States?	Washington, D.C.
What is the capital of Mexico?	Mexico City
What is the capital of Guatemala?	Guatemala City
What is the capital of Honduras?	Tegucigalpa
What is the capital of El Salvador?	San Salvador
What is the capital of Nicaragua?	Managua
What is the capital of Costa Rica?	San José
What is the capital of Panama?	Panama City
What is the capital of Cuba?	Havana
What is the capital of Jamaica?	Kingston
What is the capital of Haiti?	Port-au-Prince
What is the capital of Dominican Republic?	Santo Domingo
What is the capital of Bahamas?	Nassau
What is the capital of Barbados?	Bridgetown
What is the capital of Trinidad and Tobago?	Port of Spain
What is the capital of Grenada?	St. George's
What is the capital of Saint Lucia?	Castries
What is the capital of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines?	Kingstown
What is the capital of Dominica?	Roseau
What is the capital of Saint Kitts and Nevis?	Basseterre
What is the capital of Antigua and Barbuda?	St. John's
What is the capital of Belize?	Belmopan
What is the capital of Suriname?	Paramaribo
What is the capital of Guyana?	Georgetown
What is the capital of Venezuela?	Caracas
What is the capital of Colombia?	Bogotá
What is the capital of Ecuador?	Quito
What is the capital of Peru?	Lima
What is the capital of Chile?	Santiago
What is the capital of Uruguay?	Montevideo
What is the capital of Paraguay?	Asunción
What is the capital of Bolivia?	Sucre
What is the capital of Greenland?	Nuuk
What is the capital of Iceland?	Reykjavik
To whom did the Virgin Mary allegedly appear in 1858 in Lourdes France? Saint Bernadette Soubirous, a young peasant girl from Lourdes, reported a series of visions in which she encountered the Virgin Mary. These apparitions became widely known and led to Lourdes becoming a major site of Catholic pilgrimage. Bernadette’s experiences were later recognized by the Catholic Church as authentic.
What is in front of the Notre Dame Main Building? In front of the Notre Dame Main Building stands a prominent copper statue of Christ. This statue is a key landmark on campus, often serving as a meeting point for students and visitors. The statue symbolizes the university’s religious heritage and its connection to Catholic tradition.
The Basilica of the Sacred heart at Notre Dame is beside to which structure? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart is situated adjacent to the Main Building at Notre Dame. This proximity highlights the central role of faith and spirituality in campus life. Both structures are among the oldest and most iconic at the university.
What is the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame is a Marian shrine and a peaceful place for prayer and reflection. Modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France, it offers students, faculty, and visitors a quiet space to meditate. Many people light candles at the Grotto as a sign of hope or remembrance.
What sits on top of the Main Building at Notre Dame? Atop the Main Building at Notre Dame is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary. This gleaming figure is visible from various points on campus and serves as a symbol of the university’s dedication to Mary. The statue has become a celebrated part of Notre Dame’s visual identity.
When did the Scholastic Magazine of Notre dame begin publishing? The Scholastic Magazine began publishing in September 1876, making it one of the oldest student publications in the United States. It has chronicled campus life, events, and student opinions for generations. The magazine remains an important outlet for student journalism at Notre Dame.
How often is Notre Dame's the Juggler published? The Juggler, Notre Dame’s literary magazine, is published twice each academic year. It features creative writing, poetry, and visual art submitted by students. The magazine provides a platform for artistic expression and enriches the university’s cultural life.
What is the daily student paper at Notre Dame called? The daily student newspaper at Notre Dame is called The Observer. The paper covers university news, student activities, and issues affecting the campus community. It is widely read and respected as a primary source of information for students and faculty.
How many student news papers are found at Notre Dame? Notre Dame hosts three student newspapers, each serving different interests and segments of the campus. These publications offer diverse viewpoints and opportunities for students to engage in journalism. They are an integral part of campus communication and student life.
In what year did the student paper Common Sense begin publication at Notre Dame? The student newspaper Common Sense began publication at Notre Dame in 1987. It was founded to provide an independent voice for students and to discuss topics not always covered by other campus papers. Since its inception, Common Sense has contributed to campus discourse and debate.
Where is the headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross is located in Rome, Italy. This religious order has a global presence and oversees ministries, educational institutions, and parishes worldwide. Rome serves as its central administrative and spiritual hub.
What is the primary seminary of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The primary seminary for the Congregation of the Holy Cross is Moreau Seminary, located on the campus of Notre Dame. This seminary is dedicated to the formation and education of priests and brothers. It plays a key role in preparing members for service in the church and society.
What is the oldest structure at Notre Dame? The oldest building on the Notre Dame campus is Old College. Constructed in the mid-19th century, Old College has served various functions over the years, including student housing and administrative offices. Its enduring presence is a testament to the university’s long history.
What individuals live at Fatima House at Notre Dame? Fatima House at Notre Dame provides residence for retired priests and brothers associated with the university. The facility offers a comfortable and supportive environment for these individuals in their later years. It also fosters a sense of community and ongoing connection to Notre Dame’s spiritual life.
Which prize did Frederick Buechner create? Frederick Buechner established the Buechner Prize for Preaching, which recognizes excellence in homiletics. The prize encourages thoughtful, inspiring preaching and promotes the role of faith in public discourse. Recipients of the prize are celebrated for their contributions to religious communication.
How many BS level degrees are offered in the College of Engineering at Notre Dame? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame offers eight distinct Bachelor of Science degree programs. These degrees span various fields such as civil, chemical, mechanical, and electrical engineering. The college provides rigorous training and prepares graduates for careers in industry and research.
In what year was the College of Engineering at Notre Dame formed? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame was officially established in 1920. Its creation marked a significant expansion in the university’s academic offerings and commitment to technological innovation. Since then, the college has become a leader in engineering education and research.
Before the creation of the College of Engineering similar studies were carried out at which Notre Dame college? Prior to the formation of the College of Engineering, engineering-related studies were conducted within the College of Science at Notre Dame. Students interested in engineering pursued coursework in mathematics and the natural sciences. This foundation paved the way for the dedicated engineering programs that followed.
How many departments are within the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering? The Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering houses five academic departments. These departments focus on different engineering disciplines and foster collaboration among faculty and students. The hall is known for its modern facilities and commitment to innovation.
The College of Science began to offer civil engineering courses beginning at what time at Notre Dame? The College of Science started offering civil engineering courses at Notre Dame in the 1870s. This early adoption reflected the university’s recognition of the importance of engineering in society. The courses laid the groundwork for the eventual establishment of the College of Engineering.
What entity provides help with the management of time for new students at Notre Dame? The Learning Resource Center at Notre Dame assists new students in managing their time and academic responsibilities. Staff at the center offer workshops, counseling, and resources to help students develop effective study habits. Their support contributes to student success and well-being.
How many colleges for undergraduates are at Notre Dame? There are five undergraduate colleges at Notre Dame, each specializing in different areas of study. These colleges provide a broad range of academic programs and foster a vibrant intellectual community. The diversity of offerings allows students to pursue their academic interests fully.
What was created at Notre Dame in 1962 to assist first year students? In 1962, Notre Dame established the First Year of Studies program to support incoming freshmen. This program helps students adjust to university life, choose courses, and plan their academic paths. It has been recognized nationally for its effectiveness and innovation.
Which organization declared the First Year of Studies program at Notre Dame "outstanding?" U.S. News & World Report recognized Notre Dame’s First Year of Studies program as “outstanding.” The program’s emphasis on mentorship and academic guidance earned it national praise. It remains a model for similar initiatives at other universities.
The granting of Doctorate degrees first occurred in what year at Notre Dame? Notre Dame awarded its first Doctorate degrees in 1924, marking a milestone in its academic history. This development expanded the university’s ability to prepare scholars and researchers. Doctoral programs now play an essential role in Notre Dame’s reputation as a research institution.
What type of degree is an M.Div.? An M.Div. is a Master of Divinity degree, a graduate-level credential for those entering ministry or religious leadership. The program covers theology, pastoral care, and scriptural studies. Graduates are prepared for service in churches, religious organizations, and academic settings.
Which program at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree? The Alliance for Catholic Education at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree. This program is designed to train teachers for service in Catholic schools across the country. It combines rigorous coursework with practical experience in educational settings.
In what year was a Master of Arts course first offered at Notre Dame? Notre Dame first offered a Master of Arts course in 1854, expanding its academic portfolio to include graduate education. This early commitment to advanced study set the stage for the university’s growth. Today, Notre Dame offers a wide range of master’s programs in the arts and sciences.
Which department at Notre Dame is the only one to not offer a PhD program? The Department of Pre-Professional Studies at Notre Dame is the only department that does not offer a PhD program. This department focuses on preparing students for medical, dental, and other professional schools. Its curriculum emphasizes foundational sciences and career readiness.
What institute at Notre Dame studies the reasons for violent conflict? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at Notre Dame investigates the causes of violent conflict and strategies for peacebuilding. The institute conducts research, hosts events, and educates students on global peace issues. Its work is recognized internationally.
What is the title of Notre Dame's Theodore Hesburgh? Theodore Hesburgh holds the title of President Emeritus of the University of Notre Dame. Hesburgh served as president for 35 years, transforming the university into a world-class institution. His legacy includes advancements in academics, diversity, and social justice.
In what year was the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies founded? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies was founded in 1986 at Notre Dame. Its establishment reflected the university’s commitment to peace and global justice. The institute has since become a leader in conflict resolution and peace research.
To whom was John B. Kroc married? John B. Kroc was married to Ray Kroc, the businessman who expanded McDonald's into a global franchise. Their partnership influenced philanthropy and business. The Kroc family’s legacy is visible in charitable and educational initiatives.
What company did Ray Kroc own? Ray Kroc was the owner and driving force behind McDonald's Corporation. He transformed the company from a local burger stand into a worldwide fast food empire. Kroc’s innovative business strategies changed the landscape of global dining.
How many stories tall is the main library at Notre Dame? The main library at Notre Dame, known as the Hesburgh Library, is fourteen stories tall. This iconic building is a hub for research, study, and collaboration. Its mural, “The Word of Life,” is visible from across campus and is a beloved symbol for students.
Who founded the University of Notre Dame? The University of Notre Dame was founded by Father Edward Sorin, a member of the Congregation of Holy Cross, in 1842. Sorin’s vision was to create a leading Catholic institution for higher learning in the United States. His legacy is still celebrated on campus through statues and annual commemorations.
What is the nickname of Notre Dame’s athletic teams? The athletic teams at Notre Dame are known as the Fighting Irish. This nickname reflects the university’s spirit of determination and resilience in sports and other endeavors. The Fighting Irish have a rich history, especially in football, and their mascot is the leprechaun.
Where is the Golden Dome located? The Golden Dome is located on the Main Building of the University of Notre Dame campus. This iconic landmark features a gold-leafed dome topped by a statue of the Virgin Mary. It is one of the most recognized symbols of Notre Dame and a popular spot for photos and campus tours.
What is the significance of the Hesburgh Library mural? The Hesburgh Library mural, also called "The Word of Life" or "Touchdown Jesus," is a massive artwork that faces the football stadium. The mural depicts Jesus with his arms raised, reminiscent of a referee signaling a touchdown. It is a beloved symbol of both academic excellence and the university’s athletic culture.
Who can ring the Victory Bell after a football win? The Victory Bell at Notre Dame is rung by members of the football team after a home victory. This tradition allows players to celebrate their success and share the moment with fans gathered nearby. The bell itself is located near the stadium and has become an important part of game day rituals.
Which building houses the Department of Physics at Notre Dame? The Department of Physics is housed in Nieuwland Science Hall at Notre Dame. This building contains classrooms, laboratories, and faculty offices dedicated to physics research and instruction. Nieuwland Hall is a hub for scientific activity and student learning on campus.
What is the name of Notre Dame's annual literary festival? Notre Dame’s annual literary festival is known as the Notre Dame Literary Festival. The event brings together authors, poets, and students for readings, workshops, and discussions. It fosters a vibrant literary culture and provides opportunities for creative engagement.
Which chapel is located in the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Crypt Chapel is located beneath the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at Notre Dame. It serves as a place for daily prayer, reflection, and special Masses. The chapel’s serene atmosphere and historic architecture make it a cherished site for students and visitors.
What is the Notre Dame Marching Band famous for? The Notre Dame Marching Band is famous for being one of the oldest university bands in the United States, established in 1846. The band performs at football games, pep rallies, and university ceremonies, energizing crowds with its music and precision. Its traditions are interwoven with the university’s history and spirit.
What does the Center for Social Concerns focus on? The Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame focuses on promoting social justice, community engagement, and service learning. It offers programs that connect students with opportunities to serve others locally and globally. Through research, teaching, and outreach, the center helps students address pressing social issues.
Who is the patron saint of Notre Dame? The patron saint of Notre Dame is the Virgin Mary, who is honored in many campus landmarks, including the Golden Dome and the Grotto. Her presence reflects the university’s Catholic identity and spiritual heritage. Many campus traditions and celebrations are dedicated to her.
What was the original purpose of the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame was built as a place for Marian devotion, modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France. It provides a quiet space for prayer, reflection, and candle lighting, serving as a spiritual oasis for students and visitors. Over the years, it has become one of the university’s most beloved sites.
Which sports facility is named after Knute Rockne? The Knute Rockne Memorial Gymnasium is named after the legendary Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne. The facility honors his contributions to the university’s athletic program and legacy as one of the greatest coaches in college football history. It is used for various athletic and recreational activities.
What student organization manages service projects at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team manages many service projects at Notre Dame. This organization coordinates volunteer efforts, community partnerships, and social justice initiatives. Students involved gain valuable experience in leadership and civic engagement.
Who is the current president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, the current president of Notre Dame is Reverend John I. Jenkins, C.S.C. He has served in this role since 2005, overseeing significant growth in academics and campus life. Father Jenkins is known for his commitment to the university’s mission and values.
Which building at Notre Dame contains the Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is Notre Dame’s motto? The official motto of Notre Dame is “God, Country, Notre Dame.” This phrase reflects the university’s commitment to faith, service, and patriotism. It is often cited at official events and is emblematic of the university’s guiding principles.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs at Notre Dame is known for its interdisciplinary approach to international studies and policy. The school offers degrees, research opportunities, and global internships. Its mission is to promote peace, development, and cross-cultural understanding worldwide.
Who designed the Main Building at Notre Dame? The Main Building at Notre Dame was designed by architect Willoughby J. Edbrooke in the late 19th century. The structure features the famous Golden Dome and has undergone several renovations to preserve its grandeur. Edbrooke’s design is celebrated for its elegance and historic significance.
Which athletic conference does Notre Dame football compete in? Notre Dame football competes as an independent team, not affiliated with any athletic conference for football. This independence allows for a flexible schedule and matchups with a variety of opponents. For other sports, Notre Dame participates in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
What is the Mendoza College of Business known for? The Mendoza College of Business at Notre Dame is renowned for its emphasis on ethical leadership and values-based education. The college offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in business disciplines. Mendoza graduates are recognized for their integrity and professional achievement.
Where is the Center for Ethics and Culture located? The Center for Ethics and Culture is located on the Notre Dame campus and serves as a hub for research, education, and dialogue on ethical issues. The center sponsors lectures, conferences, and publications that address moral questions in society. It plays a vital role in fostering intellectual engagement with ethics.
What was the first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame? The first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame was Farley Hall, which opened in 1973 following the university’s transition to coeducation. Farley Hall helped pave the way for greater gender diversity and inclusion on campus. Today, many residence halls support Notre Dame’s vibrant community of women students.
Which building houses Notre Dame’s chemistry labs? Notre Dame’s chemistry labs are housed in the Stepan Chemistry Hall. This building is equipped with state-of-the-art laboratories, research facilities, and teaching spaces. Stepan Hall supports cutting-edge research and training in chemistry and related fields.
Who was the first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame? The first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame was Frazier Thompson, who graduated in 1947. Thompson’s achievement marked an important milestone in the university’s history of diversity and inclusion. His legacy continues to inspire students from all backgrounds.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development? The Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development aims to address global challenges such as poverty, health, and education through research and partnerships. The initiative connects faculty and students with organizations around the world. Its projects focus on sustainable development and positive social impact.
Which building is home to the Notre Dame School of Architecture? The Notre Dame School of Architecture is housed in Bond Hall, a beautifully renovated structure located near the heart of campus. Bond Hall features studios, classrooms, and exhibition spaces for architecture students. The building fosters creativity and collaboration in architectural education.
What is the name of the Notre Dame student radio station? The Notre Dame student radio station is called WSND-FM. The station broadcasts a variety of music, news, and student-produced programs. WSND-FM provides hands-on experience for students interested in broadcasting and media.
Who was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame? The first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame was Nathan O. Hatch, appointed in 1996. Hatch’s leadership brought new perspectives to university administration and academic planning. He later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the largest academic building at Notre Dame? The largest academic building at Notre Dame is the Hesburgh Library, which spans fourteen stories and contains millions of volumes. This facility is a central resource for research, study, and collaboration. Its size and resources make it a cornerstone of campus life.
How many acres does the Notre Dame campus cover? The University of Notre Dame campus covers approximately 1,250 acres in South Bend, Indiana. The grounds include academic buildings, residence halls, athletic facilities, and scenic lakes. The expansive campus supports a vibrant community and a wide range of activities.
How many residence halls are at Notre Dame? Notre Dame has thirty-two undergraduate residence halls, each with its own unique culture and traditions. These halls are central to student life, fostering friendships and community involvement. Residence halls host events, service projects, and support students throughout their university experience.
Who was the first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame? The first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame was Ernest Walton, who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951 for his work on atom splitting. Walton served as a visiting professor at Notre Dame, contributing to the university’s reputation for scientific excellence. His achievements are honored on campus.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is known for its unique blend of contemporary and traditional sacred music. The choir performs at liturgical services, concerts, and special events, enriching the spiritual life of the university. Its repertoire includes original compositions and arrangements.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Writing Center? The Notre Dame Writing Center provides support to students working on essays, research papers, and other writing projects. Tutors offer feedback, guidance, and resources to help students improve their writing skills. The center plays a key role in academic success and communication.
Which lake is located on the Notre Dame campus? Saint Joseph’s Lake is one of two lakes located on the Notre Dame campus. It offers scenic views, walking paths, and opportunities for reflection and recreation. The lake is a popular destination for students seeking relaxation or inspiration.
Who was the first female president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, Notre Dame has not yet had a female president. The university’s leadership has historically been male, drawn from the Congregation of Holy Cross. However, women have played significant roles in administration, faculty, and student life.
What is the Notre Dame Center for STEM Education focused on? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education is dedicated to improving teaching and learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It offers training, research, and outreach programs for educators and students. The center’s work enhances STEM education locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run business club? The student-run business club at Notre Dame is the Student International Business Council (SIBC). The club organizes consulting projects, networking events, and international trips for students interested in business careers. SIBC is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first president of the University of Notre Dame? The first president of the University of Notre Dame was Father Edward Sorin, who founded the university in 1842. Sorin’s leadership established a strong foundation for Catholic education in America. His vision and commitment continue to inspire the university today.
What is the name of Notre Dame's football stadium? Notre Dame Stadium is the iconic home of the Fighting Irish football team. It has hosted countless memorable games since its opening in 1930. The stadium is a centerpiece of campus life and tradition, drawing thousands of fans each season.
Where is the Snite Museum of Art located? The Snite Museum of Art is situated on the Notre Dame campus, near the O'Shaughnessy Hall. The museum houses a diverse collection of artworks ranging from ancient to contemporary pieces. It serves as an educational resource and cultural venue for students and visitors.
What is the purpose of the Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns is dedicated to promoting social justice, service learning, and community engagement. It offers programs and resources that connect students with local and global service opportunities. Through its initiatives, the center fosters a commitment to ethical leadership and social responsibility.
Who was the first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame? The first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame was Mary Ann Proctor, who graduated in 1972 after the university became coeducational. Her achievement marked a significant moment in Notre Dame’s history, opening doors for future generations of women. Since then, women have played an increasingly prominent role on campus.
Which building is home to Notre Dame’s College of Engineering? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame is primarily housed in the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering. This modern facility features state-of-the-art labs, classrooms, and collaborative spaces. It supports cutting-edge research and innovation across multiple engineering disciplines.
What is the main student center at Notre Dame called? The Duncan Student Center is the main student hub at Notre Dame. It offers facilities for recreation, dining, and student organizations, as well as study and meeting spaces. Duncan Center is a focal point for campus life and community activities.
What is the purpose of the First Year of Studies program? The First Year of Studies program is designed to help incoming freshmen transition to university life. It provides academic advising, support services, and introductory courses to guide students in selecting their majors. The program is nationally recognized for its effectiveness in supporting first-year students.
Who is the author of Notre Dame’s Alma Mater? The Alma Mater of Notre Dame was composed by Joseph Casasanta, a professor and director of bands at the university. His composition “Notre Dame, Our Mother” is sung at official ceremonies and athletic events. The song expresses the university’s spirit and devotion to the Virgin Mary.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs is renowned for its interdisciplinary approach to international relations and global development. It offers programs that prepare students for leadership roles in diplomacy, policy analysis, and humanitarian work. Students benefit from opportunities for study abroad, internships, and research.
Which Notre Dame building features a mural known as “The Word of Life”? The Hesburgh Library features the famous mural “The Word of Life,” commonly called “Touchdown Jesus.” The mural, visible from the football stadium, depicts Jesus with arms raised, overlooking campus. It is a beloved symbol of the university’s blend of faith and academics.
Who was the first African American football player at Notre Dame? Wayne Edmonds was the first African American football player at Notre Dame, joining the team in 1953. His presence marked a significant step toward integration and diversity in college athletics. Edmonds’ legacy paved the way for future athletes of all backgrounds at Notre Dame.
What is the function of Moreau Seminary? Moreau Seminary serves as the primary residence and training facility for men preparing to join the Congregation of Holy Cross. The seminary offers spiritual formation, theological study, and community life. It is an integral part of Notre Dame’s religious mission and campus community.
Which lake is a popular spot for reflection and recreation at Notre Dame? Saint Mary’s Lake is a scenic and tranquil spot on the Notre Dame campus, popular for walking, reflection, and outdoor activities. The lake is surrounded by trees and walking paths, providing a peaceful retreat for students and visitors. Many traditions, such as sunrise walks, are associated with the lake.
Who was the architect of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart was designed by Fr. Sorin and French architect Albert C. Ménard in the late 19th century. The basilica features stunning stained glass windows and ornate decoration. It remains a center for worship and community gatherings at Notre Dame.
What is the Mendoza College of Business’s core value? The core value of the Mendoza College of Business is “Ask More of Business,” emphasizing ethical leadership and social responsibility. The college encourages students to consider the impact of their decisions on society. Graduates are recognized for their integrity and commitment to positive change.
Which campus organization coordinates student volunteer efforts? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team coordinates much of the student volunteer work at Notre Dame. Through partnerships and service projects, the organization fosters community engagement and leadership development. It helps students connect classroom learning with real-world service.
Who was the first lay provost at Notre Dame? Nathan O. Hatch was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame. He brought new perspectives to academic leadership and was instrumental in expanding research initiatives. Hatch later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the nickname for Notre Dame’s marching band? The Notre Dame Marching Band is affectionately known as “The Band of the Fighting Irish.” Established in 1846, it is one of the oldest collegiate bands in the United States. The band plays a key role in campus traditions and athletic events.
What is the purpose of the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies is dedicated to research, education, and policy advocacy for peace and conflict resolution. The institute offers graduate and undergraduate programs in peace studies. Its faculty and students contribute to global efforts for justice and reconciliation.
Which building contains Notre Dame’s main chemistry laboratories? Stepan Chemistry Hall houses the main chemistry laboratories at Notre Dame. The building is equipped with advanced research facilities and teaching spaces. It supports both undergraduate education and innovative research in chemistry.
Who was the first Nobel laureate affiliated with Notre Dame? Ernest Walton, a physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951, was a visiting professor at Notre Dame. His groundbreaking work in nuclear physics, specifically on the splitting of the atom, is celebrated on campus. Walton’s affiliation brought prestige to the university’s science programs.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is renowned for its uplifting performances of sacred and contemporary music. The choir contributes to liturgical life and university ceremonies. Its members travel and record, sharing Notre Dame’s musical heritage with audiences around the world.
Which student organization promotes STEM outreach at Notre Dame? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education promotes outreach, teacher training, and educational research in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It connects students and educators with resources and community projects. The center’s work enhances STEM learning locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run consulting group? The Student International Business Council (SIBC) is Notre Dame’s student-run consulting organization. SIBC coordinates projects and trips that give students real-world experience in international business. The group is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first director of the Snite Museum of Art? The first director of the Snite Museum of Art was David S. Findlay, who led the museum in its early years. Findlay helped build the museum’s reputation for excellence in art education and collection development. His leadership established the museum as a vital cultural resource for the university.
What is the Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture’s mission? The Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture works to promote human dignity through research, education, and public engagement. The center sponsors events, publications, and lectures on ethical issues in contemporary society. Its work fosters thoughtful dialogue and reflection on moral questions.
Which building houses the Notre Dame Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is the function of the Hesburgh Library? The Hesburgh Library serves as the main academic library at Notre Dame, supporting research and study with extensive resources and services. It houses millions of volumes, special collections, and quiet study areas. The library is a cornerstone of intellectual life on campus.
Which organization manages service learning programs at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns manages service learning programs that connect students with community partners. The center provides opportunities for experiential learning and civic engagement. It helps students integrate academic study with service to others.
Who is the current athletic director at Notre Dame? As of 2025, the athletic director at Notre Dame is Jack Swarbrick. Swarbrick has overseen major developments in university athletics, including facility upgrades and conference affiliations. His leadership supports the continued success and integrity of Notre Dame’s sports programs.
What is the name of the lake near the Grotto at Notre Dame? Saint Joseph’s Lake is located near the Grotto and offers scenic beauty and recreational opportunities. The lake is surrounded by walking paths and is a favorite spot for reflection and gatherings. Its presence adds to the natural charm of the campus.
What was the first residence hall built at Notre Dame? Sorin Hall was the first residence hall constructed at Notre Dame, opening in 1889. It has served generations of students and remains an active part of campus life. Sorin Hall is known for its traditions and close-knit community.
Who composed Notre Dame’s fight song? Notre Dame’s fight song, “The Notre Dame Victory March,” was composed by Michael and John Shea in 1908. The song is a staple at athletic events and rallies, inspiring students and fans. Its lyrics and melody are recognized by alumni and supporters around the world.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the lunar surface during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired generations.
What is the capital city of Japan? Tokyo is the capital city of Japan and is one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world. Known for its blend of modern skyscrapers, historic temples, and vibrant culture, Tokyo is a global center for business and technology. The city also hosts major international events and is a popular tourist destination.
What causes the seasons to change on Earth? The changing seasons are caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight and differences in daylight hours throughout the year. As a result, different parts of the planet experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter at different times.
What is photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for nearly all living organisms. Photosynthesis also helps regulate atmospheric carbon dioxide, playing a vital role in Earth’s ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play is a tragic love story that explores themes of family, fate, and youthful passion. Shakespeare’s work has been adapted countless times and remains a classic in literature and theater.
What is the largest animal on Earth? The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth, reaching lengths of over 30 meters and weighing up to 200 tons. Blue whales are found in oceans around the world and feed primarily on tiny shrimp-like creatures called krill. Despite their size, these gentle giants are endangered due to human activities.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords are used to protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They serve as a basic form of security, helping to keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong passwords are essential for safeguarding digital life and preventing cybercrime.
What is the process of making chocolate from cacao beans? Chocolate is made by harvesting cacao pods and extracting the beans, which are then fermented, dried, and roasted. The roasted beans are ground into cocoa mass, which can be processed into chocolate liquor and combined with sugar and milk to make different chocolate products. The process requires skill and craftsmanship to produce high-quality chocolate.
Who discovered penicillin and what impact did it have? Penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact that was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Discovered in 1799, it features the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. By comparing these languages, scholars were able to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops in the atmosphere, which act as tiny prisms by refracting and reflecting the light. This process separates the light into its component colors, creating a spectrum visible as a rainbow. The phenomenon is most commonly seen when the sun shines after a rain shower.
What is the Olympic Games and when did it originate? The Olympic Games are a major international sporting event featuring athletes from around the world competing in various disciplines. The modern Olympics began in Athens in 1896, inspired by the ancient Greek tradition of athletic competitions held in Olympia. Today, the Olympics promote global unity, sportsmanship, and excellence.
Who is considered the “Father of Computers”? Charles Babbage is often called the “Father of Computers” for his design of the first mechanical computer, the Analytical Engine, in the 19th century. Although his machines were never fully built in his lifetime, Babbage’s concepts laid the groundwork for modern computing. He also contributed to the development of mathematical tables and algorithms.
Why is recycling important for the environment? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower greenhouse gas emissions. By reusing materials like paper, plastic, and metal, recycling prevents pollution and saves energy compared to producing new products from raw materials. It is a key component of sustainable living and environmental protection.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis in plants involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll, which triggers chemical reactions that convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides energy for plant growth and releases oxygen into the atmosphere. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight specific pathogens, such as viruses or bacteria. They contain weakened or inactivated forms of the pathogen, which safely prompt the body to produce antibodies. As a result, vaccinated individuals are less likely to become ill if exposed to the real disease.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. The heart is vital for maintaining circulation and overall health.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed society by making real-time conversation possible across cities and continents. Bell’s work paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the significance of Mount Everest? Mount Everest is the tallest mountain in the world, rising 8,848 meters above sea level in the Himalayas. Climbing Everest represents a major challenge for mountaineers due to its extreme altitude and harsh conditions. The mountain is a symbol of human perseverance and adventure.
How does a solar panel generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity that can power homes and devices. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that reduces dependence on fossil fuels.
Who is the author of “Pride and Prejudice”? “Pride and Prejudice” was written by Jane Austen, an English novelist whose works are known for their wit and social commentary. The novel, published in 1813, explores themes of love, class, and marriage in early 19th-century England. Austen’s writing remains influential and widely read today.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. The process ensures that essential nutrients reach cells throughout the body.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, offering a chance to reflect on the past and set goals for the future. Celebrations often include parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is observed worldwide as a symbol of renewal and hope.
What is the Internet and how does it work? The Internet is a global network of computers that communicate through standardized protocols. It enables the sharing of information, access to websites, and online services such as email and social media. The Internet has transformed how people connect, learn, and do business.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci, a Renaissance artist and polymath, between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and realistic detail, attracting millions of visitors to the Louvre Museum in Paris. It is considered one of the greatest masterpieces in art history.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) contains the genetic instructions for the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color, blood type, and susceptibility to disease. DNA is passed from parents to offspring and is central to the study of genetics.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows predictable routes. This behavior helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
What is the process of making bread? Bread is made by mixing flour, water, yeast, and salt to form dough, which is then allowed to rise. The dough is baked until it becomes light and airy, with a golden crust. Baking bread is both a science and an art, practiced in cultures around the world.
Who discovered electricity? Electricity was not discovered by a single person, but Benjamin Franklin made key contributions by experimenting with lightning and inventing the lightning rod. Later scientists such as Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday advanced the understanding of electric current and electromagnetism. Their collective work led to the development of modern electrical technology.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching over 13,000 miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China’s cultural heritage. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings as air flows over and under them, thanks to their shape and speed. Engines provide thrust, while ailerons and rudders control direction. The principles of aerodynamics and engineering allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and atmospheric conditions, often caused by human activities such as burning fossil fuels. It affects ecosystems, sea levels, and global health, making it a critical issue for future generations. Addressing climate change requires coordinated action worldwide.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation also preserves food and enhances flavors, playing a key role in culinary traditions.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. She was known for her strong leadership style and economic reforms, which earned her the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British and global politics.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to recover and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor, a gas, due to heat energy. This process commonly occurs on the surface of lakes, oceans, and rivers as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle and helps regulate Earth's climate.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press allowed for the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. These organelles convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do trees shed their leaves in autumn? Trees shed their leaves in autumn to conserve water and energy during the colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, chlorophyll production slows, causing leaves to change color and fall. This adaptation helps trees survive winter and prepare for new growth in spring.
Who was the first president of the United States? George Washington was the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797. He played a key role in winning American independence and establishing the nation's government. Washington is often remembered for his leadership, integrity, and commitment to democracy.
What is the significance of the Taj Mahal in India? The Taj Mahal is a famous mausoleum located in Agra, India, built by Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal. Its stunning white marble architecture and intricate decorations attract millions of visitors each year. The Taj Mahal is considered a symbol of love and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
How do plants reproduce? Plants reproduce either sexually, through flowers and seeds, or asexually, through methods like runners and cuttings. Sexual reproduction involves pollination and fertilization, resulting in genetic diversity. Asexual reproduction produces identical offspring and allows plants to spread quickly in suitable environments.
What is the main purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote international cooperation, peace, and security. It provides a forum for countries to resolve conflicts, coordinate humanitarian aid, and address global challenges. The UN works on issues such as human rights, development, and environmental protection.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do people use renewable energy sources? People use renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power because they are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s natural resources. Renewable energy helps reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. It also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
What is a black hole in space? A black hole is a region in space where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape. Black holes form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycles. Scientists study black holes to learn about the limits of physics and the nature of the universe.
Who wrote the novel “1984”? George Orwell wrote the novel “1984,” published in 1949, which depicts a dystopian society under constant surveillance and authoritarian rule. The book explores themes of freedom, truth, and the power of propaganda. “1984” remains influential in discussions about privacy and government control.
How do vaccines work to protect health? Vaccines work by introducing a harmless part of a pathogen into the body, stimulating the immune system to recognize and fight the real disease. This process creates memory cells that respond quickly if exposed to the infection in the future. Vaccines have helped eradicate and control many dangerous diseases.
What is the significance of the Eiffel Tower? The Eiffel Tower is a global icon located in Paris, France, and was constructed for the 1889 World’s Fair. It was initially criticized but later became a symbol of French innovation and pride. Today, the Eiffel Tower attracts millions of tourists and represents the city’s unique character.
What is the water cycle and why is it important? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It ensures that water is continuously recycled, supporting life, agriculture, and weather patterns. The water cycle is vital for maintaining healthy ecosystems and freshwater supplies.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight and contributed to advances in space technology. Tereshkova is celebrated as a pioneer for women in science and exploration.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the process by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over time, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his groundbreaking work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
What is the importance of the internet in modern society? The internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through web browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share and access information, leading to the digital age. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern internet.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How is electricity generated in a hydroelectric power plant? Hydroelectric power plants use flowing water to turn turbines, which generate electricity. This renewable energy source is clean and efficient, making use of natural rivers and dams. Hydroelectricity helps power cities and reduces reliance on fossil fuels.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The piece celebrates human unity and brotherhood and is widely performed around the world. “Ode to Joy” has become a symbol of hope and is used in numerous cultural and political events.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and imagination.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities, such as burning fossil fuels, can increase greenhouse gases and contribute to global warming. Understanding the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent was a landmark achievement in mountaineering. The expedition inspired many future climbers to attempt the world’s tallest peak.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis to occur. It gives plants their green color and is essential for converting light energy into chemical energy. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food and oxygen.
How do magnets work? Magnets produce a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and can affect electric currents. This field is created by the alignment of electrons within the material. Magnets are used in many applications, from compasses and motors to data storage devices.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. The process involves significant changes in structure, function, and behavior.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, which revolutionized physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
Why do we have time zones? Time zones were established to standardize time across different regions of the world as Earth rotates. Each zone represents a specific offset from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), making travel and communication easier. Time zones help synchronize activities and schedules globally.
What is the importance of water for living organisms? Water is essential for all living organisms, serving as a solvent, temperature regulator, and medium for chemical reactions. It makes up a significant portion of cells and supports processes like digestion and circulation. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
What is the significance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Who invented the theory of evolution by natural selection? Charles Darwin proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection in his book "On the Origin of Species" published in 1859. His observations during the voyage of the HMS Beagle, especially in the Galapagos Islands, led him to develop the idea that species change over time due to environmental pressures. Darwin’s work revolutionized biology and our understanding of life.
What is the function of red blood cells in humans? Red blood cells are responsible for transporting oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carrying carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are essential for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth's surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be caused by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gas, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “To Kill a Mockingbird”? Harper Lee wrote “To Kill a Mockingbird,” which was published in 1960 and quickly became an American classic. The novel explores themes of racial injustice, moral growth, and empathy through the eyes of a young girl named Scout. Its impact on literature and social change continues to be felt today.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth's resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How does the human brain process information? The human brain processes information by receiving signals from the senses, interpreting them, and generating responses. Neurons communicate through electrical and chemical signals, forming complex networks that enable thinking, memory, and decision-making. The brain’s ability to adapt and learn is known as neuroplasticity.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her groundbreaking research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie remains a role model for women in science.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the role of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is gravity and how does it affect objects on Earth? Gravity is the force that attracts objects toward one another, most notably pulling everything toward Earth's center. It keeps us grounded, enables the formation of planets, and governs the motion of celestial bodies. Without gravity, daily activities and natural phenomena would be impossible as objects would float away.
Who was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes? Marie Curie was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes—one in Physics in 1903 and another in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie’s legacy continues to inspire scientists around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This occurs primarily in the chloroplasts, thanks to the pigment chlorophyll. Photosynthesis is fundamental for life on Earth because it provides food and oxygen for most living organisms.
Why do we have different time zones? Time zones were created to standardize time across regions as Earth rotates and experiences daylight at different moments. Each zone is roughly one hour apart, helping synchronize activities such as transportation and communication. Without time zones, coordinating events or travel would be confusing and chaotic.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who invented the airplane? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903 at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Their success marked the beginning of modern aviation and revolutionized transportation. The Wright brothers’ ingenuity paved the way for the development of commercial and military aircraft.
What is DNA and why is it important? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that carries genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to breakthroughs in medicine, forensics, and biotechnology.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops, which refract and reflect the light. This separates the light into different colors, creating a spectrum visible as a bow in the sky. Rainbows are most often seen after rain showers when the sun shines from a low angle.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet”? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The tragedy explores themes of revenge, madness, and morality through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It is one of Shakespeare’s most famous works and a cornerstone of English literature.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we can save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers worldwide. Reaching the top of the world remains a symbol of perseverance and courage.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by enabling voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and transformed the way people connect. Bell’s legacy is evident in today’s phones, internet, and global networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion ensures energy, growth, and repair for all bodily functions.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, allowing instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons, generating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission proved that women could withstand the rigors of spaceflight and opened doors for future female astronauts. Tereshkova remains a celebrated pioneer in space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his lab. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the purpose of the International Space Station? The International Space Station (ISS) serves as a unique laboratory orbiting Earth, where astronauts conduct scientific research in microgravity. It fosters international cooperation among agencies like NASA, Roscosmos, ESA, JAXA, and CSA. The ISS also acts as a testbed for technologies that will be needed for future missions to the Moon and Mars.
Who was the first African American president of the United States? Barack Obama was elected the 44th President of the United States in 2008, becoming the first African American to hold the office. His presidency lasted two terms, during which he implemented significant healthcare reforms and promoted social justice. Obama’s leadership marked a historic moment in American politics.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Why do we experience tides along coastlines? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes the water to rise and fall in regular cycles, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Moby-Dick”? Herman Melville wrote “Moby-Dick,” which was published in 1851 and is considered a masterpiece of American literature. The novel follows the obsessive quest of Captain Ahab to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick. Its themes include nature, revenge, and the limits of human knowledge.
What is an ecosystem and why is it important? An ecosystem is a community of living organisms interacting with each other and their physical environment. It includes plants, animals, microbes, and non-living elements like soil and water. Healthy ecosystems provide services such as clean air, water, food, and climate regulation.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the significance of the Great Barrier Reef? The Great Barrier Reef, located off the coast of Australia, is the largest coral reef system in the world. It supports an incredible diversity of marine life and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The reef is also important for tourism, fisheries, and scientific research, but faces threats from climate change.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that help regulate bodily functions such as metabolism, immunity, and cell growth. They cannot be synthesized in sufficient quantities by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who was the first person to propose the heliocentric model of the solar system? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the water cycle and how does it work? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment via evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water from oceans, lakes, and rivers evaporates, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous movement is crucial for distributing water and supporting life on Earth.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in Renaissance art.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who discovered electricity? While many scientists contributed to the understanding of electricity, Benjamin Franklin’s experiments with lightning in the 18th century were pivotal. He proved that lightning was a form of electricity, invented the lightning rod, and helped lay the foundation for future research. Later, scientists like Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday expanded on his work.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we celebrate Earth Day? Earth Day, celebrated on April 22, raises awareness about environmental protection and encourages actions to safeguard the planet. It began in 1970 and has become a global event with millions participating in cleanups, tree planting, and educational programs. Earth Day promotes sustainability and stewardship of natural resources.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion supports overall health and well-being.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring energy, repairing tissues, and consolidating memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems such as fatigue, poor concentration, and weakened immunity.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are designed to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are vital organs responsible for exchanging gases between the body and the environment. They take in oxygen during inhalation and release carbon dioxide during exhalation. Proper lung function is essential for delivering oxygen to tissues and maintaining overall health.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Bahamas during his voyage for Spain. However, indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years before his arrival. Columbus’s voyages opened the door for European exploration and colonization.
What is the capital city of Australia? Canberra is the capital city of Australia, chosen as a compromise between rivals Sydney and Melbourne. The city is home to the country’s government institutions, museums, and cultural sites. As a planned city, Canberra features wide boulevards, parks, and modern architecture.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall in autumn because trees prepare for winter by conserving water and energy. The reduction in sunlight and cooler temperatures trigger chemical changes that cause leaves to change color and eventually detach. This process helps trees survive harsh winter conditions and regrow new leaves in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the late 18th century. His innovations powered the Industrial Revolution by enabling machinery, locomotives, and ships to operate more efficiently. The steam engine transformed industries and transportation worldwide.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. Opened in 1869, it is one of the world’s most important waterways for global trade. The canal greatly reduces travel time and shipping costs for international commerce.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. The novel explores themes of love, morality, and social class in Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” remains a classic of English literature and is widely studied and adapted.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves transferring pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It can occur via wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, awarded in 1903 for her pioneering research on radioactivity. She shared the prize with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel. Marie Curie’s work laid the foundation for advances in nuclear science and medicine.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum, built nearly 2,000 years ago, was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles in ancient Rome. It is an architectural marvel and a testament to Roman engineering. Today, the Colosseum is a symbol of Rome’s history and attracts millions of tourists every year.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. During sleep, the brain processes experiences and prepares for the next day. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and long-term health problems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although some controversies remain about the accuracy of his expedition. His journey involved traveling over ice with sled dogs and enduring extreme conditions. The achievement was celebrated as a major milestone in exploration.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using bacteria or enzymes, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then pressed, salted, and aged to develop flavor and texture. Cheese-making is both a science and an art, with many varieties produced around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians. “Guernica” is one of Picasso’s most powerful and politically significant works.
What is the importance of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy consumption. By reusing plastic materials, we prevent them from ending up in landfills and oceans where they can harm wildlife. Recycling is a key part of efforts to build a more sustainable and environmentally friendly society.
Who discovered the law of buoyancy? Archimedes, a Greek mathematician and inventor, discovered the law of buoyancy in the 3rd century BCE. His principle explains why objects float or sink in fluids based on the displaced volume. Archimedes’ work is fundamental to physics and engineering.
What is the capital city of Brazil? Brasília is the capital of Brazil, designed and built in the late 1950s to promote development in the country’s interior. It is known for its modernist architecture and unique city planning. Brasília serves as the center of government and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was distributed. His invention enabled the mass production of books and contributed to the spread of literacy and knowledge. The printing press played a key role in the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their massive scale and precise construction have fascinated historians and engineers for centuries. The pyramids are a symbol of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain one of the world’s greatest architectural achievements.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy that explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. The play follows the rise and fall of Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” is renowned for its dramatic intensity and powerful language.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is vital for powering cellular activities. Cellular respiration is fundamental to the survival of all aerobic organisms.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight helped break barriers for women in aviation and inspired future generations. Earhart’s courage and achievements remain celebrated worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet enables instant communication, access to information, and online commerce, transforming the way people live and work. It has revolutionized education, entertainment, and social interaction. The Internet continues to drive innovation and connect people across the globe.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute," which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes of love and enlightenment. "The Magic Flute" remains one of Mozart’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity supports ecosystem health, provides resources such as food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. High biodiversity makes environments more resilient to change and supports a wide variety of life. Protecting biodiversity is critical for sustainability and the well-being of all species.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important for life on Earth? Photosynthesis is the process by which green plants and some other organisms use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process is essential because it produces oxygen for animals to breathe and forms the base of most food chains. Without photosynthesis, life as we know it could not exist on Earth.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how has it changed society? The World Wide Web was invented by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989, who developed a system for sharing information using hyperlinks and web pages. The invention revolutionized how people access information, communicate, and do business globally. Today, the web connects billions of people and supports countless applications in daily life.
What causes earthquakes and what impact do they have? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates beneath Earth's surface, which release energy as seismic waves. These natural events can result in widespread destruction, including collapsed buildings and infrastructure damage. Earthquakes also influence landscape formation and can trigger tsunamis or landslides.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in two different fields? Marie Curie was the first woman to win Nobel Prizes in two different fields—Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her work on radioactivity led to major advances in science and medicine. Curie’s achievements paved the way for future generations of women scientists.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is a massive fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is one of the world’s most iconic architectural achievements. The Wall also symbolizes China’s enduring strength and historical legacy.
Why do birds migrate and how do they navigate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, breeding grounds, or warmer climates, often traveling thousands of kilometers. They use environmental cues such as the sun, stars, and Earth’s magnetic field to navigate. Migration helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and what scenes are depicted? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the Creation of Adam and the Fall of Man. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements of Renaissance art.
What is DNA and why is it important for living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that stores genetic information in all living organisms. It determines traits, governs development, and controls cellular functions through coded instructions. Understanding DNA has led to breakthroughs in genetics, medicine, and forensic science.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously declared, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” Armstrong’s achievement marked a new era in space exploration and inspired future missions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues while removing waste products. It beats continuously, adjusting its rate to physical activity and emotional states. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and survival.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower are sustainable because they are replenished naturally and do not deplete resources. Using renewables reduces pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, helping combat climate change. Transitioning to renewable energy is key for a cleaner and more stable future.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet” and what is its main theme? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The play explores themes of revenge, madness, and moral corruption through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It remains one of the most influential works in Western literature.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach where acids and enzymes act, and finishes in the intestines. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized daily life by providing safe and reliable lighting. The light bulb paved the way for widespread electrification and modern convenience.
What causes the seasons to change throughout the year? The changing of seasons is caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles and intensities of sunlight in different regions throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova remains a pioneering figure in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems remain resilient to changes and provides resources such as food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is vital for environmental health and human survival.
Why do volcanoes erupt and what are their effects? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through vents. Eruptions can create new landforms, influence climate, and enrich soils, but also pose hazards to people and property. Studying volcanoes helps scientists predict eruptions and mitigate risks.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty narrative and timeless themes have made the book a classic.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it influence Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas emissions, leading to global warming. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is essential for addressing climate change.
Who composed the Ninth Symphony and what is its significance? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the Ninth Symphony, which is renowned for its final movement, “Ode to Joy.” The symphony celebrates human brotherhood and joy, and has been adopted as the anthem of the European Union. Beethoven’s Ninth remains one of the most celebrated works in classical music.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization. This process is often aided by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of many crops and wild plants.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary of New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic ascent was a milestone in mountaineering and inspired adventurers around the world. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human determination.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is essential for drinking, cooking, and sanitation. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which are caused by contaminated water. Access to clean water is fundamental for community health and development.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh winter conditions until resources are more plentiful. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears, bats, and some rodents.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, making voice communication over long distances possible. The telephone transformed business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for modern telecommunications.
How do solar panels produce electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, electrons are released, creating an electric current. Solar energy is renewable, clean, and increasingly used in homes and businesses.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce ATP, the energy currency. They convert nutrients into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for all cellular activities and overall organism health.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His team used sled dogs and careful planning to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement is recognized as a landmark in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are essential organs in the respiratory system that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. When we inhale, the lungs bring oxygen into the bloodstream, and when we exhale, they remove carbon dioxide produced by cells. Healthy lungs are vital for energy, metabolism, and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the journey from Dover to Calais in nearly 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s achievement inspired generations of long-distance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is a type of cell division in which a single cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and the maintenance of genetic stability in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures that each new cell receives a complete set of chromosomes.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The four distinct seasons—spring, summer, autumn, and winter—affect ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” which was published in 1847 and remains a classic of English literature. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. Its themes of love, morality, and social class continue to resonate with readers around the world.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without having to sail around Africa, greatly reducing travel time and costs. The canal is a vital link in global trade and strategic geopolitics.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection, hunting, or raising young. Group living can help individuals avoid predators, find food more efficiently, and care for offspring. Examples include wolves hunting in packs, birds flocking together, and primates forming social communities.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” and her activism helped promote international peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy endures as a symbol of dedication to nonviolence.
What is the process of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation from oceans and lakes, condensation to form clouds, precipitation as rain or snow, and runoff back to bodies of water. This cycle is crucial for distributing freshwater, supporting life, and regulating climate. Without the water cycle, ecosystems and agriculture would suffer.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions cause lava to build up above the ocean surface. Over time, repeated eruptions and accumulation of volcanic rock create new land masses. Famous examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were formed by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who painted the "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch artist of the 17th century, painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring." The artwork is celebrated for its radiant light, subtle details, and enigmatic expression. Vermeer’s technique and use of color make this painting a masterpiece of Baroque art.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to sustain life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflect on achievements, and spend time with loved ones. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and special foods. Birthdays are a way to honor an individual’s life and create lasting memories.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim is disputed. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme cold and difficult terrain using dog sleds and Inuit knowledge. The journey expanded human understanding of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation helps ensure a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Saving water also reduces energy use and protects natural habitats. With growing populations and climate change, water conservation is increasingly vital for human and environmental health.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall from trees in autumn as part of an adaptation to conserve water and energy during colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, trees reabsorb nutrients from their leaves and form a protective layer where the leaf meets the branch. This process prepares trees for winter and new growth in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it practical for use in industry and transportation. His innovations drove the Industrial Revolution, transforming manufacturing, mining, and travel. Watt’s contributions helped shape the modern world.
What is the role of the immune system? The immune system protects the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that work together to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for recovery from illness and long-term well-being.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling long distances to warmer waters.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, fate, and morality. The play explores the consequences of unchecked power through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks the throne. “Macbeth” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and political intrigue.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or wind. Pollination is vital for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of food crops.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help safeguard personal information, financial data, and communications. Strong passwords are essential for maintaining digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight demonstrated courage, skill, and determination, inspiring women in aviation and beyond. Earhart’s legacy continues to encourage exploration and breaking barriers.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise strengthens muscles and bones, improves cardiovascular health, and boosts mental well-being. Physical activity helps maintain a healthy weight, reduces the risk of chronic diseases, and increases energy levels. Exercise is an essential component of a healthy lifestyle.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking some or all of the sunlight for a short period. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses cover only part of it. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the refrigerator? Carl von Linde, a German engineer, developed the first practical mechanical refrigerator in 1876. His invention made it possible to preserve food safely and revolutionized food storage and transportation. Refrigerators are now an indispensable part of modern kitchens.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their larval stage to adulthood, involving significant changes in form and function. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do people vote in elections? Voting allows citizens to participate in the democratic process, influence government decisions, and hold leaders accountable. Elections give people a voice in shaping laws and policies that affect their lives. Voting is a fundamental right and responsibility in democratic societies.
Who painted the ceiling of the Palace of Versailles’ Hall of Mirrors? Charles Le Brun, a renowned French painter and decorator, designed and painted the magnificent ceiling of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles. His work celebrated the power and achievements of King Louis XIV. The Hall of Mirrors remains an iconic example of Baroque art and architecture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the method by which green plants use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place mainly in the leaves, where chlorophyll absorbs sunlight and initiates the chemical reactions. Photosynthesis not only sustains the plant but also provides oxygen for other living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan started the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe in 1519, although he died before the journey was completed. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and that the world's oceans are connected. This achievement was a milestone in global exploration and trade.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It helps regulate climate, replenish freshwater supplies, and sustain plant and animal life. Without the water cycle, ecosystems would collapse and water would become scarce.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, which gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, resulting in yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps the plant conserve energy for winter.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing people to talk over long distances. His invention paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication systems. Bell's work continues to influence how we connect with each other today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It has four chambers and beats continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is vital for overall well-being and energy.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or scarcity of food by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, bodily functions decrease dramatically, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears and bats.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is known for its mysterious smile and realistic detail, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The painting is displayed at the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her pioneering work on radioactivity. Curie's discoveries have had a profound impact on science and medicine.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, carries the genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to advances in medicine, genetics, and biotechnology.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They are architectural marvels and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously said, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," upon stepping onto the lunar surface. Armstrong's achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the function of kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems and human activities.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized indoor lighting and made electric illumination widely accessible. Edison's work paved the way for modern electrical infrastructure.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for overall health and vitality.
Why do people recycle? People recycle to reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution. Recycling helps save energy, decreases the need for new raw materials, and supports environmental sustainability. It is an important practice for protecting ecosystems and combating climate change.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it significant? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 after observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China's rich history. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who wrote the novel "Pride and Prejudice"? Jane Austen wrote "Pride and Prejudice," published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen's work is celebrated for its wit, insight, and enduring popularity.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the importance of pollinators in nature? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds play a crucial role in the reproduction of many plants by transferring pollen from one flower to another. This process enables fruit and seed production, supporting food webs and agriculture. Without pollinators, many ecosystems and crops would struggle to survive.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited the Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it vital? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process not only provides food for plants but also releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is essential for most living organisms. Photosynthesis forms the foundation of most food chains on Earth.
Why do earthquakes happen? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in the Earth’s crust shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement can cause the ground to shake and sometimes leads to significant damage to buildings and infrastructure. Earthquakes are most common near plate boundaries and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The book follows the adventures of Bilbo Baggins as he embarks on a quest with a group of dwarves to reclaim their treasure from a dragon. “The Hobbit” is a classic of fantasy literature and a precursor to Tolkien’s “The Lord of the Rings.”
What is the water cycle and how does it affect weather? The water cycle describes the movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water evaporates from oceans and lakes, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous cycle influences weather patterns and ensures the availability of fresh water.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, sharing the award with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel in 1903. Her research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that contains the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egypt. The Rosetta Stone remains one of the most important archaeological finds in history.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and laid the groundwork for modern telecommunications. Bell’s contributions extend to education and technology, making him a key figure in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and creativity.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion begins in the mouth, where food is broken down by chewing and saliva, and continues in the stomach and intestines with the help of enzymes and acids. Nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream, and waste is expelled from the body. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and health.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time of renewal and hope. People reflect on the past year, set goals, and participate in traditions like fireworks, parties, and making resolutions. The holiday is observed worldwide and brings communities together.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers globally. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the significance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects people, businesses, and governments across the globe, enabling instant communication, information sharing, and commerce. It has transformed education, entertainment, and social interaction, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she implemented major economic and political reforms and played a prominent role in international affairs. Thatcher’s legacy continues to influence British and global politics.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. Healthy heart function is vital for overall well-being and survival.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that makes leaves green, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This change helps plants prepare for winter by conserving energy and nutrients.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. His creation allowed documents and information to be linked and accessed via browsers, transforming communication and access to knowledge. The World Wide Web is now a fundamental part of daily life for billions.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to produce bread, beer, wine, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and is important in culinary traditions and industry.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressures remain relevant and widely studied.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power generate electricity without depleting natural resources or producing greenhouse gases. They help combat climate change and reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Investing in renewables supports a sustainable future and economic growth.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs can vary by species and even by individual, serving as identifiers and social signals. Birdsong is also important for maintaining ecological balance and biodiversity.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His achievement inspired swimmers worldwide and established the Channel as a major challenge in open water swimming. Webb’s endurance and determination are celebrated in sports history.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When you inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when you exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Caribbean, although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years prior. His voyages opened the way for widespread European exploration and colonization. Columbus’s journeys had profound effects on history, culture, and global trade.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in specialized structures called chloroplasts and helps supply much of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are organic compounds that the body requires in small amounts for normal growth, metabolism, and health. They help regulate vital processes such as immunity, cell repair, and energy production. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? “Jane Eyre” was written by Charlotte Brontë and published in 1847. The novel follows the life of an orphaned girl who overcomes hardship and finds love with Mr. Rochester. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong heroine and exploration of themes like independence and morality.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise improves cardiovascular health, strengthens muscles and bones, and helps maintain a healthy weight. It also boosts mood, reduces stress, and lowers the risk of chronic diseases. Incorporating physical activity into daily routines is key to long-term well-being.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a driving force behind the Industrial Revolution. His innovations enabled more efficient transportation and manufacturing. The steam engine changed society by powering trains, ships, and factories.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799, inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Hieroglyphic. It played a crucial role in deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or breeding grounds, often traveling vast distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environmental conditions. Famous migrations include the journey of monarch butterflies and the wildebeest of Africa.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. The artwork is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and environmental conditions, often driven by human activities. It affects ecosystems, food security, and global health. Addressing climate change is critical for protecting the planet and future generations.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Her leadership, known as the “Thatcher era,” was marked by significant economic reforms and a strong stance in international affairs. She remains a controversial and influential figure in British history.
What is the process of sedimentation in rivers? Sedimentation is the accumulation of particles like sand, silt, and clay in riverbeds, lakes, or reservoirs. This process shapes landscapes, creates fertile soils, and can influence water quality. Human activities such as dam construction can accelerate sedimentation and affect aquatic habitats.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with mates, defend territory, and warn of danger. Songs and calls vary among species and can even help identify individuals. Birdsong plays a role in social bonding and the maintenance of healthy ecosystems.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” one of his most famous tragedies, around 1606. The play explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of the Scottish general Macbeth. “Macbeth” remains a staple of theater and literature worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is often credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though later research has questioned his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme conditions and helped expand geographic knowledge of the polar region. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for explorers today.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated worldwide with festivities, fireworks, and traditions. It offers a chance to reflect on the past, set goals for the future, and spend time with loved ones. The holiday is observed in diverse ways across cultures.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm that work together to facilitate breathing. This system is vital for delivering oxygen to the bloodstream and removing metabolic waste.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medal in the modern era was awarded to James Connolly in 1896 for the triple jump event in Athens. His victory marked the beginning of the tradition of awarding gold medals for first place. Connolly's achievement is remembered as a milestone in Olympic history.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period in Europe? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, leading to a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced influential figures such as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for the modern age through its emphasis on humanism and innovation.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants require sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process in which they convert light energy into chemical energy for growth and survival. Sunlight enables the production of glucose, which fuels cellular activities and development. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to thrive or reproduce.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, discovered the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His three laws describe how planets orbit the sun in elliptical paths and how their speed varies depending on their distance from the sun. Kepler’s findings were foundational for later astronomical research.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using enzymes and bacteria, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then shaped, pressed, and aged to develop flavor and texture. The process varies depending on the type of cheese, resulting in a wide variety of tastes and appearances.
Why is the Pacific Ocean important? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than one-third of the planet’s surface. It plays a critical role in regulating global climate, supporting biodiversity, and enabling international trade. Its vast resources and strategic location make it essential for economic and environmental stability.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it more efficient and practical for industrial use. His innovations powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society worldwide.
What is the importance of sleep for children? Sleep is crucial for children’s physical and mental development, supporting growth, learning, and emotional well-being. It helps regulate hormones, strengthens the immune system, and consolidates memories. Lack of sleep can lead to behavioral issues, poor academic performance, and health problems.
What is global warming and why is it a concern? Global warming refers to the long-term rise in Earth's average temperature due to increased greenhouse gas emissions from human activities. It leads to melting glaciers, rising sea levels, and more extreme weather events. Addressing global warming is critical to protecting ecosystems and human societies.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which became a classic of American literature. The novel explores themes of adolescence, alienation, and identity through the character Holden Caulfield. Its impact has endured, influencing generations of readers and writers.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone was key to understanding the language and culture of ancient Egypt.
Why do animals form herds or flocks? Animals form herds or flocks for protection, efficient foraging, and social interaction. Group living helps reduce the risk of predation, increases chances of finding food, and facilitates mating. These behaviors are common in many species, including birds, mammals, and fish.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her feat demonstrated courage and skill, inspiring women to pursue careers in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and gender equality.
What is the importance of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, oxygen, and nutrients throughout the body and removes waste products. Composed of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, it supports organ function and overall health. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, healing, and survival.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used mechanical relays to perform calculations and laid the foundation for modern computing. Zuse’s work influenced subsequent developments in computer technology.
What is the process of digestion in animals? Digestion in animals involves breaking down food into smaller molecules that can be absorbed and used for energy, growth, and repair. It starts with ingestion, followed by mechanical and chemical processing in the digestive tract. Enzymes and acids facilitate the conversion of food into nutrients.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like wind, solar, and hydro power are sustainable and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. They help lower pollution, mitigate climate change, and provide long-term energy security. Transitioning to renewables is essential for protecting the environment and supporting future generations.
Who painted the masterpiece “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians with powerful imagery. “Guernica” is considered one of the most important anti-war artworks of the 20th century.
What is the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis? Chlorophyll is a green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling the process of photosynthesis. It captures light energy and helps convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced extreme cold, ice hazards, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 that reshaped nations, societies, and international relations. It involved major powers, resulted in millions of deaths, and led to the creation of the United Nations. The war’s consequences continue to influence global politics and culture.
Why do we need water to survive? Water is essential for all living organisms as it supports cellular processes, regulates body temperature, and aids digestion. It acts as a solvent, transports nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The play centers on the character Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army, and his downfall due to manipulation. “Othello” is recognized for its psychological depth and enduring relevance.
What is the process of cell division in living organisms? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a parent cell splits to create two identical daughter cells. This process is fundamental for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Proper cell division ensures genetic material is accurately distributed to new cells.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited Earth aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s journey opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the importance of education for society? Education empowers individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking, enabling them to contribute to their communities and economies. It promotes equality, innovation, and democratic values. A well-educated society is better equipped to solve problems and adapt to change.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate traditions, beliefs, and heritage, bringing communities together in joy and reflection. They foster understanding, preserve customs, and strengthen social bonds. Festivals often include music, dance, food, and rituals that highlight the diversity of human experience.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing communication and the spread of knowledge. His invention made books and written materials more accessible, promoting literacy and learning. The printing press is considered one of the most important innovations in history.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and neutralize pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the role of the atmosphere on Earth? The atmosphere acts as a protective shield around Earth, absorbing harmful solar radiation and maintaining the planet’s temperature. It contains the air we breathe—mainly nitrogen and oxygen—and supports weather systems. Without the atmosphere, life as we know it would not be possible.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in the human body? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered and described the circulation of blood in 1628. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed system, revolutionizing medical science. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
Why do we use currency in trade? Currency provides a standardized medium of exchange that makes buying and selling goods and services easier and more efficient. It replaced the barter system, allowing societies to grow and economies to expand. Modern currencies can be coins, paper money, or digital forms.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle ensures the continuous movement of water between Earth’s surface and the atmosphere through evaporation, condensation, and precipitation. It is vital for replenishing freshwater sources, supporting agriculture, and regulating climate. The water cycle sustains all life on the planet.
Who invented the steam engine and why was it important? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. The steam engine powered factories, ships, and trains, fueling the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed society, leading to rapid technological and economic progress.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Like plants, algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place in specialized cell structures called chloroplasts. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates beneath Earth’s surface shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can cause the ground to shake, sometimes resulting in significant destruction. Monitoring earthquakes helps scientists understand Earth’s structure and prepare for natural disasters.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. This iconic surrealist artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting remains a powerful example of creativity and imagination in modern art.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against harmful invaders such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It consists of organs, cells, and proteins that identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or to reproduce, often traveling hundreds or thousands of miles. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include monarch butterflies, whales, and many bird species.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and connected by oceans. The expedition expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact the planet? The greenhouse effect is caused by gases like carbon dioxide and methane trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excessive greenhouse gases lead to global warming. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for fighting climate change.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein” in 1818, creating the tale of Victor Frankenstein and his monstrous creation. The novel explores themes of science, ambition, and ethical responsibility. Shelley’s work is considered a cornerstone of both science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water, which are naturally replenished and do not run out. It helps reduce pollution, mitigates climate change, and provides sustainable power for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and healthier planet.
Why do we experience seasons? Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the cyclical changes of temperature and daylight known as seasons. The pattern influences ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, transforming how people communicate and access information. His creation allowed for the easy sharing of documents and data across the globe. The World Wide Web is now a crucial part of modern life, from education to commerce.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian monuments built over 4,500 years ago as tombs for pharaohs. Their massive size and precise construction have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the ingenuity and ambition of ancient civilizations.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova of the Soviet Union became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard the Vostok 6 spacecraft. Her mission proved that women could endure the challenges of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It operates continuously and adapts to the animal’s activity level and environment. A healthy heart is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do people recycle and what are the benefits? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve resources, and minimize environmental pollution. By processing materials like paper, glass, and metal for reuse, recycling saves energy and lowers greenhouse gas emissions. It contributes to sustainable living and a healthier planet.
Who discovered penicillin and what was its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical advances in history.
What is the importance of education in society? Education provides individuals with the knowledge and skills needed to solve problems, innovate, and contribute to their communities. It promotes equality, reduces poverty, and drives economic growth. A well-educated population strengthens democratic institutions and fosters social progress.
Who wrote “The Odyssey”? Homer, an ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Odyssey,” an epic poem recounting Odysseus’s journey home after the Trojan War. The story explores themes of heroism, loyalty, and the human struggle against adversity. “The Odyssey” has influenced literature and storytelling for millennia.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, specifically mitosis, is the process by which a cell splits to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, development, and tissue repair in multicellular organisms. Accurate cell division ensures genetic material is properly passed on.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, or magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and escapes through openings. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy exists over his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme cold and dangerous conditions. His achievement expanded our understanding of polar geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that captures sunlight for photosynthesis, converting light energy into chemical energy. It gives plants their green color and is vital for producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not sustain life on Earth.
What is the importance of the Sun for life on Earth? The Sun is the primary source of energy for all life on Earth, providing light and warmth that sustains ecosystems. Its energy drives photosynthesis in plants, which forms the basis of most food chains. Without the Sun, Earth would be cold, dark, and incapable of supporting life.
Who discovered the law of gravity and how did it change science? Sir Isaac Newton discovered the law of gravity in the 17th century, explaining how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights unified the motion of celestial bodies and objects on Earth, laying the foundation for classical physics. Newton’s work transformed scientific understanding and influenced countless discoveries.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the air we breathe. Oxygen enters the bloodstream in the lungs, while carbon dioxide is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Why do plants need water to grow? Water is critical for plants because it transports nutrients, maintains cell structure, and enables photosynthesis. It also helps regulate temperature and keeps tissues turgid. Without water, plants wilt, cannot make food, and eventually die.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, a scientist who creates a living being from dead body parts. Shelley’s work explores themes of ambition, ethics, and the consequences of unchecked scientific progress.
What is the process of metamorphosis in butterflies? Metamorphosis in butterflies involves four stages: egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa (chrysalis), and adult. During the pupal stage, the caterpillar undergoes dramatic changes to become a butterfly. This process allows butterflies to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do seasons change throughout the year? Seasons change because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun. This tilt causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter in a predictable cycle.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a historic achievement in space exploration. Gagarin’s flight paved the way for future missions and inspired generations.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis. It converts solar energy into chemical energy, providing food and oxygen for nearly all living organisms. Without chlorophyll, plants could not survive or sustain life on Earth.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, or magma, beneath Earth’s surface. When the pressure becomes too great, magma escapes through cracks, causing an eruption. Volcanic eruptions can shape landscapes, create new land, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work is foundational to today’s global communication networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, symbolizing renewal and hope. People celebrate with parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is a time for reflection, resolutions, and welcoming fresh opportunities.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Bible, including the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The chapel attracts millions of visitors annually who marvel at Michelangelo’s genius.
What is the importance of biodiversity in nature? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems stay healthy and resilient to changes, providing food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is essential for environmental stability and human well-being.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold weather or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it important? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in a petri dish. Penicillin became the first widely used antibiotic, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Its discovery marked a turning point in the fight against bacterial infections.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize Egypt’s rich cultural heritage and achievements in architecture.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the tragedy “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and frequently performed works.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for our planet’s future.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” Thatcher led significant economic and political reforms. Her leadership reshaped British society and influenced global politics.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewables is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
How do magnets work and what are their uses? Magnets create a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and influences electric currents. They are used in compasses, motors, generators, and data storage devices. Magnets play a vital role in everyday technology and scientific research.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share and access information online through websites and browsers. His invention transformed communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an essential part of daily life worldwide.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This is crucial for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle affects sleep, animal behavior, and daily activities.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy remains. His expedition overcame extreme cold and treacherous ice to achieve this goal. The journey expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the significance of Stonehenge? Stonehenge is a prehistoric monument in England consisting of a ring of massive standing stones. Archaeologists believe it was constructed as a ceremonial or astronomical site over 4,000 years ago. Its mysterious origins and impressive engineering continue to fascinate researchers and visitors alike.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which drastically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work helped save millions of lives and paved the way for further advances in immunology. Salk chose not to patent the vaccine, prioritizing public health over personal profit.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity also contributes significantly to Earth’s oxygen supply.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun combined with their own inertia. The balance between gravity and forward motion keeps planets in stable paths called orbits. This principle, explained by Isaac Newton, governs the motion of all objects in our solar system.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational work in Western literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the importance of wetlands? Wetlands are ecosystems where land is saturated with water, providing habitat for many species of plants and animals. They act as natural filters, purifying water and controlling floods. Wetlands also store carbon, helping to mitigate climate change, and support biodiversity.
How does a tornado form? Tornadoes form when warm, moist air meets cold, dry air, creating instability in the atmosphere. If wind speeds at different altitudes vary, a rotating column of air called a mesocyclone can develop. When this column touches the ground, it becomes a tornado, capable of causing significant damage.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works, including “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” are known for their imaginative storytelling and vivid descriptions of Swedish life. Lagerlöf’s achievement paved the way for future female writers.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. The type and appearance of clouds depend on atmospheric conditions and altitude.
Why do whales migrate? Whales migrate to find food and suitable breeding grounds, often traveling thousands of kilometers each year. They move between cold, nutrient-rich waters for feeding and warmer regions for mating and giving birth. Migration helps whales survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible via browsers. His invention revolutionized how people communicate, share information, and conduct business globally. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern digital age.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are organs that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is removed. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall health.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetized needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward magnetic north. This allows travelers and navigators to determine directions and find their way. Compasses have been vital tools for exploration and navigation throughout history.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The work features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting is considered an iconic masterpiece of surrealism.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It works to address global challenges such as poverty, human rights, and climate change. The UN provides a forum for dialogue and collective action on important issues.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe, sheltered place for their eggs and young. Nests protect offspring from predators and harsh weather, and their construction varies widely among species. Building and maintaining nests is a key part of many birds’ reproductive strategies.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in humans? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered the circulation of blood in the early 17th century. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed circuit. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? Mark Twain wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,” published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood adventures along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work is celebrated for its humor, social commentary, and vivid depiction of American life.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is crucial for global trade and international relations.
How do plants absorb nutrients from the soil? Plants absorb nutrients through their roots, which take in water and dissolved minerals. The nutrients are transported up to the leaves, where they support growth and photosynthesis. Healthy soil and root systems are essential for robust plant development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though there is some controversy about his claim. His expedition marked a milestone in polar exploration and inspired future adventurers. The journey required overcoming extreme conditions and logistical challenges.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria and provides the energy needed for cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for life in animals, plants, and many microorganisms.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates that make up Earth's crust. When plates shift or collide, energy is released in the form of seismic waves, which we feel as shaking. Earthquakes can cause destruction but also help shape landscapes over time.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends elements of fantasy, comedy, and symbolism, and is celebrated for its innovative music and storytelling. “The Magic Flute” remains one of Mozart’s most popular and influential works.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that was key to deciphering hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone enabled scholars to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used electromechanical relays and could perform complex calculations automatically. Zuse’s work laid the groundwork for modern computing technology.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin is the body’s largest organ, providing a protective barrier against pathogens, injury, and dehydration. It regulates temperature, produces vitamin D, and contains sensory receptors. Healthy skin is vital for overall well-being and disease prevention.
Why do dolphins communicate with clicks and whistles? Dolphins use clicks and whistles to communicate with each other, navigate, and hunt for food. These sounds can convey information about identity, location, and emotional state. Dolphin communication is highly sophisticated and reflects their intelligence and social nature.
Who wrote “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The fantasy novel follows Bilbo Baggins on a quest to win a share of a dragon’s treasure. Tolkien’s imaginative world laid the foundation for his later work, “The Lord of the Rings,” and inspired countless adaptations.
What is the importance of the Pacific Ocean? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than 60 million square miles. It serves as a major route for global trade and influences weather patterns around the world. The Pacific is home to countless marine species and supports important ecosystems from coral reefs to coastal rainforests.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it change society? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a practical source of power for factories, trains, and ships. The steam engine fueled the Industrial Revolution, transforming transportation and manufacturing. Watt’s innovation led to rapid economic growth and urbanization.
What is the function of white blood cells in humans? White blood cells are an essential part of the immune system, defending the body against infections and diseases. They patrol the bloodstream and tissues, identifying and destroying harmful bacteria, viruses, and other invaders. A healthy count of white blood cells is vital for fighting illness and maintaining health.
Why do deserts form? Deserts form in areas where rainfall is very low, often due to geographic factors such as mountains blocking moist air or high pressure zones that prevent cloud formation. The lack of water leads to sparse vegetation and extreme temperature variations. Deserts can be hot or cold and are found on every continent.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating the challenges of adolescence and identity in New York City. The novel’s themes of alienation and rebellion have made it a lasting classic in American literature.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, marking a rebirth of art, science, and learning. Figures like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo made lasting contributions. The period laid the foundation for the modern world by encouraging creativity and critical thinking.
How does the circulatory system work? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, and oxygen throughout the body using the heart, arteries, veins, and capillaries. It also helps remove waste products like carbon dioxide. Proper circulation is necessary for organ function, temperature regulation, and overall health.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring flight from Newfoundland to Ireland broke records and inspired millions around the world. Earhart’s achievements advanced women’s roles in aviation and remain legendary today.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from a flower’s male part to its female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or the wind and is essential for the reproduction of many plants. Pollination supports food production, biodiversity, and healthy ecosystems.
Why do we experience eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, such as when the Moon passes between the Earth and Sun (solar eclipse) or the Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). Eclipses provide valuable opportunities for scientific study and have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the computer mouse? Douglas Engelbart invented the computer mouse in the 1960s while working at Stanford Research Institute. His invention allowed users to interact with computers through a simple point-and-click interface. The mouse revolutionized computing and remains an essential tool for navigating digital environments.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. The stone’s discovery unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which anchor them in the soil and draw up resources via specialized cells. Water and minerals travel through the stem to the leaves, where they support processes like photosynthesis. Healthy roots are essential for plant growth and resilience.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated the limits of human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in open-water swimming.
What is the importance of the printing press? The printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century, allowed for the mass production of books and the spread of information. It made knowledge more accessible, contributed to rising literacy rates, and helped fuel the Renaissance and Reformation. The printing press is considered one of the most influential inventions in history.
Why do animals form packs or herds? Animals form packs or herds to improve their chances of survival by finding food, defending against predators, and protecting their young. Social groups also enable cooperation for tasks like hunting and migration. Herd behavior can be seen in species ranging from wolves to elephants.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores the destructive power of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” is one of Shakespeare’s darkest and most frequently performed tragedies.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when organic remains are buried by sediment and slowly replaced by minerals over millions of years. This process preserves the shapes of ancient plants and animals, providing clues to Earth’s history. Fossils help scientists study evolution, extinction, and past environments.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed the existence of a negatively charged particle smaller than an atom, transforming our understanding of atomic structure. The discovery of the electron laid the groundwork for modern physics and electronics.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, greatly shortening the route for ships traveling between Europe and Asia. Opened in 1869, it is a critical artery for global trade and has played a strategic role in international affairs. The canal continues to be vital for commerce and navigation.
How do bees produce honey? Bees produce honey by collecting nectar from flowers and storing it in their hives. They use enzymes to break down the nectar and then evaporate excess water to create the thick, sweet substance. Honey serves as food for the bee colony and has been harvested by humans for thousands of years.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering and inspired countless adventurers. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It addresses global challenges like poverty, human rights, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a platform for diplomacy and international collaboration.
Why do we need a balanced diet? A balanced diet provides the body with essential nutrients like carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals. Proper nutrition supports growth, energy, immune function, and overall health. Eating a variety of foods helps prevent deficiency diseases and supports long-term well-being.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for breathing and energy production.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War and the hero Achilles. The poem explores themes of honor, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational text in Western literature.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation ensures that clean, fresh water is available for drinking, agriculture, industry, and natural ecosystems. Conserving water helps prevent shortages, reduces energy use, and protects the environment. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using water wisely make a big difference.
What is the purpose of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on international public health. It coordinates efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and promote health education worldwide. WHO also responds to global emergencies and sets international health standards.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the geographic North Pole in 1909, though the claim has been debated. His expedition faced extreme cold, dangerous ice, and logistical challenges. Peary’s journey inspired further Arctic exploration and scientific study.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a critical role in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of the food web. They also contribute significantly to global oxygen production.
Why do we experience wind on Earth? Wind is caused by the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun, which creates differences in air pressure. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, resulting in wind. Winds help distribute heat, influence weather patterns, and are used as a renewable energy source.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? “Macbeth” was written by William Shakespeare in the early 17th century and is one of his most famous tragedies. The play explores ambition, guilt, and the supernatural through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” continues to be studied and performed worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and online commerce. It has transformed education, business, and social relationships, making the world more interconnected than ever. The Internet drives innovation and economic growth in nearly every sector.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to control and nearly eradicate the disease. His work saved countless lives and demonstrated the power of scientific research. The vaccine’s success led to widespread immunization campaigns around the world.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that provided the key to understanding hieroglyphic writing. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Its decipherment unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
Why do animals adapt to their environment? Animals adapt to their environment to survive and reproduce under changing conditions. Adaptations may involve physical traits, behaviors, or physiological changes that offer advantages in food gathering, predator avoidance, or climate tolerance. Over time, adaptation leads to evolution and biodiversity.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, completing the journey in just under 15 hours. Her achievement broke records and inspired generations of female aviators. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of courage and progress in aviation.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources that are replenished, such as sunlight, wind, and water. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps fight climate change. Investing in renewable energy supports a sustainable future for people and the planet.
Who painted the “Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus Christ’s final meal with his disciples before his crucifixion. It is renowned for its composition, emotional impact, and artistic innovation.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the mechanism by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over generations, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his influential work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Earth’s tilt relative to its orbit around the sun causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the changes in temperature and weather known as seasons. The cycle of seasons affects ecosystems, agriculture, and human activities.
Who was the first person to successfully swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, covering the distance between England and France in just under 22 hours. His feat was considered extraordinary at the time and sparked interest in long-distance swimming. Today, crossing the channel remains a prestigious challenge for swimmers.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall vitality in mammals.
Who discovered the structure of the atom? Ernest Rutherford conducted experiments in the early 20th century that led to the discovery of the atom’s structure, including its nucleus. His work revealed that atoms consist of a dense central nucleus surrounded by electrons. Rutherford’s findings laid the foundation for modern atomic theory.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 involving most of the world’s nations. It led to significant changes in political boundaries, technological advancements, and the establishment of the United Nations. The war’s impact continues to shape international relations and historical understanding.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again. Hibernation is common among mammals such as bears, bats, and ground squirrels.
Who invented the microscope? Zacharias Janssen, a Dutch spectacle-maker, is credited with inventing the first compound microscope in the late 16th century. The microscope revolutionized science by allowing observation of tiny organisms and cells. Later improvements by scientists like Antonie van Leeuwenhoek expanded its use in research and medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet and making life possible. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, is credited with composing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and conflict and has influenced Western literature for centuries. “The Iliad” is still studied and admired for its storytelling and cultural impact.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to produce foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer. Fermentation enhances flavors, preserves food, and has played a role in human diets for thousands of years.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with each other, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs and calls vary between species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is important for social bonding, reproduction, and maintaining ecological balance.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the voyage, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do solar panels work to generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy through a process called the photovoltaic effect. When sunlight strikes the cells, electrons are released and generate a flow of electricity. Solar power is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that features the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher hieroglyphics, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum and remains an iconic symbol of linguistic discovery.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement broke barriers for women in aviation and inspired generations to pursue their dreams. Earhart’s courage and adventurous spirit continue to captivate people worldwide.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, water, and carbon dioxide. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides the ATP needed for all cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for the survival of most living organisms.
Why do we have eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, most commonly when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun (solar eclipse) or when Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). These events happen due to the alignment of the Sun, Earth, and Moon. Eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are important for scientific study.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847 under the pen name Currer Bell. The novel explores themes of independence, morality, and romance through the life of its strong-willed heroine. “Jane Eyre” is considered a classic of English literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy pathogens such as bacteria and viruses, and also play a role in inflammation and healing. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for overall immunity.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, to hunt more efficiently, or to care for young. Social living can also help individuals find mates and share resources. Group behavior is seen in many species, from mammals like wolves to insects like bees.
What is the importance of the Industrial Revolution? The Industrial Revolution, which began in the late 18th century, marked a major turning point in history with the rise of factories, urbanization, and new technologies. It transformed economies from agrarian to industrial and improved transportation and communication. The Industrial Revolution greatly increased productivity but also brought social and environmental challenges.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments using cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms were made up of smaller particles, changing our understanding of matter. The discovery of the electron paved the way for advancements in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur via wind, water, or animals like bees and butterflies. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do we need exercise? Regular exercise helps maintain physical and mental health, strengthen muscles and bones, and boost the immune system. It also reduces the risk of chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity. Exercise improves mood and energy levels, contributing to overall well-being.
Who was the first person to discover America? Although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years, Christopher Columbus is often credited in Western history for “discovering” America in 1492. He landed in the Caribbean while searching for a route to Asia. His voyages led to lasting contact between Europe and the Americas, changing the course of history.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for protecting the environment.
Why do plants need sunlight? Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy for growth. Sunlight allows plants to produce food, oxygen, and other vital compounds. Without sufficient light, plants cannot thrive and ecosystems suffer.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian composer, wrote “The Four Seasons” in 1723. This set of violin concertos vividly depicts the changing seasons through music, with lively melodies and dramatic contrasts. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular works in classical music.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Proper circulation is essential for energy, temperature regulation, and health.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work laid the foundation for the widespread use of electricity.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It coordinates humanitarian aid, supports development, and works to resolve conflicts through diplomacy. The UN also upholds human rights and addresses global challenges like climate change.
Why do turtles lay eggs on beaches? Female turtles lay eggs on beaches because the sand provides a safe and warm environment for incubation. After hatching, the young turtles make their way to the ocean, facing many dangers along the way. This reproductive strategy helps turtles maintain their populations, despite high mortality rates.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy surrounds this claim. Peary’s expedition endured extreme cold and hardship to accomplish the feat. Reaching the North Pole was a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer, enhancing flavor and shelf life. Fermentation has been practiced for thousands of years and is vital in culinary traditions.
Why do people learn foreign languages? Learning foreign languages improves communication, expands cultural understanding, and opens up opportunities for travel and work. It also enhances cognitive abilities and can make learning other subjects easier. Multilingualism is increasingly valuable in our interconnected world.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus tells his disciples that one of them will betray him. “The Last Supper” is renowned for its composition, emotion, and technical innovation.
What is the importance of clean air? Clean air is necessary for health, as polluted air can cause respiratory problems, heart disease, and other illnesses. It also supports ecosystems and agriculture by providing oxygen and reducing toxins. Efforts to reduce air pollution benefit both people and the environment.
Who was the first person to swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, completing the journey in less than 22 hours. His feat was celebrated as a triumph of endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in the world of sports.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It involves phases such as prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Proper mitosis ensures genetic material is accurately passed to new cells.
Why do we celebrate birthdays? Birthdays mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and are celebrated to honor their life and achievements. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and well wishes from family and friends. Celebrating birthdays strengthens social bonds and provides an opportunity for reflection and joy.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she led significant economic and political reforms and played a major role on the international stage. Thatcher’s leadership continues to influence British politics.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Common methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination or UV exposure. Clean water is essential for public health and daily life.
Why do bees make honey? Bees make honey by collecting nectar from flowers and converting it into a sweet, viscous substance through enzymatic processes. Honey serves as a food source for bees during winter and poor weather. It is also harvested by humans and valued for its nutrition and medicinal properties.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to access and share information online through interconnected documents. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an indispensable part of modern life.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When we inhale, oxygen passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism, is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy, cellular function, and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to successfully circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519 and completed by his crew in 1522 after Magellan’s death. This journey proved that the Earth is round and that the world’s oceans are interconnected. The voyage marked a milestone in global exploration and navigation.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a developmental transformation that insects undergo from one stage of life to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar changes into a butterfly through several stages including pupa and adult. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and roles during their life cycle.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that regulate metabolism, support immunity, and aid in growth and repair. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained through food. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to health problems such as fatigue, weakened immune function, and disease.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the 18th century. His innovations greatly increased efficiency and paved the way for the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 and was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Featuring the same text in three scripts—hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek—the stone allowed scholars to understand ancient Egyptian writing and history. Its discovery opened new doors to Egyptology and the study of ancient civilizations.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, temporarily blocking the Sun’s light. This alignment can result in a partial or total eclipse, depending on the observer’s location. Solar eclipses are rare and dramatic events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818, which is widely considered the first science fiction novel. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the limits of scientific ambition. Shelley’s work has inspired countless adaptations and remains relevant in discussions about ethics and technology.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer sits in the Earth’s stratosphere and absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. Without this protective layer, living organisms would be at greater risk of cancer, cataracts, and other health issues. International efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have helped restore and protect this vital shield.
Why do rivers meander? Rivers meander because flowing water erodes the outer banks and deposits sediment on the inner banks of bends, causing the river’s path to curve over time. This natural process creates winding channels and floodplains. Meandering helps distribute sediment and nutrients, supporting diverse ecosystems along the river.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, becoming the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is widely used in baking, brewing, and preserving foods such as bread, beer, and yogurt. Fermentation not only enhances flavors but also increases food safety and nutritional value.
How do magnets work? Magnets have a magnetic field created by the movement and alignment of electrons within the material. This field attracts certain metals, such as iron, and allows magnets to interact with other objects. Magnets are used in many everyday devices, including motors, compasses, and data storage tools.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The artwork, known for its swirling skies and vibrant colors, is considered a masterpiece of post-impressionist art. “The Starry Night” has inspired countless artists and is admired worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature drops and physiological activity slows down, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and certain rodents.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing how information is accessed and shared online. His invention enabled the creation of web browsers and websites, leading to the digital age. Today, the World Wide Web is an integral part of daily life and commerce.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His historic step marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement demonstrated human ingenuity and the possibilities of science and technology.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by natural forces such as water, wind, or ice. It shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Human activities like deforestation can accelerate erosion and lead to environmental challenges.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks power at any cost. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most performed and studied plays.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do airplanes stay in the air? Airplanes stay in the air by generating lift through their wings, which have a shape that causes air to move faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey faced extreme cold, difficult terrain, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals and humans? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It adapts to activity levels and environmental changes, working continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is crucial for survival and overall well-being.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries around the world. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, coordinating humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like poverty and climate change. The UN also helps uphold human rights and supports development initiatives worldwide.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, formulated the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His work described how planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun, which improved upon previous models. Kepler’s laws played a crucial role in the development of modern astronomy and physics.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Proper digestion is essential for maintaining good health and supporting all bodily functions.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, called magma, beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence, love, and self-respect. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong, complex heroine and its exploration of social class, morality, and gender roles.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth’s resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How do bees contribute to the environment? Bees play a critical role in pollinating plants, which helps produce fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Their pollination supports biodiversity and stable food supplies for both humans and wildlife. Without bees, many crops and wild plants would struggle to survive, making them essential for healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, earning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity transformed science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields worldwide.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system enables humans to breathe in oxygen and expel carbon dioxide. It consists of organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, working together to support cellular respiration. Proper functioning of this system is vital for maintaining energy levels and overall health.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo by boat? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail solo around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the Spray was chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” which became a classic of maritime literature. Slocum’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo navigation and inspired generations of sailors.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its inscription in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—enabled scholars to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs for the first time. Understanding the Rosetta Stone opened the door to learning about Egypt’s ancient history and culture.
How do plants adapt to dry environments? Plants in dry environments often develop adaptations such as deep roots, thick waxy cuticles, or the ability to store water in stems and leaves. Some also use strategies like closing their stomata during the day to reduce water loss. These adaptations improve survival in arid climates and allow plants to thrive where water is scarce.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s. His work helped eradicate polio in many parts of the world, saving countless lives and preventing paralysis. Salk famously chose not to patent the vaccine, making it widely accessible to those in need.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are driven by wind, water temperature differences, salinity, and the rotation of Earth. These currents help distribute heat and nutrients across the globe, influencing weather patterns and marine ecosystems. Understanding ocean currents is vital for navigation, climate science, and preserving ocean health.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic material is copied accurately and passed on to new cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection against predators, increased hunting efficiency, and social interaction. Group living can also help with raising young and defending territory. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds flocking together during migration.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s struggle for independence and love, set against the harsh realities of Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong protagonist and exploration of themes like morality, class, and gender.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a platform for resolving international conflicts, coordinating humanitarian aid, and supporting human rights. The UN’s agencies also address global challenges such as health, education, and environmental protection.
How do vaccines help prevent disease? Vaccines introduce a weakened or inactive form of a pathogen to stimulate the immune system. This prepares the body to recognize and fight the real disease if exposed in the future. Vaccines have been instrumental in controlling and eradicating diseases like smallpox, polio, and measles.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team, which included Matthew Henson and several Inuit guides, endured extreme cold and treacherous conditions. Peary’s accomplishment remains a milestone in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of chambers and valves that ensure blood flows in the correct direction. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and supports activity, growth, and development.
Why do we experience weather changes? Weather changes occur due to interactions between the sun’s energy, the atmosphere, oceans, and land surfaces. Factors like air pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind shape daily weather patterns. These changes affect agriculture, transportation, and daily life around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a powerful protest against the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural uses dramatic black, white, and gray tones to depict the horrors of war and human suffering. “Guernica” remains a symbol of anti-war sentiment and artistic expression.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It facilitated the exchange of goods, cultures, religions, and ideas, shaping world history. The Silk Road’s legacy continues to influence global commerce and cultural diversity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966. She was known for her strong leadership, economic reforms, and controversial emergency rule. Gandhi’s tenure left a lasting impact on Indian politics and society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in producing oxygen and supporting aquatic food webs. Their ability to photosynthesize is essential for marine ecosystems and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic eruptions create new landforms and affect climate and ecosystems.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most significant breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the environment? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, was the first person to walk in space in 1965. He spent over 12 minutes outside his spacecraft, connected by a tether and facing unexpected challenges. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future spacewalks and advancements in space exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
How do airplanes generate lift to fly? Airplanes generate lift by moving air over their wings, which are shaped to create a pressure difference. Faster airflow above the wing and slower airflow below causes the aircraft to rise. Engines provide thrust, while control surfaces help steer and stabilize the plane.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experimentation, only to face tragic consequences. “Frankenstein” explores themes of ambition, isolation, and the dangers of unchecked scientific pursuit.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell, generating energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do we have seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s accomplishment became a symbol of human endurance and inspired future swimmers.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process can be carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was instrumental in deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three languages: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. By comparing these, scholars were able to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs and better understand Egypt’s history.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to combat a disease that caused paralysis and death worldwide. His vaccine was administered to millions of children and led to a dramatic decline in polio cases. Salk’s work paved the way for global vaccination campaigns and public health improvements.
What is the function of the atmosphere on Earth? Earth’s atmosphere protects living organisms by blocking harmful solar radiation and regulating temperature. It provides the oxygen necessary for respiration and enables weather systems that distribute water and heat. The atmosphere is crucial for sustaining life and maintaining environmental balance.
Why do leaves appear green in spring and summer? Leaves appear green due to the presence of chlorophyll, a pigment that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. During spring and summer, chlorophyll is abundant as plants actively produce food. In autumn, chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments and causing leaves to change color.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works often draw on folklore and regional history, with “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils” being especially well known. Lagerlöf’s storytelling and vivid imagination influenced generations of writers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It involves the replication and separation of chromosomes, ensuring each new cell receives the correct genetic material. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when energy stored in Earth’s crust is suddenly released, usually due to movement along faults or tectonic plate boundaries. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Scientists monitor earthquakes to better understand and prepare for these natural events.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey took him through dangerous waters and required remarkable navigation skills. Slocum’s adventures were chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspiring future explorers.
What is the importance of the Sumerians in history? The Sumerians are credited with creating one of the world’s first civilizations in ancient Mesopotamia. They developed writing (cuneiform), established cities, and advanced mathematics, law, and astronomy. Their legacy influenced later cultures and laid the foundations for modern society.
Why do animals form groups or herds? Animals form groups or herds for protection, increased foraging success, and social interaction. Group living can help defend against predators, find food more efficiently, and care for young. Examples include schools of fish, flocks of birds, and herds of mammals.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online using browsers and hyperlinks. The Web transformed communication, education, commerce, and entertainment, connecting billions of people globally. It remains a cornerstone of the digital age.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, with “The Creation of Adam” being especially famous. Michelangelo’s work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification removes contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, chlorination, distillation, and reverse osmosis. Clean water is essential for public health, agriculture, and industrial processes.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to synchronize the calendar year with the solar year, which is about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, leap years prevent seasonal drift over time. This adjustment keeps our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team endured extreme cold and hardship to achieve this milestone. The journey helped expand knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and neutralizing pathogens like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It includes organs, cells, and proteins that work together to defend against illness. A healthy immune system is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with others, attract mates, establish territory, and warn of danger. Each species has unique songs and calls that can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding and ecological balance.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream in the 1920s. Fitzgerald’s lyrical prose and vivid characters have made it a classic of American literature.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur through wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in just under 22 hours, battling cold water and strong currents. Webb’s achievement inspired countless endurance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their size, precision, and enduring presence have fascinated historians and tourists alike. The pyramids are symbols of ancient ingenuity and remain among the world’s most iconic monuments.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made electric power widely accessible. Edison’s work led to further advances in technology and changed daily life for people around the world.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division is called mitosis when a cell splits to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It ensures that genetic material is accurately distributed during cell replication.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s accomplishment inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of education? Education provides knowledge, skills, and opportunities for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democracy and social progress.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to allow air to move faster over the top than underneath. This difference in air pressure creates an upward force, while engines provide thrust. Proper control surfaces allow pilots to steer and stabilize the aircraft.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing linguists to understand a language that had been lost for centuries. Its discovery revolutionized the study of ancient Egypt and opened the door to understanding more of its history.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew continued the journey and returned to Spain in 1522. Their voyage proved the Earth could be circled by sea and greatly expanded global exploration.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis involves several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, followed by cytokinesis.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons on Earth are caused by the tilt of our planet’s axis as it orbits the Sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight at different times of the year, making days longer or shorter and temperatures warmer or colder. This cycle shapes the climate, agriculture, and natural rhythms of life worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experiments. Shelley’s work is considered one of the earliest examples of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, ethics, and humanity.
What is the function of the respiratory system? The respiratory system enables the exchange of gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—between our bodies and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, which work together to facilitate breathing. Proper respiratory function is essential for delivering oxygen to cells and removing waste gases.
Why do some animals have camouflage? Camouflage helps animals blend in with their surroundings to avoid predators or sneak up on prey. Patterns, colors, and even body shapes can help an animal become nearly invisible in its environment. This adaptation increases an animal’s chances of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a key driver of the Industrial Revolution. Earlier versions were developed by Thomas Newcomen and Thomas Savery, but Watt’s design made steam power more efficient. Steam engines transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process in which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun. This keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excess greenhouse gases from human activities can cause global warming. Managing greenhouse emissions is critical for addressing climate change.
Who was the first female Nobel Prize winner? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, making her the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s research changed the field of chemistry and medicine.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe over thousands of years. It enabled the exchange of goods, ideas, cultures, and technologies between distant civilizations. The Silk Road helped shape global history and the development of many societies.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can result from tectonic plate movement, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and affects climate and ecosystems.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Creation of Adam is one of the most famous images in Western culture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial producers in aquatic ecosystems, supporting food webs and generating much of the world’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity is vital for life in oceans and lakes.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although there is some controversy over the exact details of his expedition. He traveled with a team of assistants and Inuit guides, enduring extreme conditions. The achievement represented a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night occur because Earth rotates on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This rhythm influences sleep patterns and behavior in humans and animals.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication across long distances for the first time. His invention transformed society and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work continues to influence technology and how people connect.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Macbeth,” which explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. Set in medieval Scotland, the tragedy follows the rise and fall of a nobleman who seeks the throne through murder. “Macbeth” is a staple of English literature and has been adapted countless times.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It addresses issues such as human rights, development, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a forum for resolving conflicts and coordinating humanitarian efforts.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person in space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person in space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in the history of space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower provide clean, sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Investing in renewables creates jobs and supports a resilient energy future.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of cell respiration and why is it important? Cell respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored as ATP and powers essential cellular functions like growth, repair, and movement. Without cell respiration, living organisms could not survive, as they would lack the energy needed for life.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe starting in 1519, though he died before completing the journey. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the world could be sailed around and that the oceans were interconnected. This historic journey greatly expanded global understanding and trade routes.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. It housed hundreds of thousands of texts and attracted scholars from across the Mediterranean. Its destruction remains a symbol of the loss of cultural and scientific knowledge.
Why do we have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns on the skin of our fingers formed before birth. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have the same fingerprints. Fingerprints are widely used in forensic science and security systems because of their uniqueness.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat from the sun in the atmosphere, keeping Earth warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas levels, leading to global warming and climate changes. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental stability.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, just months before his death. The opera is celebrated for its enchanting music and allegorical story, blending fantasy with Enlightenment ideals. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients absorbed from food, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces important proteins for blood clotting. It also stores glucose and helps regulate metabolism. A healthy liver is vital for digestion and overall well-being.
Why do some animals migrate seasonally? Many animals migrate seasonally to find food, mate, or escape harsh weather conditions. Migration can involve journeys of thousands of kilometers, such as birds flying south for winter or wildebeest crossing Africa’s plains. These migrations help species survive and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the first mechanical clock? The first mechanical clocks were invented in medieval Europe during the 13th century, with Richard of Wallingford and Henry De Vick among early pioneers. These clocks used gears and weights to measure time more accurately than earlier sundials or water clocks. Mechanical clocks revolutionized timekeeping and daily life.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plant cells. It absorbs sunlight and uses its energy to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose during photosynthesis. Chlorophyll is essential for plant growth and for producing the oxygen we breathe.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905 for her lifelong efforts to promote peace and disarmament. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" inspired the peace movement across Europe. Von Suttner’s legacy lives on in international peace advocacy.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? Volcanic eruptions occur when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises through cracks, building pressure until it bursts through the surface. Eruptions can release lava, ash, and gases, reshaping landscapes and affecting climate. Volcanic activity is closely monitored to protect communities living near volcanoes.
Why do leaves change color in fall? Leaves change color in fall because shorter days and cooler temperatures cause chlorophyll to break down, revealing pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. These pigments produce vibrant yellow, orange, and red hues. The process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter dormancy.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan navigating society and personal ambition in Victorian England. Dickens’ exploration of themes like social class, redemption, and identity has made the book a literary classic.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in history? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It allowed the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and technologies across vast distances. The Silk Road played a crucial role in shaping global history and cultural development.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on parts of Earth’s surface. Depending on the alignment, eclipses can be total, partial, or annular. Solar eclipses are rare and attract observers and scientists worldwide.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics that revolutionized healthcare, saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and harmful microorganisms from water through methods such as filtration, boiling, chlorination, and distillation. Purified water is essential for safe drinking, cooking, and hygiene. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though the claim remains debated. His expedition braved extreme cold and treacherous ice to reach the northernmost point on Earth. Peary’s journey expanded scientific knowledge and inspired further polar exploration.
What is the significance of the Parthenon in Greece? The Parthenon is an ancient temple on the Acropolis of Athens, built in the 5th century BCE to honor the goddess Athena. It exemplifies classical Greek architecture and artistic achievement. The Parthenon remains a symbol of democracy, culture, and Western civilization.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. During sleep, the brain processes information and the immune system strengthens. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems, mood disturbances, and impaired cognitive function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious, reflecting Dalí’s interest in psychoanalysis. It is one of the most recognizable pieces of Surrealist art.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen, much like plants. This process supports aquatic food chains and helps regulate oxygen levels in water bodies. Algae are important producers in marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Who was the first person to run a marathon? The marathon commemorates the legendary run of Pheidippides, a Greek messenger who ran from Marathon to Athens in 490 BCE to announce victory over the Persians. The modern marathon was introduced at the first Olympic Games in 1896. Today, marathons are held worldwide and attract runners of all ages.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is a vital link for global trade and international relations.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Bears, bats, and some rodents are well-known hibernators, spending months in a dormant state. Hibernation helps these animals endure harsh conditions until resources become available.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and attack pathogens like viruses and bacteria. A strong immune system is crucial for maintaining health and recovering from illness.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” around 1603, exploring themes of jealousy, betrayal, and race. The tragedy centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his downfall orchestrated by the villain Iago. "Othello" remains a powerful work in the study of human emotion and prejudice.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, from plants and animals to microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy environments, provides food and medicine, and helps ecosystems recover from disturbances. Preserving biodiversity is essential for the planet’s resilience and sustainability.
What is the process of cellular respiration in living organisms? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored in the form of ATP, which powers cellular functions. The process takes place in the mitochondria and is essential for growth, movement, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan is credited with leading the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died during the journey, his crew completed the trip in 1522, proving the world could be circled by sea. This achievement expanded European knowledge of global geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert solar energy into chemical energy, producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to sustain themselves or support life on Earth.
Why do we experience lightning during storms? Lightning occurs when electrical charges build up in clouds and discharge, creating a sudden flash of light. This happens because different parts of a cloud carry positive and negative charges, and when the difference becomes large enough, electricity jumps between them or to the ground. Lightning helps balance electrical energy in the atmosphere.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in art history.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water on, above, and below the surface of the Earth. It includes processes like evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. This cycle is vital for distributing fresh water, supporting life, and influencing climate patterns.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His work made electric lighting accessible to homes and businesses, transforming daily life. Edison’s invention paved the way for the widespread use of electricity.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms within a particular habitat or ecosystem. High biodiversity ensures ecosystem resilience, provides food, medicine, and supports natural processes. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a healthy and sustainable environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive changing seasons and environmental challenges. Examples include birds flying south in winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the consequences of scientific discovery. Shelley’s work is considered a pioneering text in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet. While this effect is necessary for life, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her research on radioactivity changed science and medicine forever. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It involves mechanical and chemical processes starting in the mouth and continuing through the stomach and intestines. Proper digestion supports overall health and vitality.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. Cooler temperatures and shorter days trigger this process, resulting in vibrant reds, oranges, and yellows. The color change is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates unity and brotherhood and has become an anthem for peace. “Ode to Joy” is performed worldwide and holds deep cultural significance.
What is the function of red blood cells? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs. They contain hemoglobin, which binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are critical for energy and overall well-being.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunication. Bell’s work transformed how people connect with each other.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions. Stretching over thousands of miles, it is a symbol of Chinese ingenuity and perseverance. Today, the wall is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a major tourist attraction.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring physical and mental energy, consolidating memories, and repairing tissues. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems and impaired cognitive performance.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon in 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in aquatic ecosystems and contribute significantly to global oxygen production. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and helps regulate the Earth’s atmosphere.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic tale of two young lovers whose families are locked in a bitter feud. It explores timeless themes of love, fate, and conflict.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and help reduce pollution. They provide a cleaner alternative to fossil fuels and combat climate change. Investing in renewables is key to a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited with being the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced harsh conditions and controversy, but Peary’s accomplishment is recognized in polar exploration history. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for adventurers.
What is the function of the heart? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall wellbeing.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air more quickly over the top than the bottom. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics enable airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants use sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. This occurs in the chloroplasts, where the pigment chlorophyll captures light energy. Photosynthesis is essential for life on Earth, as it forms the basis of most food chains and replenishes atmospheric oxygen.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, starting in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving that the world could be circumnavigated by sea. The voyage greatly expanded European knowledge of world geography.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through Earth's atmosphere, surface, and underground. Processes such as evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff continuously recycle water, maintaining ecosystems and supporting life. The water cycle is crucial for weather patterns, agriculture, and freshwater resources.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature, heart rate, and breathing decrease significantly. This adaptation allows animals like bears and bats to endure harsh winters until conditions improve.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication and paved the way for the telecommunications industry. Bell's work led to further innovations such as the mobile phone and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Discovered in 1799, it allowed scholars to decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs for the first time. The Rosetta Stone unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight directly into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it excites electrons, creating an electric current that can power homes, businesses, and devices. Solar energy is a renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectation in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty style and keen observations have made the book a classic, still widely read and adapted today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It has four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and vitality.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years are added every four years to keep the calendar year synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.25 days. By adding an extra day to February, we prevent the calendar from drifting out of alignment with the seasons. Without leap years, seasonal dates would gradually shift over time.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold called Penicillium notatum killed bacteria in a petri dish. This led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical discoveries in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing greenhouse emissions is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, and is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. The largest, the Great Pyramid, was constructed for Khufu and showcases remarkable engineering skills. The pyramids remain symbols of Egypt's history and are major tourist attractions.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future generations of female astronauts.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is vital for maintaining health and supporting bodily functions.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers whose families are feuding, leading to heartbreak and loss. Shakespeare’s exploration of love, fate, and conflict has made the play a timeless classic.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and combats climate change. Investing in renewable energy is essential for a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create fertile soils, and can impact climate and ecosystems.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott, thanks to careful planning and use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently over long distances.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. Proper circulation is essential for health, healing, and energy.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the late 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. This invention powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll and sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial for aquatic ecosystems, producing much of the world’s oxygen and serving as the foundation of many food chains. Their efficient photosynthesis supports life in oceans and lakes.
Why do people use sunscreen? Sunscreen helps protect the skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun, reducing the risk of sunburn, premature aging, and skin cancer. It contains ingredients that absorb or reflect UV rays, forming a barrier against damage. Regular use of sunscreen is important for maintaining healthy skin, especially during outdoor activities.
Who wrote the “Harry Potter” series? J.K. Rowling wrote the “Harry Potter” series, which consists of seven books published between 1997 and 2007. Her stories follow the journey of a young wizard, Harry Potter, as he battles dark forces at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. The series has captivated millions worldwide and inspired movies, plays, and theme parks.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum is an ancient amphitheater in Rome, Italy, completed in 80 AD under Emperor Titus. It hosted gladiatorial games, public spectacles, and dramatic performances, symbolizing the power of the Roman Empire. Today, the Colosseum stands as a major tourist attraction and a testament to Roman engineering and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients from the soil through their roots, which branch out to maximize contact with the ground. Tiny root hairs increase surface area, allowing minerals and moisture to enter the plant’s vascular system. The absorbed substances travel upward to the leaves, supporting growth and photosynthesis.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Peace? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize, receiving the honor in 1905 for her efforts in promoting international peace and advocating against war. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired many to pursue nonviolent solutions to conflict. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to shape peace movements worldwide.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations dedicated to public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, respond to emergencies, and improve healthcare systems. The WHO provides guidance, sets standards, and supports countries in safeguarding the health of their populations.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe environment for their eggs and young chicks. Nests protect offspring from predators, harsh weather, and other dangers, offering warmth and security. The materials and design of nests vary among species, reflecting adaptation to different habitats.
Who discovered the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, dramatically reducing cases of the disease worldwide. His work was a breakthrough in medical science, leading to widespread immunization campaigns. Polio vaccines have saved millions of lives and helped nearly eradicate the disease.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. This creates visible droplets or ice crystals that cluster together, forming clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns around the globe.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, a surrealist masterpiece featuring melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape. The painting explores themes of time, memory, and the subconscious mind. Dalí’s work is celebrated for its imaginative imagery and technical skill.
What is the role of the nervous system? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily functions, processing sensory information and sending signals to muscles and organs. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and a network of nerves throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, sensation, and response to the environment.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5th, raises awareness about environmental issues and promotes action to protect our planet. The day encourages individuals, communities, and governments to address problems such as pollution, deforestation, and climate change. Activities include tree planting, cleanups, and educational campaigns.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist of the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Games. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic tradition after centuries of inactivity. Gold medals have since become a symbol of excellence and achievement in sports.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, opened in 1869. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, saving time and fuel. The canal is a vital link in global trade and has strategic significance for international shipping.
How do bees communicate within the hive? Bees communicate using a “waggle dance,” a series of movements that convey the direction and distance to food sources. They also use pheromones and vibrations to share information about threats, health, and colony activities. This complex communication system ensures the survival and efficiency of the hive.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Othello,” a tragedy about jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona, whose love is destroyed by the manipulations of Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful exploration of human emotions and social issues.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? A volcanic eruption occurs when magma rises from beneath Earth’s surface, driven by pressure and gas accumulation. The magma escapes through vents, forming lava flows, ash clouds, and sometimes explosive blasts. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and can affect climate and ecosystems.
Why do athletes train regularly? Athletes train regularly to improve strength, stamina, technique, and mental focus. Consistent training helps prevent injuries, enhances performance, and prepares athletes for competition. Training routines are tailored to specific sports and individual needs, supporting long-term success.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with reaching the North Pole in 1909, though his achievement remains subject to debate. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme conditions using sled dogs, specialized gear, and careful planning. His journey expanded knowledge of the Arctic and inspired future exploration.
What is the importance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient monuments in Egypt built as tombs for pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the geographic North Pole. This simple device helps with navigation and orientation, especially before the advent of GPS technology. Compasses have been essential tools for explorers, sailors, and hikers for centuries.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing the way information is accessed and shared. His creation introduced websites, hyperlinks, and browsers, making the internet user-friendly and interactive. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education globally.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each containing the same genetic material. It occurs in several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Mitosis is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do people study history? People study history to understand the events, cultures, and decisions that shaped the world we live in today. History provides lessons about successes and failures, helps explain current issues, and fosters empathy for others. Studying history encourages critical thinking and informed citizenship.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed the opera “The Magic Flute” in 1791. The work blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes, featuring memorable arias and symbolic characters. “The Magic Flute” is celebrated for its musical brilliance and enduring popularity.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert light energy into glucose, providing food and oxygen for life on Earth. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce the energy needed to grow and survive.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, casting a shadow on Earth and temporarily blocking sunlight. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses occur when only part of the Sun is obscured. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events.
What is the significance of the moon landing in 1969? The moon landing in 1969 marked the first time humans set foot on another celestial body, with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walking on the lunar surface as part of NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. This achievement represented a major milestone in space exploration and demonstrated the possibilities of human ingenuity. The event inspired generations and advanced scientific research about the moon and space travel.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century, describing how every mass attracts every other mass with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights explained the motion of planets and objects on Earth. Newton’s work laid the foundation for classical physics and remains central to our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part (anther) to the female part (stigma) of a flower, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often assisted by wind, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of most plants and for the production of many fruits and vegetables.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts by ensuring only authorized users can access sensitive information and services. Strong passwords prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and identity theft. They are a fundamental aspect of digital security, especially as more personal and financial activities move online.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She was recognized for her advocacy against war and for international peace. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" and her activism helped shape the early peace movement in Europe.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the warming of Earth’s atmosphere caused by certain gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, trapping heat from the sun. It keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if intensified by human activities. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century, revolutionizing the production of books and written materials. The press made information more accessible and accelerated the spread of education and scientific ideas. Gutenberg’s invention played a key role in the Renaissance and the modernization of society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are key producers in aquatic ecosystems and generate a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and global carbon cycles.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better environmental conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often occurs seasonally. This behavior increases survival and reproductive success for many species, including birds, whales, and butterflies.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, power, and fate. First performed in the early 17th century, the play explores the psychological effects of guilt and the consequences of unchecked ambition. "Macbeth" remains one of Shakespeare’s most studied and performed works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It helps prevent diseases such as cholera and dysentery and supports overall health and well-being. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health and community development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim has been debated. His expedition overcame extreme cold and challenging terrain, setting a precedent for polar exploration. The achievement expanded geographic knowledge of the Arctic region.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and alcoholic beverages. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and provides important nutrients.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn as chlorophyll breaks down due to cooler temperatures and shorter daylight hours. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps trees conserve energy and prepare for winter.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict biblical stories from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements in the history of art.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, from genes to species to entire communities. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources like food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is essential for the stability and sustainability of the planet.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed personal and business communication and paved the way for the development of modern telecommunications. Bell’s work remains influential in technology and society.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling conserves natural resources, reduces waste, and lowers pollution by reusing materials like paper, plastic, glass, and metal. It saves energy and helps protect the environment from landfill overflow and resource depletion. Recycling is a key component of sustainable living and responsible consumption.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, weather patterns, and daylight hours. The cycle of seasons influences agriculture, wildlife, and human activities.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of scientific ambition, ethics, and isolation, following Victor Frankenstein’s creation of a sentient creature. "Frankenstein" is considered a foundational work in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They help convert nutrients from food into usable energy and play roles in cell signaling and apoptosis. Healthy mitochondria are essential for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic expedition showed the world that the highest peak could be conquered. Their achievement inspired future generations of climbers and adventurers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase extraordinary engineering and have fascinated historians and archaeologists for centuries. The pyramids serve as a symbol of Egypt’s rich history and cultural achievements.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth for nearly three days aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired women around the world to pursue careers in science and technology.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects billions of people globally, providing access to information, communication, commerce, and entertainment. It has transformed how we work, learn, and interact, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and social change in countless fields.
How do solar panels work? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electricity. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons that generate a flow of electrical current. Solar energy is renewable, reduces dependence on fossil fuels, and helps combat climate change.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for bringing oxygen into the body and removing carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism. It includes the lungs, airways, and muscles that facilitate breathing. Healthy respiration is essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, was the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey in the sloop “Spray” was a remarkable feat of navigation and endurance. Slocum’s account, “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspired generations of adventurers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is a process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the original cell. It’s essential for growth, tissue repair, and asexual reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic consistency across cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, improved hunting, and social interaction. Group living can help deter predators and increase success in finding food. Social bonds also aid in raising offspring and passing on survival skills.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, leading to its widespread use during the Industrial Revolution. His innovations made steam engines more efficient and practical for factories and transportation. Watt’s work transformed industry and society.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, contains the same text in Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its decoding by Jean-François Champollion allowed scholars to finally understand ancient hieroglyphic writing. The stone is now housed in the British Museum and is a symbol of linguistic discovery.
How does the human body regulate temperature? The human body maintains a stable internal temperature through processes like sweating, shivering, and adjusting blood flow. The hypothalamus in the brain acts as a thermostat, triggering responses to heat or cold. Proper temperature regulation is vital for cellular function and health.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” was written by Mark Twain and published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood in a small town along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work captures the spirit of American youth and the complexities of growing up.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circling Africa. Opened in 1869, the canal greatly reduced travel time and boosted international trade. Today, it remains a critical passage for global shipping.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflecting on past experiences and looking forward to the future. Birthday celebrations often include gatherings, gifts, and special traditions. They serve as opportunities for social connection and gratitude.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller, negatively charged particles, challenging the idea that atoms were indivisible. Thomson’s findings were foundational to the development of modern physics and chemistry.
What is the significance of Mount Kilimanjaro? Mount Kilimanjaro is Africa’s highest peak, rising 5,895 meters above sea level in Tanzania. Its snow-capped summit and diverse ecosystems attract climbers and scientists from around the world. Kilimanjaro is a symbol of natural beauty and environmental change, as its glaciers have been shrinking.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the magnetic north pole. This device helps travelers and explorers determine direction, especially before the advent of GPS. Compasses have been vital for navigation for centuries.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She advocated for disarmament and international cooperation, influencing Alfred Nobel himself to create the peace prize. Her book “Lay Down Your Arms” was instrumental in promoting peace movements.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment that gives plants their green color and is essential for photosynthesis. It captures sunlight, allowing plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into energy and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Why do we need vitamins and minerals? Vitamins and minerals are vital nutrients that support growth, immune function, and overall health. They help regulate hundreds of bodily processes, from bone strength to nerve signaling. Deficiencies can lead to disease, so a balanced diet is important for well-being.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fairy tale elements, symbolism, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its themes of enlightenment and triumph over adversity resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is the importance of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It is essential for the reproduction of most plants and the production of fruits and vegetables. Pollinators like bees, birds, and bats play a vital role in sustaining ecosystems.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. They introduce a harmless part of the pathogen, training the body to respond quickly if exposed to the real disease. Vaccination has helped control and eradicate many serious illnesses.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. The work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of earth’s surface by wind, water, ice, or gravity. It shapes landscapes, forms valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Preventing excess erosion is important for environmental conservation.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, breed, or avoid harsh weather, often traveling long distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations. Examples include birds flying south in winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, revolutionizing physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
What is the importance of education? Education provides people with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population contributes to stronger economies and more just societies.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online. His creation transformed communication, commerce, and learning. The Web is now a cornerstone of modern life for billions of people.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood, delivering oxygen and nutrients throughout an animal’s body. It maintains circulation and helps remove waste products. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and activity in all animals.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on Earth. Depending on alignment, eclipses can be partial, total, or annular. Solar eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are studied for their effects on nature.
What is the process of mitosis in living cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the parent. This is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic stability across generations of cells.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it impact society? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use in industry and transportation. The steam engine powered factories, trains, and ships, driving the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed economies and the way people lived and worked.
What is the function of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plants and is essential for photosynthesis. It absorbs light energy, which is then used to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or release oxygen for other living things.
Why do stars twinkle in the night sky? Stars appear to twinkle because their light passes through different layers of Earth's atmosphere, which are constantly shifting due to temperature and air movement. This causes the light to bend and change intensity in a process called atmospheric refraction. Twinkling is more noticeable for stars closer to the horizon.
Who was the first emperor of Rome? Augustus, originally known as Octavian, became the first emperor of Rome in 27 BCE. He established the Roman Empire after defeating Mark Antony and Cleopatra and ending the period of civil wars. Augustus’ reign brought stability, reforms, and the Pax Romana, a long era of relative peace.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It is vital for replenishing freshwater supplies, supporting ecosystems, and regulating climate. The cycle ensures that water is continuously recycled and available for living organisms.
Who wrote the novel "Frankenstein"? Mary Shelley wrote "Frankenstein," first published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being from dead tissue, only to be haunted by his creation. "Frankenstein" is considered one of the earliest works of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, responsibility, and isolation.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth's crust suddenly shift along faults or boundaries, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can be triggered by volcanic activity, human actions, or natural plate movements. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry. Bell’s work led to the development of the telephone network and later technologies like the internet.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for protecting the environment.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey involved months of travel over ice and harsh conditions, with the help of Inuit guides and sled dogs. Peary’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals camouflage themselves to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play "Macbeth"? William Shakespeare wrote "Macbeth" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. "Macbeth" remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When you inhale, oxygen enters the lungs and passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product, moves from the blood into the lungs to be exhaled. This process is vital for energy production and overall health.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing the fall of an apple. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law laid the foundation for classical physics and transformed our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to keep our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, we compensate for the fractional difference and ensure that seasons stay in sync with the calendar. Without leap years, seasonal drift would gradually occur over centuries.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the global telecommunications industry. Bell’s legacy is evident in the phones and networks we use today.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and love. The novel explores themes of social class, gender, and morality, and is regarded as a classic of English literature. Brontë’s work remains influential and widely read today.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary, a New Zealand mountaineer, and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa guide from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in the history of exploration and mountaineering. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest challenges for adventurers.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. The process begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. Proper digestion is essential for health and well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for their green color, breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who wrote the play “A Midsummer Night’s Dream”? William Shakespeare wrote “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” in the late 16th century. The play combines elements of fantasy, romance, and comedy as it explores the adventures of lovers and fairies in an enchanted forest. It remains one of Shakespeare’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, and works continuously to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, growth, and survival.
Who discovered the electron and what was its significance? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His discovery revealed that atoms were not indivisible, as previously thought, but contained smaller charged particles. This breakthrough transformed our understanding of atomic structure and led to major advances in physics and chemistry.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, delivering humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like climate change. The UN plays a crucial role in fostering diplomacy and protecting human rights worldwide.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process by which they convert light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy that powers this transformation, allowing plants to grow and produce oxygen. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to survive or reproduce.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861, which follows the life of an orphan named Pip as he navigates Victorian society. The novel explores themes of ambition, social class, and personal growth, and is considered one of Dickens’s greatest works. Its memorable characters and insights into human nature have made it a classic.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a barrier erected by East Germany in 1961 to separate East and West Berlin during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 symbolized the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and the reunification of Germany. The Berlin Wall remains an important historical reminder of political division and the power of freedom.
How does a compass work? A compass is a navigational instrument that uses a magnetized needle to indicate direction relative to Earth’s magnetic poles. The needle aligns itself with the planet’s magnetic field, pointing towards magnetic north. Compasses are essential for navigation, especially before the advent of GPS technology.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends whimsical fantasy with serious themes of love, wisdom, and justice. Its memorable arias and characters have made it a beloved part of the classical repertoire.
What is the importance of recycling plastics? Recycling plastics helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy usage compared to producing new plastic. By reprocessing used plastics, we prevent them from accumulating in landfills and oceans, where they can harm wildlife and ecosystems. Recycling also supports sustainable industry and environmental protection.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, efficient hunting, and social interaction. Living together can help deter predators, increase chances of finding food, and facilitate learning and cooperation. Group living is common in species ranging from insects to mammals and is essential for survival in some environments.
Who was the first person to discover Antarctica? While many explorers sighted parts of Antarctica, Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, a Russian explorer, is credited with the first recorded sighting of the continent in 1820. His expedition provided valuable maps and observations of the southern polar region. The discovery paved the way for future scientific research and exploration.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells break down glucose and oxygen to produce energy in the form of ATP. This process occurs in the mitochondria and releases carbon dioxide and water as byproducts. Cellular respiration is essential for powering all cellular activities in living organisms.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism and explores themes of time, dreams, and reality. Dalí’s imaginative vision continues to intrigue viewers and inspire artists.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on global public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and respond to health emergencies. The WHO’s guidance and research help save lives and improve well-being worldwide.
Why do we use passwords for online security? Passwords protect online accounts and systems from unauthorized access by serving as a form of identity verification. A strong password helps guard against hacking, identity theft, and data breaches. Regularly updating and safeguarding passwords is essential for personal and organizational cybersecurity.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for peace and disarmament influenced the creation of the Nobel Peace Prize itself. Von Suttner’s legacy endures in the modern peace movement.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon is a vast geological formation in Arizona, carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. It is renowned for its dramatic landscapes, colorful rock layers, and rich fossil record. The Grand Canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and attracts millions of visitors annually.
How does solar energy benefit the environment? Solar energy generates electricity from sunlight, reducing reliance on fossil fuels and lowering greenhouse gas emissions. It is renewable, abundant, and produces minimal pollution compared to traditional energy sources. Solar power supports sustainability and helps fight climate change.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story follows Othello, a Moorish general, as he falls victim to manipulation and suspicion. "Othello" remains a powerful examination of human emotion and social dynamics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from egg to larva, pupa, and adult. This process allows for dramatic changes in structure, function, and behavior. Metamorphosis is common in butterflies, beetles, and many other insect species.
Who invented the lightbulb? Thomas Edison is often credited with inventing the first practical incandescent lightbulb in 1879. His development of a durable filament and electrical system revolutionized lighting and made it accessible to homes and businesses. Edison’s invention transformed daily life and spurred further technological progress.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients necessary for growth and development. They also store food and help stabilize the plant against wind and erosion. Healthy roots are essential for plant survival and productivity.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5, raises awareness about environmental issues and encourages global action for sustainability. Activities include cleanups, tree planting, and educational campaigns. The day inspires individuals and communities to protect the planet for future generations.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae utilize photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into energy, producing glucose and releasing oxygen as a byproduct. This process is similar to that found in land plants but occurs in aquatic environments, making algae essential for oxygen production in oceans and lakes. Algae are a primary food source for many aquatic organisms and play a major role in global carbon cycling.
Who was the first human to orbit the Earth? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to orbit the Earth on April 12, 1961 aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1. His flight lasted 108 minutes and marked a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin's achievement opened the door to human spaceflight and inspired generations of astronauts.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria in history? The Library of Alexandria was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world, located in Egypt. It was a center of learning and scholarship, attracting scholars from many cultures and preserving vast collections of manuscripts. The library’s destruction is often regarded as a great loss for human knowledge and history.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes are commonly found along tectonic plate boundaries because this is where plates either collide or move apart, allowing magma from beneath the Earth’s crust to escape. Subduction zones and rift valleys provide pathways for molten rock to rise and erupt at the surface. These geological processes shape landscapes and create fertile soils but can also pose hazards to nearby populations.
Who developed the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which dramatically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. Before the vaccine, polio caused paralysis and death in thousands of people, mostly children. Salk’s invention is considered one of the greatest medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer prevents excessive UV radiation from reaching the Earth’s surface, reducing the risk of skin cancer and protecting ecosystems. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its vital function.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892 in St. Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and has become a classic holiday tradition, featuring memorable music and enchanting dances. “The Nutcracker” is performed by ballet companies around the world each winter.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are primarily driven by wind, the Earth’s rotation, temperature differences, and variations in salinity. These currents help distribute heat, regulate climate, and transport nutrients and marine life across vast distances. Ocean currents play a key role in global weather patterns and the health of marine ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her imaginative storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Her most famous work, “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” remains popular in Sweden and abroad.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria of cells and provides the energy needed for growth, movement, and maintenance. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and supports all bodily functions.
Why do we use decimal and metric systems in science? The decimal and metric systems are used in science because they provide a standardized, easy-to-use framework for measurement based on powers of ten. This allows for precise calculations and consistent communication across different countries and scientific fields. The metric system simplifies conversion between units and supports global collaboration.
Who built the Taj Mahal and what was its purpose? The Taj Mahal was built by Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan in the 17th century in memory of his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal. The white marble mausoleum is renowned for its stunning architecture and intricate details. It stands as a symbol of love and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
What is the importance of groundwater? Groundwater is water stored beneath the Earth’s surface in soil and rock formations, providing drinking water for billions of people. It supports agriculture and industry and helps maintain river flows during dry periods. Protecting groundwater from pollution is critical for long-term environmental and human health.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. The light bulb led to widespread electrification and transformed daily life and industry.
What causes tides in the oceans? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes periodic rising and falling of sea levels, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems and are predictable based on celestial mechanics.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with the crucial contributions of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. Understanding DNA has revolutionized medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for over two thousand years. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road greatly influenced world history, commerce, and cultural development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition was meticulously planned, using sled dogs and survival expertise to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months, lowering body temperature and heart rate. Hibernation allows animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” which explores themes of jealousy, trust, and betrayal through the tragic story of a Moorish general and his wife Desdemona. The play delves into complex human emotions and the destructive power of manipulation. “Othello” remains a powerful work frequently performed and studied.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is essential for health, agriculture, and industry around the world.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The printing press allowed for mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. It played a crucial role in the Renaissance, Reformation, and the rise of modern science.
What is the role of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and overall well-being.
What is the role of the skeleton in the human body? The skeleton provides structural support, protects internal organs, and enables movement by serving as an attachment point for muscles. It is made up of 206 bones in adults, including the skull, spine, and limbs. The skeleton also produces blood cells and stores essential minerals such as calcium and phosphorus.
Who was the first person to discover America according to historical evidence? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492, although Norse explorer Leif Erikson reached North America centuries earlier. Columbus’s voyages marked the beginning of sustained European exploration and colonization of the Americas. His arrival had profound and lasting effects on history, culture, and indigenous peoples.
What is the process of respiration in living organisms? Respiration is the process by which organisms exchange gases with their environment, taking in oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide. In humans and animals, this occurs mainly in the lungs, while plants use structures called stomata. Cellular respiration then converts oxygen and glucose into energy, vital for survival.
Why do earthquakes occur and what are their effects? Earthquakes occur due to the sudden release of energy along faults or tectonic plate boundaries in Earth’s crust. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Earthquakes can lead to property damage, loss of life, and changes in landscapes such as landslides or tsunamis.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland lasted nearly 15 hours and made her a global icon of courage and aviation. Earhart’s achievements inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer helps prevent skin cancer, cataracts, and damage to plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork is famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is celebrated as a masterpiece of surrealism and modern art.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth and survival. They also store food and help stabilize the plant during storms or drought. Some roots, such as those in carrots or beets, are specialized for storage and nutrition.
Why do we need sleep and what happens during sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to rest and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal? John Baxter Taylor Jr. became the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal as part of the U.S. medley relay team in 1908. His achievement marked a significant milestone in sports history and paved the way for greater inclusion in athletics. Taylor’s legacy continues to inspire athletes today.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from egg to adult, passing through distinct stages such as larva, pupa, and imago. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows for specialization and adaptation to different environments during an insect’s life cycle.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows Holden Caulfield, a disaffected teenager navigating the challenges of growing up in post-war America. Salinger’s work is celebrated for its authentic voice and exploration of themes like alienation and identity.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce for centuries.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. His swim from Dover to Calais took nearly 22 hours and demonstrated extraordinary endurance. Webb’s accomplishment inspired future generations of swimmers and set a benchmark for open water challenges.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation is vital for ensuring a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Conserving water helps protect ecosystems, reduce energy use, and prevent shortages during droughts. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using efficient appliances can make a significant difference.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and was capable of performing complex calculations. Zuse’s innovation paved the way for the development of modern computers and information technology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965. His extravehicular activity lasted just over 12 minutes and presented numerous challenges, including a suit that inflated unexpectedly. Leonov’s achievement marked a significant milestone in human space exploration.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century. The play blends elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue as it explores themes of forgiveness, power, and transformation. “The Tempest” remains a favorite among audiences and scholars for its imaginative storytelling.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor due to heat, typically from the sun. This process is a crucial part of the water cycle, helping to regulate temperature and move water from bodies like lakes and oceans into the atmosphere. Evaporation supports cloud formation and ultimately precipitation, sustaining ecosystems around the world.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail alone around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the sloop Spray took more than three years and covered over 46,000 miles. Slocum’s adventure inspired generations of sailors and is considered a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are vital components of the immune system, protecting the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy harmful bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens through various mechanisms. A healthy count of white blood cells is essential for fighting off illnesses and maintaining overall health.
Why do we have continents and how did they form? Continents exist because of Earth's tectonic plates, which float atop the semi-fluid mantle and have shifted over millions of years. The movement of these plates caused the landmasses to break apart and drift, forming the seven continents we know today. This process, called plate tectonics, continues to shape Earth's surface and geography.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows the struggles of teenager Holden Caulfield as he deals with alienation and the challenges of growing up. Salinger’s work became a classic of American literature, resonating with young readers for its candid exploration of adolescence.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, greatly reducing shipping time and costs. The canal is a vital link in world commerce and has strategic importance for many nations.
How do plants reproduce asexually? Plants can reproduce asexually through methods such as runners, tubers, bulbs, and cuttings. In asexual reproduction, new plants grow from parts of the parent plant, resulting in genetically identical offspring. This strategy allows plants to rapidly colonize areas and survive in stable environments.
Who was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal? Charlotte Cooper, a British tennis player, was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal in 1900 at the Paris Games. Her victory marked a significant milestone in sports history, paving the way for women’s participation in future Olympics. Cooper’s achievement inspired countless female athletes worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it work? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide and methane, trap heat from the sun. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if greenhouse gases increase excessively. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Why do animals undergo metamorphosis? Metamorphosis is a biological process where animals, such as insects and amphibians, undergo dramatic changes in form during their life cycle. This transformation allows them to exploit different habitats and resources at various stages of life. Metamorphosis increases survival chances and supports species diversity.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape and is considered one of Dalí’s most famous pieces. The painting explores themes of time, reality, and the subconscious mind.
What is the process of filtration and where is it used? Filtration is the separation of solid particles from fluids (liquids or gases) using a porous barrier or filter. It is widely used in water purification, air cleaning, and laboratory procedures. Filtration helps remove contaminants and improve the quality of substances in daily life and industry.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 during experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller negatively charged particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern electronics and our understanding of atomic structure.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the second longest river in the world and flows through South America, mainly Brazil and Peru. It supports the largest tropical rainforest and is home to thousands of plant and animal species. The river is crucial for transportation, biodiversity, and the climate of the region.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and brain to rest, repair, and consolidate memories. During sleep, various processes occur, such as hormone regulation and immune system strengthening. Insufficient sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His carefully planned expedition used sled dogs and precise navigation to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the process of fermentation and why is it important? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation also plays a role in biofuel production and medicine.
Who wrote “The Divine Comedy”? Dante Alighieri, an Italian poet, wrote “The Divine Comedy” in the early 14th century. The epic poem describes a journey through Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, exploring themes of morality, redemption, and human nature. Dante’s work is considered a masterpiece of world literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the role of mitochondria in animal cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the “powerhouses” of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities in animals.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find better food sources, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows established routes. This behavior increases survival rates and helps maintain healthy populations across regions.
What is the importance of clean water for communities? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. She was known for her strong leadership and economic reforms, earning the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British politics and global affairs.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae, like in plants, uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall in history? The Berlin Wall was built in 1961, dividing East and West Berlin and symbolizing the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 marked the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and paved the way for German reunification. The wall remains a powerful symbol of division and freedom.
Who was the first person to propose the concept of the atom? The ancient Greek philosopher Democritus first proposed the idea of the atom around 400 BCE, suggesting that all matter is made up of tiny, indivisible particles. His theory laid the groundwork for modern atomic science, though it took centuries for experimental evidence to support it. Today, the atom is a central concept in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological processes. It occurs through factors such as wind, water, temperature changes, and plant roots. Weathering shapes landscapes and provides soil for plant growth.
Why do humans have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns formed by ridges on the skin of our fingers and thumbs. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have exactly the same fingerprints. Forensic science relies on fingerprints for solving crimes and confirming identities.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in world history? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It enabled the exchange of goods like silk, spices, and precious metals, as well as ideas, religions, and technologies. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping civilizations and fostering cultural diversity.
Who invented the process of vaccination? Edward Jenner developed the first successful vaccine in 1796 by using cowpox to protect people from smallpox. His work laid the foundation for immunology and modern vaccination practices. Vaccines have since saved millions of lives by preventing infectious diseases.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and acts as a protective barrier against injury, infection, and harmful UV radiation. It helps regulate temperature, produces vitamin D, and allows for sensations such as touch and pain. Healthy skin is essential for overall health and well-being.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun and their own inertia, which keeps them moving in a curved path. This balance between gravity and motion creates the stable orbits seen in our solar system. The laws of planetary motion were first described by Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established basic rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters a variety of characters and faces moral challenges as he seeks success and love. The novel is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the process of urbanization and its effects? Urbanization is the movement of people from rural areas to cities, resulting in the growth of urban centers. It often leads to economic development, increased job opportunities, and improved infrastructure. However, urbanization can also cause challenges such as overcrowding, pollution, and loss of green spaces.
Why do humans experience emotions? Emotions are complex responses to stimuli that help us communicate, make decisions, and adapt to our environment. They are regulated by the brain and hormones and are influenced by genetics and experiences. Emotions play a vital role in mental health and social interactions.
What is the importance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has provided breathtaking images and valuable data about the universe. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study distant galaxies, and discover exoplanets. Hubble’s findings have transformed our understanding of space.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966 and served until 1984. She was known for her bold leadership and significant political reforms, as well as for declaring a controversial state of emergency in the 1970s. Gandhi remains a prominent figure in Indian history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process is vital in aquatic ecosystems, where algae produce much of the world’s oxygen and serve as the basis of many food chains. Algae also contribute to carbon cycling and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes often form along tectonic plate boundaries because magma from the mantle rises through cracks created by plate movement. Subduction zones and rifts are especially prone to volcanic activity. These eruptions can create new landforms and impact global climate.
What is the significance of the Renaissance? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to 17th centuries that marked a renewed interest in art, science, and humanism. It began in Italy and spread throughout Europe, producing masterpieces in painting, literature, and architecture. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western thought and creativity.
Who invented the World Wide Web and why is it important? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share information through linked documents and websites. This innovation revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, making the internet accessible to billions. The World Wide Web is now central to daily life and global connectivity.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in France. The artwork’s swirling skies and vivid colors reflect Van Gogh’s emotional turmoil and creative genius. “The Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic paintings in art history.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and serves as a protective barrier against pathogens, physical injuries, and harmful environmental factors. It also helps regulate body temperature through sweating and maintains hydration by preventing excessive water loss. Additionally, the skin contains nerve endings that allow us to sense touch, pain, and temperature.
Who was the first person to reach the moon and what did he say? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. Upon stepping onto the lunar surface, he famously said, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” His achievement marked a pivotal moment in space exploration and inspired people worldwide.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world and the second longest. It flows through the heart of the Amazon rainforest, supporting diverse ecosystems and countless species of plants and animals. The river is vital for transportation, local economies, and global climate regulation.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? Birthdays are celebrated to mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and acknowledge the passage of time. They offer an opportunity for friends and family to gather, express appreciation, and share joy. Birthday traditions vary across cultures but often include ceremonies, gifts, and special foods.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, love, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona. “Othello” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of evaporation and where is it seen in nature? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat energy. It commonly occurs in lakes, rivers, oceans, and even puddles after rainfall as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is a crucial part of the water cycle and helps regulate climate and weather patterns.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling, imagination, and depiction of Swedish folklore and rural life. Lagerlöf’s works continue to be celebrated for their literary merit and cultural significance.
What is the significance of the Statue of Liberty? The Statue of Liberty, located in New York Harbor, was a gift from France to the United States in 1886. It stands as a symbol of freedom, democracy, and hope for immigrants arriving in America. The statue is an iconic landmark and a testament to the enduring friendship between the two nations.
Why do volcanoes form and erupt? Volcanoes form when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises through weak spots or openings in the surface. Eruptions occur when pressure builds up and forces magma, gas, and ash outward, sometimes violently. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes, creates new landforms, and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the founder of Buddhism? Siddhartha Gautama, known as the Buddha, founded Buddhism in the 5th century BCE in ancient India. After attaining enlightenment, he taught principles of compassion, mindfulness, and the path to overcoming suffering. Buddhism has since spread across the world and influenced countless cultures and philosophies.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process, carried out by chlorophyll, supports aquatic food webs and generates a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Algae are critical for maintaining healthy aquatic ecosystems.
What is the importance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is a marvel of engineering and a symbol of China’s historical strength and unity. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who invented the first practical light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first commercially practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than previous methods like candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work contributed to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach is a muscular organ that receives food from the esophagus and breaks it down using acids and enzymes. It churns the food into a semi-liquid mixture called chyme, which is then sent to the small intestine for further digestion and nutrient absorption. The stomach plays a key role in the digestive process.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and later attempted to circumnavigate the globe in 1937. Although she disappeared during her final journey, Earhart’s pioneering spirit and achievements inspired generations of aviators and adventurers. Her legacy remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the significance of the periodic table? The periodic table organizes all known chemical elements by their atomic number, electron configuration, and recurring chemical properties. Invented by Dmitri Mendeleev, it allows scientists to predict the behavior of elements and discover new ones. The periodic table is an essential tool in chemistry, physics, and many other sciences.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian Baroque composer, wrote “The Four Seasons,” a set of four violin concertos, in 1723. Each concerto represents a different season and is celebrated for its vivid musical imagery and technical brilliance. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular and frequently performed pieces of classical music.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, cooperation in hunting or foraging, and social interaction. Living in groups can increase survival chances by deterring predators, sharing resources, and caring for young. Examples include packs of wolves, flocks of birds, and schools of fish.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson, a British physicist, discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms are composed of smaller subatomic particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern atomic theory and technology.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century, blending elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue. The play explores themes of forgiveness, power, and the human condition through the story of Prospero and his daughter Miranda. “The Tempest” is widely regarded as one of Shakespeare’s greatest works.
What is the process of cell division in bacteria? Bacteria reproduce through a process called binary fission, in which a single cell divides into two identical daughter cells. This rapid form of cell division allows bacteria to multiply quickly under favorable conditions. Binary fission is essential for bacterial growth, adaptation, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate Africa by sea? Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias was the first to round the southern tip of Africa, the Cape of Good Hope, in 1488. His voyage opened up the sea route from Europe to Asia, leading to the age of global exploration and trade. Dias’s achievement helped establish Portugal as a leading maritime power.
Why do we need education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities, fostering personal growth and societal progress. It promotes innovation, reduces poverty, and encourages equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies, supports democratic governance, and helps solve global challenges.
What is artificial intelligence and how is it used today? Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to computer systems capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving, and decision-making. Today, AI is used in fields like healthcare for diagnosing diseases, in finance for detecting fraud, and in everyday life with virtual assistants and recommendation systems. As AI continues to evolve, it is transforming industries and raising important ethical questions.
Who mapped the human genome and why was it significant? The Human Genome Project, completed in 2003 by an international team of scientists, successfully mapped all the genes in human DNA. This achievement provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and personalized medicine. Knowing the complete sequence of the human genome has accelerated advances in biotechnology and medical research.
What is the importance of coral reefs for marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital habitats that support a vast diversity of marine life, offering shelter, food, and breeding grounds for countless species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. However, coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation critical.
Why do humans need sleep and what happens without it? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to impaired cognitive function, weakened immunity, and increased risk of diseases. Maintaining healthy sleep habits is crucial for overall well-being and productivity.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist in the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Olympics. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic Games, which had been dormant for centuries. Since then, gold medals have symbolized athletic excellence and international competition.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. This usually happens when warm air meets cooler temperatures at higher altitudes or when air is forced to rise over mountains. Cloud formation plays a key role in Earth's water cycle and weather patterns.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate shared traditions, beliefs, and histories, bringing communities together for music, food, dance, and rituals. They help preserve cultural heritage, foster social bonds, and promote understanding among different groups. Festivals also serve as opportunities for education and tourism.
Who discovered radio waves and their significance? Heinrich Hertz discovered radio waves in the late 19th century, demonstrating that they could be produced and detected with electrical equipment. His work laid the foundation for wireless communication, including radio, television, and cell phones. Today, radio waves are essential for global information exchange and technology.
What is the role of bees in pollination? Bees are crucial pollinators that transfer pollen between flowers as they collect nectar, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process supports the growth of many fruits, vegetables, and nuts, and helps maintain healthy ecosystems. The decline of bee populations poses a serious threat to food security and biodiversity.
Why do countries have national symbols? National symbols, such as flags, anthems, and emblems, represent a country’s identity, history, and values. They foster unity and pride among citizens and are used during official ceremonies and international events. National symbols can also serve as powerful reminders of a nation's struggles and achievements.
Who invented the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, leading to widespread immunization and a dramatic decline in polio cases worldwide. His discovery helped prevent a disease that once caused paralysis and death in thousands of children. Salk’s work is celebrated as a major achievement in public health.
What is the significance of the Renaissance in European history? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to the 17th century that originated in Italy and spread across Europe. It marked a renewed interest in art, science, and literature, leading to remarkable advancements and the rise of figures like Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for modern Western civilization.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, easier hunting or foraging, and better chances of raising offspring. Group living, such as in packs, herds, or colonies, can also provide social interactions and aid in learning behaviors. Examples include wolves, dolphins, and bees, all of which benefit from cooperation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her achievement challenged gender roles and inspired women in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s disappearance during a later flight remains one of history’s great mysteries.
What is the process of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic involves collecting used items, sorting them by type, cleaning them, and melting them down to form new products. This reduces waste in landfills and conserves resources, but not all plastics are easily recyclable. Advances in technology and consumer awareness are helping to improve plastic recycling rates.
Why is the Amazon River important? The Amazon River is the largest river by volume in the world and supports the Amazon rainforest, one of the most biodiverse places on Earth. It provides water, transportation, and sustenance to millions of people and countless species. The river also influences global weather and climate patterns.
Who developed the theory of relativity and its impact? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His work led to advances in physics, such as nuclear energy and GPS technology. Einstein’s theories continue to shape scientific research and technological innovation.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in Earth’s atmosphere absorbs harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun, protecting living organisms from damage. Efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have led to recovery of the ozone layer in recent decades. Maintaining its health is vital for life on Earth and for preventing skin cancer and other issues.
Why do people write poetry? Poetry allows people to express emotions, ideas, and experiences in creative and evocative ways. It can capture beauty, challenge norms, and communicate complex feelings that may be hard to convey in ordinary language. Poetry has been an important part of human culture for thousands of years, inspiring and connecting people across generations.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in less than 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge for athletes worldwide.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. This system is vital for sustaining life and supporting the function of all organs.
Who discovered the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s. His discovery led to widespread immunization programs that drastically reduced polio cases worldwide. The vaccine’s success helped prevent paralysis and death, changing public health history.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, which returns water to Earth’s surface. Condensation helps regulate temperature and humidity in the atmosphere.
Why do we need minerals in our diet? Minerals such as calcium, iron, and potassium are essential for building bones, carrying oxygen, and regulating nerve function. They act as cofactors for enzymes and help maintain fluid balance. A balanced intake of minerals supports growth, energy, and overall health.
Who was the first person to reach the moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a turning point in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement in Europe from the 14th to the 17th century, characterized by a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced great thinkers and artists like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western civilization.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which have tiny hairs that increase surface area for uptake. These substances travel up the stem to the leaves where photosynthesis occurs. The process enables growth, development, and the production of food for other organisms.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating issues of identity, alienation, and loss in postwar America. The novel is considered a classic of American literature and resonates with readers worldwide.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones such as insulin to regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a critical role in both the digestive and endocrine systems. Proper pancreatic function is essential for metabolism and energy balance.
Why do volcanoes form on Earth? Volcanoes form when magma from Earth’s mantle rises through cracks in the crust, often at tectonic plate boundaries. The magma erupts as lava, ash, and gases, creating volcanic landforms over time. Volcanoes can shape landscapes, influence climate, and create fertile soils for agriculture.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for disarmament and her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired the peace movement in Europe. Von Suttner’s honor helped elevate women’s voices in international affairs.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides ATP, the energy currency for cellular functions. Cellular respiration powers growth, movement, and repair in all living things.
Why do deserts receive so little rainfall? Deserts are located in regions with high-pressure systems, dry winds, and few clouds, preventing moisture from accumulating. Mountain ranges can also block rain-bearing winds, creating rain shadows. Low precipitation and evaporation rates result in arid conditions and sparse vegetation.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change history? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century. The press enabled the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. Gutenberg’s invention sparked the spread of literacy and ideas, fueling the Reformation and the Renaissance.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in the stratosphere absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, reducing the risk of skin cancer and eye disorders. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as reducing CFC emissions, have helped restore its protective role.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” first performed in 1791. The opera blends magical elements, philosophical themes, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its story combines adventure, romance, and the triumph of good over evil.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the evaporation of water from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps cool the plant, move nutrients, and maintain the flow of water from the roots. Transpiration also influences weather patterns and the water cycle.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals provide opportunities for communities to express traditions, honor history, and strengthen social bonds. They often feature music, dance, food, and religious or historical rituals. Festivals promote diversity, understanding, and a sense of belonging.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in nearly 22 hours. His achievement inspired future generations of open-water swimmers and remains a benchmark in endurance sports. Webb’s legacy is celebrated in swimming history.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections, viruses, and harmful substances. They identify and destroy pathogens, and some remember past infections to respond faster next time. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for immune protection.
Who discovered the structure of benzene? Friedrich August Kekulé proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865, revolutionizing organic chemistry. His discovery explained benzene’s stability and paved the way for understanding aromatic compounds. Kekulé’s insights remain foundational in modern chemistry.
What is the process of weathering and why is it important? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals by wind, water, ice, and biological activity. It produces soil and shapes landscapes, influencing ecosystems and agriculture. Weathering is essential for the formation of fertile ground and the cycling of nutrients.
Who wrote the play “Death of a Salesman”? Arthur Miller wrote “Death of a Salesman,” first performed in 1949. The play explores the struggles of Willy Loman, a salesman facing disillusionment and family conflict. Miller’s work is a cornerstone of American theater, examining themes of identity, ambition, and societal expectations.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions, allowing organisms to sense and respond to their environment. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, transmitting signals throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, emotion, and reflexes.
What is the function of the skeleton in animals? The skeleton provides structural support, protects vital organs, and enables movement through muscles attached to bones. It also plays a role in producing blood cells and storing minerals such as calcium. Healthy bones are essential for growth, strength, and overall well-being.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart made history in 1932 as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement inspired women in aviation and showed that perseverance and courage could break barriers. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s rights.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. These droplets gather together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes depending on atmospheric conditions. Clouds play a crucial role in regulating temperature and distributing precipitation.
Why do we use decimal numbers in mathematics? Decimal numbers are based on the base-10 system, which is easy to use because humans have ten fingers. This system allows for efficient arithmetic operations, clear representation of fractions, and standardized measurement. Decimals are essential in science, engineering, and everyday calculations.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism, challenging viewers’ perceptions of time and reality. Dalí’s innovative style influenced many artists and changed the course of modern art.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage and skin cancer. Without the ozone layer, life on Earth would be at greater risk from intense solar radiation. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
Who was the founder of the Mongol Empire? Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire in the early 13th century, uniting various nomadic tribes under his leadership. His military campaigns created one of the largest empires in history, stretching across Asia and Europe. Genghis Khan’s legacy includes innovations in governance, trade, and culture.
What is the process of water filtration? Water filtration removes impurities and contaminants from water by passing it through layers of sand, gravel, charcoal, or specialized membranes. This process produces clean, safe water for drinking, cooking, and industrial use. Filtration is critical for public health and environmental protection.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when underwater eruptions build up layers of lava and ash that eventually break the ocean surface. Over time, these volcanic islands can grow larger as more eruptions occur and materials accumulate. Examples include Hawaii and Iceland, both formed by volcanic activity.
Who wrote “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which follows the story of Holden Caulfield as he struggles with adolescence and alienation. The novel’s themes of identity, rebellion, and authenticity have resonated with generations of readers. Salinger’s work remains a classic in American literature.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions by transmitting signals between the brain, spinal cord, and other parts of the body. It enables sensation, movement, thought, and emotional responses. A healthy nervous system is essential for survival and adaptation to environmental changes.
Why do camels have humps? Camels have humps to store fat, which can be converted into energy and water when food and water are scarce. This adaptation enables camels to survive long journeys across deserts and harsh climates. Their unique physiology makes them invaluable for transportation and agriculture in arid regions.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, dramatically reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work saved countless lives and helped eradicate polio in many countries. Salk’s contribution is celebrated as a major milestone in medical science.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume in the world and runs through the heart of the Amazon rainforest in South America. It supports a vast diversity of plant and animal life and provides water, transportation, and livelihoods for millions of people. The river is vital for regional climate regulation and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the 21-mile journey in less than 22 hours. His feat demonstrated the possibilities of human endurance and inspired future long-distance swimmers. Webb’s accomplishment is still celebrated in the world of sports.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by absorbing sunlight through chlorophyll, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process supports aquatic food chains and produces much of the world’s oxygen supply. Algae are important for maintaining healthy ecosystems in oceans, lakes, and rivers.
Why do people celebrate festivals? Festivals are celebrated to mark important cultural, religious, or historical events, fostering community spirit and shared traditions. They provide opportunities for socialization, entertainment, and reflection on values and beliefs. Festivals contribute to cultural identity and help preserve heritage across generations.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute” in 1791, blending elements of fantasy, comedy, and enlightenment philosophy. The opera’s music and symbolism have made it a beloved work, performed worldwide. Mozart’s creativity and genius are evident in its enduring popularity.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin acts as a protective barrier against physical injury, pathogens, and harmful substances. It regulates body temperature, enables sensation, and helps synthesize vitamin D when exposed to sunlight. Healthy skin is essential for overall well-being and immune defense.
Why do we use wind turbines for energy? Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy of wind into electricity, providing a clean, renewable energy source. They reduce greenhouse gas emissions and reliance on fossil fuels, helping to combat climate change. Wind power is increasingly used in many countries to support sustainable development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, became the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His success was due to careful planning, experience with polar conditions, and the use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of Antarctica and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who wrote the poem “The Raven”? Edgar Allan Poe wrote “The Raven,” first published in 1845. The poem explores themes of grief, loss, and madness through the haunting visit of a mysterious raven. Poe’s use of rhythm, symbolism, and dark imagery makes “The Raven” a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time and shipping costs. The canal is vital for international trade and global commerce.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process by which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients within the plant. Transpiration also plays a significant role in the water cycle and influences local climate conditions.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Dr. Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, greatly reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. Polio was a crippling and sometimes deadly illness, especially among children. Salk’s vaccine marked a turning point in public health, preventing countless cases of paralysis and death.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a physical barrier that divided East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989. It symbolized the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. The fall of the wall in 1989 marked the beginning of German reunification and the end of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe.
Why do we need protein in our diet? Protein is essential for building and repairing tissues, producing hormones and enzymes, and supporting immune function. It provides the building blocks for muscles, skin, hair, and internal organs. A lack of protein can lead to fatigue, weakened immunity, and poor growth and development.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, combining elements of fairy tale, comedy, and profound philosophical themes. The opera is famous for its memorable melodies and enchanting characters. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most beloved and frequently performed operas in the world.
What is the purpose of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)? UNESCO was established in 1945 to promote international collaboration in education, science, and culture. The organization works to preserve cultural heritage, support universal education, and foster freedom of expression. UNESCO's initiatives help build peace and sustainable development worldwide.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling cold water, strong currents, and exhaustion. Webb’s achievement inspired many future long-distance swimmers and remains a legendary accomplishment in sports history.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when the remains or traces of organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. The process often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineralization where organic material is replaced by minerals. Fossils provide crucial evidence of ancient life and help scientists understand the history of Earth.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions occur underwater and lava accumulates, eventually rising above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were created by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who wrote the novel "The Catcher in the Rye"? J.D. Salinger wrote "The Catcher in the Rye," published in 1951. The novel follows the experiences of Holden Caulfield, a teenager struggling with alienation and identity. Salinger's work is celebrated for its candid exploration of adolescence and its impact on modern literature.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s upper atmosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Preserving the ozone layer is crucial for environmental and human health.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups to improve their chances of finding food, defending against predators, and caring for young. Living in groups allows individuals to work together and share resources. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds forming flocks for migration.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the process of crystallization? Crystallization is the process by which atoms or molecules arrange themselves into a well-ordered, repeating pattern to form a solid crystal. It can occur from solutions, melts, or vapor. Crystallization is important in geology, chemistry, and the manufacturing of products like sugar and salt.
Who was the first female prime minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the role of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. This organ plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we experience wind? Wind is caused by differences in air pressure resulting from the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, creating currents. Wind helps distribute heat, moisture, and seeds, influencing weather and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of genetic inheritance? Genetic inheritance is the passing of traits from parents to offspring through genes found in DNA. Each parent contributes half of an offspring’s genetic material, resulting in a unique combination. Inheritance explains how characteristics like eye color or blood type are transmitted across generations.
Who discovered the vaccine for smallpox? Edward Jenner discovered the vaccine for smallpox in 1796 by using material from cowpox blisters to immunize people. This groundbreaking work laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox. Jenner’s discovery remains one of the greatest achievements in public health.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Why do humans laugh? Laughter is a response to humor, surprise, or social interaction, and it helps strengthen social bonds. It can also reduce stress, improve mood, and trigger beneficial physical changes in the body. Scientists believe laughter evolved as a way to communicate and build trust among groups.
Who painted "The Persistence of Memory"? Salvador Dalí painted "The Persistence of Memory" in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is a hallmark of the Surrealist movement and is displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
What is the purpose of the Red Cross? The Red Cross is an international humanitarian organization founded to provide emergency assistance, disaster relief, and health services. It operates in nearly every country, helping victims of war, natural disasters, and health crises. The Red Cross also promotes education in first aid and international humanitarian law.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis by using sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide to produce glucose and oxygen. Unlike plants, their photosynthetic machinery is located in the cell membrane, not in chloroplasts. Cyanobacteria are among the oldest life forms and have helped shape Earth’s atmosphere.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister broke the four-minute barrier in 1954, running the mile in 3 minutes and 59.4 seconds. His achievement was considered impossible at the time and inspired athletes around the world to push human limits. Bannister’s record was soon surpassed, but his legacy endures.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the ancient world’s largest and most important centers of learning. It housed thousands of scrolls and attracted scholars from many cultures, contributing greatly to the advancement of science and philosophy. Its destruction marked a significant loss of knowledge and cultural heritage.
Why do some animals have camouflage patterns? Camouflage patterns help animals avoid predators or sneak up on prey by blending into their environment. This adaptation can include colors, shapes, and behaviors that match surroundings such as leaves, rocks, or sand. Camouflage increases survival rates and is found in insects, reptiles, mammals, and birds.
Who developed the first theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and have since moved apart. Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics, although they were initially controversial.
What is the process of water purification in treatment plants? Water purification involves several steps, including filtration to remove physical debris, chemical treatment like chlorination to kill microbes, and sometimes advanced processes such as reverse osmosis. These methods ensure that drinking water is safe and free from contaminants. Modern treatment plants are essential for public health.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The artwork depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea, symbolizing love and beauty. Botticelli’s painting is celebrated for its graceful figures and mythological themes.
What is the importance of coral reefs in the ocean? Coral reefs provide habitats for thousands of marine species, protect coastlines from erosion, and support fishing and tourism industries. They are among the most diverse ecosystems but are threatened by pollution, overfishing, and climate change. Conservation of coral reefs is crucial for ocean health.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which explores the impact of the Napoleonic wars on Russian society. The novel is famous for its complex characters, philosophical insights, and vivid historical detail. "War and Peace" is considered one of the greatest works of world literature.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces bile for digestion. It also stores energy and helps regulate blood sugar levels. The liver is vital for metabolism and overall health, and its failure can be life-threatening.
Why do birds migrate seasonally? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climates as seasons change. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows ancient routes. This behavior ensures survival and reproductive success in changing environments.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart achieved fame as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and she later set records for solo flights around the world. Her daring adventures challenged gender norms and inspired future aviators. Earhart disappeared during her attempt to circumnavigate the globe in 1937, leaving a lasting legacy.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental protection.
Who invented the vaccine for rabies? Louis Pasteur developed the first effective rabies vaccine in the late 19th century. His work demonstrated the principles of immunization and saved countless lives. Pasteur’s discoveries helped establish the field of microbiology and modern vaccines.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, limited the powers of the English monarchy and established principles of legal rights and due process. It influenced the development of constitutional law in many countries and is seen as a foundation for democracy. The Magna Carta’s legacy endures in legal systems worldwide.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement typically occurs along faults or plate boundaries and can cause significant damage. Earthquake monitoring and building codes help reduce risks in vulnerable regions.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty" in 1889. The ballet is known for its enchanting music and elaborate choreography, telling the story of Princess Aurora. "Sleeping Beauty" remains a staple of classical ballet and is performed by companies worldwide.
What is the role of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorb floodwaters, and provide habitats for a wide range of plants and animals. They help maintain biodiversity and protect against erosion. Wetland conservation is important for environmental balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. The discovery has revolutionized biology and medicine.
What is the process of cloud formation in meteorology? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds in the sky. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather patterns.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it commonly occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor, usually due to heat from the sun. It commonly occurs on the surface of oceans, lakes, and rivers, contributing to the water cycle. This process is vital for maintaining natural water distribution and regulating climate.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. The light bulb revolutionized society by enabling safe, reliable indoor lighting and extending productive hours after sunset. Edison's invention paved the way for modern electric power systems and transformed homes and cities.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify, attack, and remove harmful pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Maintaining a healthy level of white blood cells is essential for overall well-being.
Why do we experience different climates on Earth? Different climates occur because of variations in latitude, altitude, proximity to oceans, and atmospheric circulation. The tilt of Earth’s axis and its orbit around the sun also influence seasonal changes and temperature patterns. These factors create a diverse range of environments across the planet.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which is regarded as one of the greatest novels of all time. The book explores themes of love, war, fate, and the human condition during the Napoleonic era in Russia. Tolstoy’s work continues to influence literature and philosophy worldwide.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling plants to produce fruits and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail to reproduce, threatening food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinator populations is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. He completed the journey in his boat, the Spray, overcoming storms, loneliness, and navigation challenges. Slocum’s adventure inspired countless sailors and remains a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria use chlorophyll to absorb sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. They are among the oldest organisms on Earth and played a crucial role in oxygenating the atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria continue to support aquatic food webs and global ecosystems.
Why do we need carbohydrates in our diet? Carbohydrates are a primary source of energy for the body, fueling brain function, physical activity, and metabolism. They are broken down into glucose, which cells use to produce ATP, the energy currency of life. Consuming the right balance of carbohydrates supports health and prevents fatigue.
Who composed "Clair de Lune"? Claude Debussy composed "Clair de Lune," one of his most famous piano pieces, in 1890. Its gentle melodies evoke images of moonlight and tranquility, making it a favorite among musicians and audiences alike. Debussy’s composition is a hallmark of Impressionist music.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon, located in Arizona, USA, is a vast geological formation carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. Its layered rocks reveal Earth’s ancient history and attract millions of visitors annually. The canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a symbol of natural beauty and scientific discovery.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His Special and General Relativity theories have had profound impacts on physics, astronomy, and technology. Einstein’s work continues to inspire scientific advances and exploration.
What is the function of the liver in humans? The liver filters blood, metabolizes nutrients, stores vitamins, and detoxifies harmful substances. It also produces bile, which helps digest fats, and plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar levels. A healthy liver is vital for digestion, energy, and overall health.
Why do animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other organisms or objects, helping them avoid predators or attract prey. For example, some butterflies mimic toxic species, while certain insects resemble leaves or twigs. Mimicry increases survival by confusing predators and enhancing adaptation to the environment.
Who painted "Water Lilies"? Claude Monet painted "Water Lilies," a series of about 250 oil paintings created between 1897 and 1926. These works depict Monet’s flower garden in Giverny and are celebrated for their vibrant colors and impressionistic style. "Water Lilies" has influenced generations of artists and is displayed in museums worldwide.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands form when underwater volcanoes erupt, building up layers of lava and ash until they rise above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions create landmasses that support unique ecosystems. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which emerged from volcanic activity in the Pacific Ocean.
Who was the first female astronaut from the United States? Sally Ride became the first American woman to travel to space in 1983 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger. Her mission broke gender barriers in science and inspired generations of women to pursue careers in STEM. Ride’s achievements remain a milestone in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It significantly shortens shipping routes between Europe and Asia, boosting global trade and economic development. The canal is strategically important for international commerce and maritime navigation.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur due to Earth’s tilted axis and its orbit around the sun, causing variations in sunlight and temperature throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in day length and weather patterns, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. The cycle of seasons shapes ecosystems and influences human activities.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440, revolutionizing the spread of information and literacy. The printing press made books affordable and accessible, fueling the Renaissance and scientific progress. Gutenberg’s invention is considered one of the most important in human history.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach stores and mixes food, secretes digestive enzymes and acids, and breaks down proteins into smaller molecules. Its muscular walls churn food to help with chemical digestion before it moves into the intestines. Proper stomach function is essential for nutrient absorption and overall health.
Who wrote the play "The Tempest"? William Shakespeare wrote "The Tempest" around 1610–1611, weaving themes of magic, forgiveness, and power into a story set on a remote island. The play explores the relationship between Prospero, a sorcerer, and the other castaways. "The Tempest" remains one of Shakespeare’s most imaginative and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support immense biodiversity, providing habitats for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fishing and tourism, and contribute to oxygen production. Preserving coral reefs is vital for the health of oceans and the people who rely on them.
What is the process of water desalination and why is it important? Water desalination is the technique of removing salts and minerals from seawater or brackish water to produce freshwater. The process is crucial in regions where natural freshwater sources are scarce, providing clean drinking water for millions of people. Methods include reverse osmosis and distillation, both of which require significant energy but offer solutions for drought-stricken areas.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her courageous feat broke records and inspired women around the world to pursue careers in aviation and other fields traditionally dominated by men. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s history.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital for marine biodiversity, providing habitats and shelter for thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and support fishing and tourism industries. The health of coral reefs is threatened by pollution, climate change, and overfishing, making their conservation a global priority.
Why do people celebrate the Lunar New Year? The Lunar New Year is celebrated in many East and Southeast Asian cultures as the beginning of a new year based on the lunar calendar. Traditions include family reunions, feasts, fireworks, and the exchange of red envelopes with money for good luck. The festival symbolizes renewal, prosperity, and the importance of family and community.
Who developed the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 could perform floating-point arithmetic and was used for engineering calculations. Zuse’s work laid the foundation for modern computing and influenced the design of later electronic computers.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most influential libraries in history. It was a center of learning, attracting scholars from across the Mediterranean and housing countless scrolls on science, philosophy, and literature. The library’s destruction is often seen as a symbol of lost knowledge and the fragility of cultural heritage.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for their eggs and young, protecting them from predators and harsh weather. Nests can be simple or elaborate, made from twigs, grass, mud, or even feathers. The act of nest-building also promotes bonding between parent birds and helps ensure the survival of their offspring.
Who composed the musical "West Side Story"? Leonard Bernstein composed the music for "West Side Story," which premiered in 1957. The musical, with lyrics by Stephen Sondheim, reimagines Shakespeare’s "Romeo and Juliet" in the context of rival street gangs in New York City. Its groundbreaking fusion of classical, jazz, and Latin styles made it a classic of American musical theater.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands are formed when underwater volcanoes erupt, layering lava and ash until they rise above the ocean’s surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands, such as the Hawaiian archipelago. These islands often have unique ecosystems and provide insights into geological processes.
Why do humans need iron in their diet? Iron is an essential mineral that enables the production of hemoglobin, which carries oxygen in the blood. Without enough iron, people can become fatigued and develop anemia, a condition marked by weakness and poor concentration. Dietary sources of iron include red meat, beans, spinach, and fortified cereals.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and later drifted apart. Wegener’s theory eventually led to the development of plate tectonics, revolutionizing earth sciences.
What is the importance of honeybees in agriculture? Honeybees are critical pollinators, supporting the production of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. Their pollination increases crop yields and quality, making them indispensable for food security. Threats to honeybee populations, such as disease and pesticides, pose serious risks to global agriculture.
Why do we have blood types? Blood types are determined by specific antigens on the surface of red blood cells, which help the immune system distinguish between self and foreign cells. Understanding blood types is crucial for safe blood transfusions and organ transplants, as incompatible types can trigger immune reactions. The main blood groups are A, B, AB, and O, each with positive or negative Rh factors.
Who invented the printing press and why is it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The press allowed books and documents to be produced quickly and cheaply, making literacy and knowledge accessible to many. Gutenberg’s invention paved the way for the Renaissance, scientific progress, and the modern world.
What is the process of nitrogen fixation? Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into compounds that plants can absorb and use for growth. This process is carried out by certain bacteria and is essential for the fertility of soils. Nitrogen fixation supports agriculture and natural ecosystems by providing a key nutrient for plant development.
Why do people use compasses for navigation? Compasses are used for navigation because they reliably indicate magnetic north, helping travelers determine direction in unfamiliar terrain. The invention of the compass enabled explorers to sail across oceans and discover new lands. Compasses remain a vital tool in hiking, boating, and orienteering.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the late 15th century, depicting the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell. The painting is celebrated for its graceful lines, mythological subject, and symbolic meaning. "The Birth of Venus" is a highlight of Renaissance art and draws visitors to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.
What is the importance of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitat for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do people celebrate the Day of the Dead in Mexico? The Day of the Dead, or Día de los Muertos, is celebrated in Mexico to honor and remember deceased loved ones. Families create altars, offer food and gifts, and gather in cemeteries to celebrate life and memory. The holiday blends indigenous traditions and Catholic beliefs, emphasizing the cyclical nature of existence.
Who was the first African American woman in space? Dr. Mae Jemison became the first African American woman in space in 1992 aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour. She conducted scientific experiments and inspired many with her achievements in science and education. Jemison continues to advocate for STEM opportunities for underrepresented groups.
What is the process of rock formation? Rock formation occurs through three main processes: igneous rocks form from cooled lava or magma, sedimentary rocks develop from compacted sediments, and metamorphic rocks arise from existing rocks transformed by heat and pressure. These processes shape Earth’s landscapes and provide resources for human use. The rock cycle is fundamental to geology and planetary science.
Who composed the symphony "New World Symphony"? Antonín Dvořák composed the "New World Symphony" (Symphony No. 9) during his stay in the United States in the 1890s. The piece incorporates American musical themes and has become one of the most beloved orchestral works. Dvořák’s symphony reflects his admiration for American culture and landscapes.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria of cells and provides the ATP needed for movement, growth, and other bodily functions. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and underpins all activity in living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat? Sir Francis Chichester was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat, completing his journey in 1967. He sailed the vessel Gipsy Moth IV, overcoming storms and challenging conditions. Chichester’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo ocean navigation and inspired future sailors.
What is the significance of the Human Genome Project? The Human Genome Project was an international scientific effort to map all the genes in human DNA, completed in 2003. It provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and medicine. The project has paved the way for advances in genomics, personalized medicine, and biotechnology.
Why do icebergs float in water? Icebergs float because solid ice is less dense than liquid water, causing buoyancy. Most of an iceberg’s mass is hidden below the surface, with only a small portion visible above water. This phenomenon is crucial for marine navigation and plays a role in ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “War and Peace”? Leo Tolstoy wrote “War and Peace,” a monumental work of Russian literature published in the 1860s. The novel explores themes of love, war, family, and fate through a vast cast of characters set during the Napoleonic Wars. Tolstoy’s masterpiece is celebrated for its depth, realism, and philosophical insight.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs are diverse underwater ecosystems that support thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, provide food and income for millions, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who was the first woman to win the Fields Medal in mathematics? Maryam Mirzakhani became the first woman to win the Fields Medal in 2014 for her outstanding contributions to the geometry and dynamics of Riemann surfaces. Her groundbreaking work opened new areas of research and inspired women in mathematics worldwide. Mirzakhani’s legacy continues through her pioneering ideas.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Photosynthesis in cyanobacteria uses specialized pigments to capture sunlight, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. These ancient microbes played a key role in oxygenating Earth’s atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria remain vital in aquatic ecosystems and biotechnology applications.
Why do volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries because magma rises when plates move apart or one plate is forced under another. This process allows molten rock to reach the surface, creating volcanic eruptions. Plate boundaries are hotspots for geological activity and the formation of new land.
Who composed the opera "La Traviata"? Giuseppe Verdi composed "La Traviata" in 1853, telling the story of a doomed romance between Violetta and Alfredo. The opera is renowned for its emotional music and dramatic plot. "La Traviata" is one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who was the first astronaut to set foot on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first astronaut to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions. Armstrong’s achievement marked a milestone in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone in archaeology? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s written language. The stone is a symbol of linguistic and historical breakthroughs.
Why do some plants produce flowers? Plants produce flowers to facilitate reproduction through the attraction of pollinators and the production of seeds. Flowers contain male and female reproductive organs, enabling genetic diversity. The evolution of flowers has been crucial for the survival and spread of many plant species.
Who invented the first practical steam locomotive? George Stephenson invented the first practical steam locomotive, named "Locomotion No. 1," in 1825. His designs improved transportation, enabling rapid movement of goods and people. Stephenson’s work was fundamental to the development of the railway industry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological means. Physical weathering involves temperature changes and abrasion, while chemical weathering includes reactions with water and air. Weathering shapes landscapes and contributes to soil formation.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains controversial and influential in global history.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental restoration, memory consolidation, and immune system support. It helps regulate hormones, metabolism, and emotional health. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to poor concentration, health problems, and reduced quality of life.
Who wrote the play “The Importance of Being Earnest”? Oscar Wilde wrote “The Importance of Being Earnest” in 1895. The play is a witty satire of Victorian society and explores themes of identity, marriage, and social conventions. Wilde’s humor and clever dialogue have made it a classic of English theater.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. Cloud formation is essential for precipitation and influences weather patterns around the globe.
What is the process of evaporation and how does it affect the water cycle? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat, usually from the sun. This process moves water from surfaces like oceans and lakes into the atmosphere, forming clouds and eventually leading to precipitation. Evaporation is a key driver in the global water cycle, influencing weather and climate.
Who invented the first practical electric light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His light bulb was reliable, long-lasting, and safe for use in homes and businesses. This invention revolutionized society by making electric lighting widely accessible and changing the way people lived after dark.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. In animals, it consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is vital for survival, growth, and energy distribution.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight is essential for plants because it provides the energy needed for photosynthesis, the process by which they produce food. Through photosynthesis, plants convert light energy into chemical energy, creating glucose and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot thrive, and ecosystems would collapse.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream through the story of Jay Gatsby and his lavish parties. “The Great Gatsby” is considered a classic of American literature and remains widely studied and admired.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants, controlling floods, and replenishing groundwater. They support a rich diversity of plant and animal life and serve as breeding grounds for many species. Conserving wetlands is crucial for maintaining ecosystem balance and protecting biodiversity.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent became a symbol of human endurance and exploration. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest achievements in mountaineering history.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most living organisms. However, excess greenhouse gases can lead to global warming and climate change.
Why do animals form social groups? Animals form social groups for protection, finding food, raising offspring, and communicating. Living in groups can increase survival rates and provide opportunities for learning and cooperation. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and dolphins living in pods.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and vibrant colors express Van Gogh’s emotional intensity and creativity. “The Starry Night” is considered one of the most iconic works in art history.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It starts in the mouth with chewing and saliva, continues in the stomach and intestines with enzymes and acids, and ends with nutrient absorption and waste elimination. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created the protocols for linking documents and sharing information through web browsers. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important for the water cycle? Evaporation is the process where liquid water transforms into water vapor due to heat from the sun. This process occurs on the surfaces of oceans, lakes, and rivers, returning water to the atmosphere. Evaporation is crucial for the water cycle, regulating climate and replenishing precipitation.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest on May 29, 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering history. The successful expedition inspired countless climbers and expanded understanding of high-altitude exploration.
What is the function of red blood cells in the human body? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen, giving blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are vital for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who wrote the novel "Don Quixote"? Miguel de Cervantes, a Spanish author, wrote "Don Quixote," published in two parts in 1605 and 1615. The novel follows the adventures of an idealistic knight and is considered one of the greatest works in world literature. "Don Quixote" has influenced countless writers and remains widely read today.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch Baroque painter, created "Girl with a Pearl Earring" around 1665. The painting is famous for its enigmatic expression and masterful use of light and color. It is often called the "Mona Lisa of the North" and remains one of Vermeer’s most celebrated works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation is the process by which water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This transition occurs when warm, moist air rises and encounters cooler temperatures at higher altitudes. Condensation is crucial for creating precipitation and maintaining the Earth’s water cycle.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel into space in 1963 aboard Vostok 6. Her journey lasted almost three days and proved that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, and cognitive functions. Proper functioning of the nervous system is vital for survival and everyday life.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate during winter to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows down significantly, allowing them to use stored body fat for energy. This adaptation is common in mammals such as bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan, as he grows up and pursues his dreams, encountering a host of memorable characters along the way. Dickens’ work is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the significance of the invention of the wheel? The invention of the wheel revolutionized transportation, agriculture, and technology by enabling the movement of goods and people with greater ease. Wheels are essential components of vehicles, machinery, and countless devices. This simple yet profound invention played a key role in the development of civilization.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and gradually moved apart. Although controversial at first, his ideas laid the groundwork for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo as they develop from larvae to adults. It involves distinct stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with dramatic changes in form and function. For example, caterpillars become butterflies through metamorphosis, adapting to different environments and roles.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy required to combine carbon dioxide and water, producing food and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot grow or sustain life on Earth.
Who painted the mural "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" in the late 15th century on the wall of the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during the famous biblical meal and is renowned for its composition and emotional depth. "The Last Supper" remains one of the most iconic works of Renaissance art.
What is the importance of recycling for the environment? Recycling reduces waste, conserves natural resources, and lowers pollution levels by transforming used materials into new products. It helps save energy and decreases the need for raw material extraction, protecting ecosystems. Recycling is a key practice for sustainable living and environmental protection.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and enchanting story have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies and is beloved by audiences of all ages.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces enzymes that help break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon, hormones that regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and metabolic health.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climate conditions. Migration often involves navigating across continents, using landmarks and the Earth's magnetic field for guidance. This behavior is vital for survival and maintaining healthy bird populations.
Who invented the first practical electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first practical electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a reliable source of continuous electric current, paving the way for modern electrical devices. Volta’s work is honored in the unit of electric potential, the volt.
What is the process of erosion and its effects on landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and transports soil from one place to another. While erosion is a natural process, human activities can accelerate it, leading to environmental challenges.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. Shakespeare’s play is one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, help prevent flooding, and provide habitat for a wide variety of plants and animals. They support biodiversity and contribute to the health of surrounding ecosystems. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the law of electromagnetic induction? Michael Faraday discovered the law of electromagnetic induction in 1831, showing that a changing magnetic field can produce an electric current. This principle is the foundation for electric generators, transformers, and many modern technologies. Faraday’s experiments greatly advanced the understanding of electricity and magnetism.
What is the significance of the Apollo 11 mission? The Apollo 11 mission, launched by NASA in 1969, was the first to land humans on the Moon. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the lunar surface, while Michael Collins piloted the command module. The mission represented a major achievement in space exploration and inspired generations worldwide.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for the water cycle because it leads to precipitation, returning water to Earth's surface. Condensation also helps regulate atmospheric temperature and humidity.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria using a microscope? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first to observe bacteria under a microscope in the late 17th century. His homemade lenses allowed him to see tiny organisms he called "animalcules." Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries laid the foundation for microbiology and transformed our understanding of life.
What is the function of platelets in human blood? Platelets are small cell fragments in blood that help clot wounds and prevent excessive bleeding. When an injury occurs, platelets gather at the site and form a plug, releasing chemicals that trigger clotting. This process is vital for healing and protecting the body from infection.
Why do deserts have extreme temperatures? Deserts experience extreme temperatures because they have little moisture in the air to buffer heat changes. During the day, the sun rapidly heats the surface, but at night, the lack of clouds allows heat to escape quickly. This results in very hot days and cold nights in many desert regions.
Who wrote the novel "The Odyssey"? "The Odyssey" is an ancient Greek epic poem attributed to Homer, believed to have been composed in the 8th century BCE. It tells the story of Odysseus’s long and perilous journey home after the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of adventure, loyalty, and perseverance and remains influential in literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide habitats for diverse wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Protecting wetlands is crucial for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She is known for her novel "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which combines adventure and educational themes. Lagerlöf’s work is celebrated for its vivid storytelling and impact on Swedish literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in Earth's climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in the atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping Earth warm enough to support life. Without it, the planet would be too cold for most living organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps them survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Many species follow specific routes and rely on instinct, environmental cues, and learned behaviors.
Who invented the first vaccine and what disease did it target? Edward Jenner developed the first vaccine in 1796 to protect against smallpox. He used material from cowpox blisters to immunize people, pioneering the concept of vaccination. Jenner’s discovery laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces digestive enzymes that break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon to regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and energy management.
Who painted "The Starry Night"? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while he was living in an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The swirling sky and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and innovative style. Today, the painting is considered one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is crucial for global trade and has shaped international relations.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong, unique passwords are essential for safeguarding digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who wrote the play "Waiting for Godot"? Samuel Beckett wrote "Waiting for Godot," first performed in 1953. The play is a landmark of absurdist theater, exploring themes of meaning, time, and human existence through two characters waiting for someone named Godot. Beckett’s work has influenced modern drama and philosophical thought.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? Kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents once formed a single landmass called Pangaea and gradually drifted apart. Although controversial at first, Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their juvenile form to adulthood, involving distinct stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, undergoing dramatic changes in structure and function. This process allows insects to exploit different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world? Sir Robin Knox-Johnston became the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world in 1969 aboard his boat "Suhaili." His journey took 312 days and overcame severe storms and isolation. Knox-Johnston's achievement is celebrated as a monumental milestone in maritime history.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the greatest centers of learning in the ancient world, housing thousands of manuscripts and attracting scholars from many cultures. Its destruction resulted in the loss of invaluable knowledge and records of ancient civilizations. The library remains a symbol of the importance of preserving and sharing human knowledge.
Why do deserts form on Earth? Deserts form due to factors such as low precipitation, high evaporation rates, and geographical barriers like mountains that block moisture-laden winds. Many deserts occur at latitudes where dry air sinks and inhibits cloud formation. Deserts play a role in Earth's climate and are home to unique adaptations in plants and animals.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who navigates social class, ambition, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’s work is renowned for its rich characters and exploration of themes like justice, redemption, and love.
What is the importance of mangrove forests? Mangrove forests protect coastlines from erosion and storm surges, provide habitats for countless marine and terrestrial species, and support local fisheries. Their complex root systems trap sediments and filter pollutants, maintaining water quality. Mangroves are increasingly recognized for their role in carbon storage and climate change mitigation.
Who invented the safety elevator and how did it change architecture? Elisha Otis invented the safety elevator in 1852, introducing a braking mechanism that prevented the cab from falling if the cable broke. This innovation made it feasible to construct taller buildings, leading to the development of skyscrapers. Otis’s invention transformed urban landscapes and modern architecture.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, as condensed water eventually falls as rain or snow. Condensation helps regulate Earth's temperature and is a key stage in the water cycle.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works include "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which is celebrated for its imaginative storytelling and depiction of Swedish folklore. Lagerlöf paved the way for women writers in international literature.
What is the significance of the Mayan calendar? The Mayan calendar was a sophisticated system used by the Maya civilization to track time, predict astronomical events, and determine religious ceremonies. It included several cycles, such as the Haab’ and Tzolk’in, and was more accurate than many contemporary Western calendars. The calendar reflects the advanced mathematical and astronomical knowledge of the Maya.
Why do volcanoes create fertile soils? Volcanic eruptions deposit minerals and nutrients onto the land, enriching the soil and making it highly fertile. As volcanic rocks weather and decompose, they release elements like potassium and phosphorus. Many agricultural regions around the world benefit from soil formed by past volcanic activity.
Who composed the opera "Carmen"? Georges Bizet composed the opera "Carmen," which premiered in 1875. The opera tells the story of a passionate and tragic love affair between Carmen, a free-spirited woman, and Don José, a soldier. "Carmen" is celebrated for its memorable melodies and dramatic intensity, making it one of the most popular operas ever written.
What is the process of erosion and why is it important? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. This process shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and transports nutrients across ecosystems. While erosion is a natural force, excessive human-induced erosion can lead to loss of fertile land and environmental problems.
Who discovered the structure of benzene and its significance? August Kekulé, a German chemist, proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865. His insight solved a long-standing mystery in organic chemistry and paved the way for the development of aromatic compounds. Benzene’s structure underpins much of modern chemistry, including the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and materials.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support a vast diversity of marine life, protect shorelines from erosion, and provide resources for fishing and tourism. They are sometimes called the "rainforests of the sea" due to their biodiversity. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change, pollution, and overfishing, making their conservation critical.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister, a British athlete, became the first person to run a mile in under four minutes on May 6, 1954. His time was 3 minutes, 59.4 seconds, breaking a psychological barrier in athletics. Bannister’s achievement inspired runners worldwide and is considered one of the greatest feats in sports history.
What is the process of plate tectonics and its impact on geography? Plate tectonics is the movement of large plates that make up Earth’s crust, driven by heat from the planet’s interior. This movement causes earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, mountain formation, and the drifting of continents. Plate tectonics continually reshape Earth’s geography and influence natural disasters.
Who painted "The Night Watch"? Rembrandt van Rijn, a Dutch master, painted "The Night Watch" in 1642. The painting is famous for its dramatic use of light and shadow, as well as its dynamic composition of a city militia. "The Night Watch" is a highlight of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and a symbol of Dutch Golden Age art.
What is the function of the nervous system in animals? The nervous system in animals controls and coordinates actions by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, enabling responses to external stimuli, movement, and thought. Proper functioning of the nervous system is essential for survival, behavior, and adaptation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland took nearly 15 hours and demonstrated both her courage and skill as a pilot. Earhart’s accomplishment advanced the role of women in aviation and remains a historic milestone.
What is the process of condensation and why is it important? Condensation is the process where water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid water, forming droplets. This typically occurs when humid air encounters a cooler surface or temperature, creating dew, fog, or clouds. Condensation is essential in the water cycle, as it allows for the formation of precipitation and helps regulate Earth’s climate.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication over long distances for the first time. The device revolutionized both personal and business interactions, making real-time conversations possible across cities and countries. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the function of the circulatory system in the human body? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body using blood vessels. The heart pumps blood to all tissues, maintaining cellular health and homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, immunity, and overall well-being.
Why do seasons change during the year? Seasons change because of Earth’s axial tilt and its orbit around the sun. As the planet moves, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, causing shifts in temperature and daylight hours. These changes influence plant growth, animal behavior, and human activities across the globe.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. "Romeo and Juliet" remains one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who painted the "Starry Night" and why is it significant? Vincent van Gogh painted "Starry Night" in 1889, capturing swirling skies over a quiet town. The work is celebrated for its emotional intensity, bold colors, and innovative brushwork. "Starry Night" is considered a masterpiece of Post-Impressionist art and is studied and admired worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it affect the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His historic step was broadcast worldwide, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Armstrong’s achievement inspired generations and expanded humanity’s understanding of the cosmos.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of education for society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Why do some animals migrate long distances? Animals migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better climate conditions. Migration can span thousands of kilometers, as seen in monarch butterflies, whales, and birds. This behavior helps species survive seasonal changes and is critical for maintaining healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, contains the genetic instructions that determine the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living things. It carries information that is passed down from parents to offspring, ensuring continuity of traits. DNA is essential for cellular processes and is the basis of heredity and evolution.
Who was the first person to run a marathon in under two hours? Eliud Kipchoge, a Kenyan athlete, became the first person to run a marathon in under two hours in 2019 during the Ineos 1:59 Challenge. His time was 1:59:40, although it does not count as an official world record due to controlled race conditions. Kipchoge's achievement is celebrated as a milestone in distance running.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. The conservation of wetlands is essential for maintaining healthy ecosystems and protecting water resources.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, enabling the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. It helps maintain immune function and emotional well-being. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of health issues.
Who composed the opera “Carmen”? Georges Bizet composed the opera “Carmen,” which premiered in 1875. The story is set in Spain and follows the passionate and tragic tale of Carmen, a free-spirited woman. “Carmen” is renowned for its memorable melodies and has become one of the most popular operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Without photosynthesis, life on Earth would not be possible.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Lagerlöf’s works are celebrated for their imagination and deep humanity.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s language and history. The Rosetta Stone is a symbol of linguistic and archaeological breakthroughs.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. “Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we need renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s resources. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Renewable energy also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body via blood. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. A healthy circulatory system is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
Who was the first woman to travel to space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel to space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, was one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional law and individual freedoms, influencing democratic governments worldwide. Its principles remain relevant in contemporary legal systems.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, their body temperature drops, and bodily functions decrease to minimal levels. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” first published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters love, loss, and personal growth as he moves through Victorian society. Dickens’ novel is celebrated for its vivid characters and exploration of social class and morality.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important for plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops humans rely on.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to transmit voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication by making real-time conversation possible over long distances. The telephone paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication networks.
What is the importance of clean air for health and the environment? Clean air is vital for respiratory health, reducing the risk of diseases such as asthma and lung cancer. It also supports healthy ecosystems and prevents damage to crops, forests, and bodies of water. Maintaining clean air is essential for public health and environmental sustainability.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding, reproduction, and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria using a microscope in the late 17th century. His discoveries opened the door to microbiology and the study of microscopic life. Leeuwenhoek’s work revolutionized medicine and our understanding of disease.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for environmental sustainability.
Who composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty,” which premiered in 1890. The ballet is renowned for its beautiful melodies, enchanting story, and elaborate choreography. “Sleeping Beauty” remains a staple of classical ballet repertoires worldwide.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy needed for growth, movement, and cellular activities. Healthy mitochondria are crucial for overall cellular function and organismal health.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during their final meal together, capturing a moment of intense emotion and drama. “The Last Supper” is celebrated as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and religious symbolism.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can create valleys, cliffs, and other landforms by transporting soil and rock from one place to another. Erosion is a key factor in shaping Earth’s surface over time.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership left a lasting legacy in both national and global history.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do glaciers retreat and what does it mean for the planet? Glaciers retreat when melting outpaces snowfall due to rising global temperatures, shrinking their mass and surface area. This contributes to sea level rise and affects freshwater supplies for many regions. Glacier retreat is a visible indicator of climate change and can disrupt ecosystems and human societies.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it revolutionize medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo distinct changes in form and structure throughout their life cycle. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources at each stage, contributing to their evolutionary success.
Who was the first person to invent a working electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first true electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a continuous source of electric current and sparked new experiments in electricity. Volta’s work laid the foundation for modern electrical technology and devices.
What is the role of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is crucial for energy production, growth, and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted relative to its orbital plane around the sun. As the planet travels through its orbit, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. These seasonal changes affect weather patterns, plant growth, and animal behavior.
Who wrote the novel "Wuthering Heights"? Emily Brontë wrote "Wuthering Heights," which was published in 1847. The novel is known for its dark, passionate story of love and revenge set on the Yorkshire moors. Brontë’s only novel has become a classic of English literature, admired for its complex characters and emotional intensity.
What is the function of enzymes in biological systems? Enzymes are proteins that act as catalysts, speeding up chemical reactions in living organisms. They are essential for processes such as digestion, energy production, DNA replication, and cell signaling. Without enzymes, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to sustain life.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Her achievement paved the way for future female astronauts and inspired generations.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It houses an extraordinary variety of plants and animals and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the global climate. The Amazon is also vital for indigenous cultures and biodiversity conservation.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe and secure place for their eggs and young. Nests protect against predators and harsh weather and sometimes help regulate temperature and humidity. The construction and location of nests vary greatly among bird species, reflecting their unique needs and behaviors.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information through linked documents accessible via browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge across the globe.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization is the process by which the remains or traces of living organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. It often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineral replacement or casting. Fossils are crucial for understanding past life and the history of Earth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping modern British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in global history.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, allowing photosynthesis to occur. It enables plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen, providing energy for growth. Chlorophyll also gives plants their characteristic green color.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890 in Saint Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is celebrated for its enchanting music, elegant choreography, and fairy-tale story. It is a staple of classical ballet and performed by companies worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus announces that one of his disciples will betray him. "The Last Supper" is renowned for its composition, emotional intensity, and artistic innovation.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly shortening trade routes. The canal remains vital for global commerce and geopolitics.
Why do humans need vitamins? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the play "Death of a Salesman"? Arthur Miller wrote "Death of a Salesman," which premiered in 1949. The play explores themes of the American Dream, family, and personal failure through the life of Willy Loman, a struggling salesman. Miller’s work is regarded as a classic of American theater and continues to be widely studied and performed.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo a dramatic transformation from one stage of life to another. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with each stage having distinct forms and behaviors. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources throughout their lifecycle.
Who was the first person to invent the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the first practical telephone in 1876. His invention allowed people to communicate over long distances using electrical signals, revolutionizing global communication. Bell’s telephone paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine environments? Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems in the world, supporting thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and provide food and income for millions of people. Coral reefs are also important for medicine and tourism, but they are threatened by pollution and climate change.
Why do humans need vitamins in their diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that the body requires for normal growth, development, and metabolism. They play crucial roles in processes such as immune function, energy production, and cell repair. Since the human body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food to prevent deficiencies and maintain health.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and tells the tale of a young girl's magical adventure with a nutcracker prince. “The Nutcracker” is especially popular during the holiday season and is performed by ballet companies around the world.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys are organs that filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain the body’s fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for overall health and detoxification.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who dreams of rising above his humble beginnings and becoming a gentleman. Dickens explores themes of social class, ambition, and personal growth, making it one of his most celebrated works.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities have increased the concentration of greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is crucial for mitigating environmental impacts.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Hibernation is a survival strategy used by certain animals to conserve energy during periods of cold and food scarcity. During hibernation, animals lower their metabolic rates and body temperatures, often remaining inactive for weeks or months. This allows them to survive harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the printing press and why was it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440 in Germany. The printing press enabled the mass production of books and other written materials, greatly increasing access to information. This technological breakthrough helped spread literacy, science, and ideas, fueling the Renaissance and shaping modern society.
What is the role of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands serve as natural water filters, removing pollutants and improving water quality. They provide habitat for many species, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Wetlands are essential for maintaining ecological balance and are a focus of conservation efforts worldwide.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and masterful technique, making it one of the most recognized artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This takes place mainly in the mitochondria and is essential for powering bodily functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences today.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished and do not deplete Earth’s resources. It helps reduce pollution, combat climate change, and supports sustainable development. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a cleaner, safer future.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it change medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. Penicillin led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. This discovery is considered one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web and what was its impact? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers, making it easy to access and exchange knowledge. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, transforming how people live and work.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports nutrients, oxygen, and hormones to cells throughout the body and removes waste products like carbon dioxide. It includes the heart, blood, and blood vessels, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the Z3 in 1941, widely considered the first programmable, fully automatic digital computer. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and floating-point calculations, laying the groundwork for modern computing. Zuse’s innovations influenced the development of computers worldwide.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, was a charter that limited the power of the English king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It is seen as a foundational document for modern democracy and constitutional law. Its principles influenced legal systems and the development of human rights.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight provides the energy required for photosynthesis, the process by which plants make food from carbon dioxide and water. Without sunlight, plants cannot produce the glucose needed for growth, repair, and reproduction. Sunlight also influences flowering, seed production, and overall plant health.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who faces social and personal challenges as he rises in society. Dickens’s work explores themes of ambition, love, and redemption, and remains a classic of English literature.
What is the purpose of the immune system in humans? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and destroying harmful invaders like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs, including white blood cells and antibodies. A strong immune system is vital for survival and recovery.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro? Hans Meyer, a German geographer, and Ludwig Purtscheller, an Austrian mountaineer, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro in 1889. Their successful ascent opened the way for scientific studies and tourism in the region. Kilimanjaro remains a popular destination for climbers from around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis and its importance for life? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process creates the food and oxygen that sustain nearly all life on Earth. Without photosynthesis, ecosystems would collapse, and most living organisms would not survive.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet,” which premiered in 1938. Based on Shakespeare’s tragic play, the ballet is known for its dramatic music and expressive choreography. Prokofiev’s score has become one of the most beloved works in the ballet repertoire.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world and is home to an incredible diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. It plays a key role in regulating the global climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen. The Amazon is also a source of medicines and supports unique ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling people to transmit speech over long distances for the first time. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication, connecting people and places across the globe. The telephone paved the way for modern telecommunications, including mobile phones and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to understand the language and history of ancient Egypt. The Stone is a symbol of breakthroughs in archaeology and linguistics.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows, and body temperature drops, allowing them to live off stored fat. Hibernation is a common adaptation in mammals like bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples at the moment he announces that one will betray him. “The Last Supper” is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and artistic innovation.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth. They also store food and interact with soil organisms to support plant health. A strong root system is essential for stability, resilience, and productivity in plants.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her courageous flight demonstrated the possibilities of aviation for women and inspired generations. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and perseverance.
What is the importance of renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete Earth's resources. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and pollution. Investing in renewables supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who composed the opera “The Marriage of Figaro”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Marriage of Figaro,” which premiered in 1786. The opera is a comedic masterpiece that explores themes of love, class, and mistaken identity. Mozart’s music and the witty libretto have made it one of the most beloved operas in history.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, or ice. This natural process shapes valleys, coastlines, and mountains over time. Erosion influences soil fertility, ecosystem health, and the formation of geological features.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It helps regulate temperature and maintain homeostasis. This system is essential for survival, supporting organs and tissues by ensuring they receive the resources they need.
Who invented the telephone and how did it impact society? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. The telephone revolutionized how people connected, transforming business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Its invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and the global networks we rely on today.
What is the significance of the Declaration of Independence? The Declaration of Independence, adopted in 1776, marked the American colonies’ formal separation from British rule. It articulated the principles of liberty, equality, and self-government, inspiring movements for democracy worldwide. The document remains a cornerstone of American identity and political philosophy.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These sudden movements often happen along faults or plate boundaries. Earthquakes can cause significant damage to structures and landscapes and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring journey helped break gender barriers in aviation and encouraged women to pursue careers in science and exploration. Earhart remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is essential for powering cell functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 on the wall of a monastery in Milan. The masterpiece depicts Jesus with his disciples and is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and innovative techniques. "The Last Supper" is one of the most recognized and studied artworks in history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to propose heliocentrism? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His revolutionary theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the role of the digestive system in humans? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet” in 1935, based on Shakespeare’s tragic play. The music is known for its dramatic intensity and memorable melodies, and the ballet is performed by companies worldwide. Prokofiev’s work is celebrated for capturing the emotion and conflict of the story.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The story follows the orphan Pip as he navigates ambition, love, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’ novel is renowned for its memorable characters and social commentary.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates bodily functions by transmitting electrical signals between the brain, spinal cord, and the rest of the body. It enables us to perceive the environment, move muscles, and respond to stimuli. The nervous system is essential for memory, learning, and maintaining homeostasis.
Who discovered the structure of DNA and why was it important? James Watson and Francis Crick, with crucial contributions from Rosalind Franklin, discovered the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough explained how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA’s structure revolutionized genetics, medicine, and biotechnology.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, limited the powers of the king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional government and the rule of law. The Magna Carta has influenced legal systems around the world and remains a symbol of liberty and justice.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and prevent overheating. When the body becomes too warm, sweat glands release moisture that evaporates and cools the skin. Sweating also helps remove some waste products from the body.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. He achieved this feat through careful planning, use of sled dogs, and efficient travel techniques. Amundsen’s success marked a major milestone in polar exploration.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest on Earth, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to a vast diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous people, and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the planet’s climate. Protecting the Amazon is vital for global biodiversity and environmental health.
Who wrote the play "Othello"? William Shakespeare wrote "Othello" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of a Moorish general in Venice. "Othello" remains a powerful work, frequently performed and studied for its complex characters and dramatic impact.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the loss of water vapor from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps transport nutrients from roots to leaves and cools the plant. Transpiration also drives the movement of water through ecosystems and influences local climate.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created protocols for sharing information via linked documents, revolutionizing communication, commerce, and education. The Web is now an essential part of modern life, connecting billions of people worldwide.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function and homeostasis.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are celebrated for their artistic mastery and dramatic storytelling. The Sistine Chapel remains a major attraction for visitors and art lovers worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for a stable and healthy environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and remains a landmark in space exploration.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microorganisms to promote healthy growth. Strong roots are essential for plant stability and productivity.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and choreography have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies each winter.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skeletal system in humans? The skeletal system provides structure and support for the human body, protecting vital organs and enabling movement through joints and muscles. Bones also produce blood cells in the marrow and store minerals such as calcium and phosphorus. A healthy skeletal system is essential for overall mobility and resilience.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria in the late 17th century using a homemade microscope. His discoveries opened up the world of microbiology, revealing tiny organisms previously unknown to science. Leeuwenhoek’s work laid the foundation for modern bacteriology and cell theory.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and maintain homeostasis, especially in hot conditions or during physical activity. Sweat evaporates from the skin, cooling the body and preventing overheating. Sweating also helps excrete certain waste products and maintain electrolyte balance.
Who composed the opera “The Barber of Seville”? Gioachino Rossini composed “The Barber of Seville,” which premiered in 1816. The opera is a comic masterpiece, known for its energetic arias and witty plot involving the clever barber Figaro. “The Barber of Seville” remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Who was the first woman to travel to the deepest part of the ocean? Kathy Sullivan became the first woman to travel to Challenger Deep, the deepest known point in the ocean, in 2020. She is also an astronaut, making her the first person to both walk in space and reach the ocean’s deepest spot. Sullivan’s achievements highlight the spirit of exploration across frontiers.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Why do migratory birds travel such long distances? Migratory birds travel long distances to find optimal conditions for feeding, breeding, and survival, often moving between continents. Changing seasons, food availability, and climate drive these remarkable journeys. Migration ensures species can avoid harsh environments and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the kidneys in humans? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the late 15th century, depicting the mythological goddess emerging from the sea on a shell. The artwork is celebrated for its graceful figures and vibrant colors. Botticelli’s painting remains a masterpiece of the Italian Renaissance.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Why do some animals use camouflage? Animals use camouflage to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” first performed around 1604. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his manipulative subordinate Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful work in the English literary canon.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases such as carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for a healthy planet.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, which involves dramatic changes in form and function. This process allows insects to occupy different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the first movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century in Germany. His invention revolutionized the production of books, making literature and scientific knowledge more accessible. The printing press played a crucial role in the spread of ideas during the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the role of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for laying eggs, incubating them, and raising their young. Nests protect eggs and chicks from predators and harsh weather. The materials and construction techniques vary widely depending on the species and environment.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army. “Othello” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and performed works.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry? Marie Curie was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her work on radium and polonium. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for scientists and women worldwide.
What is the process of erosion and how does it affect landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and impact ecosystems.
Why do some animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of transpiration in plants and why is it important? Transpiration is the process by which water travels from the roots of a plant, moves up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature, maintain nutrient flow, and influences local humidity and rainfall patterns. Transpiration also plays a crucial role in the global water cycle.
Who was the first person to climb all fourteen 8,000-meter peaks? Reinhold Messner, an Italian mountaineer, became the first person to climb all fourteen peaks over 8,000 meters without supplemental oxygen. He completed this feat in 1986, demonstrating extraordinary endurance and skill. Messner’s achievement is celebrated as one of the greatest accomplishments in modern mountaineering.
What is the importance of the International Date Line? The International Date Line is an imaginary line, mostly following the 180th meridian, that determines where the calendar date changes by one day. Crossing the line from west to east subtracts a day, while crossing from east to west adds a day. It helps standardize global timekeeping and coordinates activities across continents.
Why do some animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other species or natural objects for protection, hunting, or attracting mates. For example, some butterflies imitate toxic species to avoid predators, and certain insects mimic leaves or twigs for camouflage. Mimicry increases survival chances by confusing or deterring threats.
Who composed the opera "Don Giovanni"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "Don Giovanni," which premiered in 1787. The opera blends comedy, tragedy, and supernatural elements in the story of the notorious seducer Don Juan. "Don Giovanni" is considered one of Mozart’s greatest works and a masterpiece of operatic literature.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and attack pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. Different types of white blood cells have specialized roles, including producing antibodies and destroying infected cells.
Who invented the airplane and how did it change transportation? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903. Their invention revolutionized transportation, enabling rapid travel across continents and oceans. Aviation has since transformed commerce, tourism, and global connectivity.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China was built over centuries to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids by nomadic tribes. Stretching thousands of miles, it stands as a symbol of China’s engineering prowess and historical resilience. The Wall attracts millions of tourists and remains a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do we experience lunar eclipses? Lunar eclipses occur when the Earth passes between the Sun and the Moon, casting a shadow on the Moon’s surface. This can only happen during a full moon. Lunar eclipses are visible from anywhere on the nighttime side of Earth and have been observed and studied for centuries.
Who painted "Guernica" and what does it represent? Pablo Picasso painted "Guernica" in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of innocent civilians. "Guernica" is a powerful anti-war symbol and one of Picasso’s most famous works.
What is the process of photosynthesis in aquatic plants? Aquatic plants use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in submerged leaves and stems, providing oxygen for aquatic life and helping regulate carbon levels in the water. Photosynthesis in aquatic ecosystems supports fish, invertebrates, and other organisms.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her work advocating for disarmament and peaceful conflict resolution influenced global peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to inspire activists and leaders around the world.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do some countries use geothermal energy? Countries with abundant geothermal resources, such as Iceland and New Zealand, use geothermal energy to generate electricity and heat buildings. Geothermal energy is sustainable, produces minimal pollution, and provides reliable power. Harnessing geothermal energy helps reduce dependence on fossil fuels and supports environmental goals.
Who wrote the novel "The Grapes of Wrath"? John Steinbeck wrote "The Grapes of Wrath," published in 1939. The novel chronicles the struggles of a family during the Great Depression as they migrate from Oklahoma to California. Steinbeck’s work highlights themes of poverty, injustice, and resilience, and remains a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators such as bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling the production of fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail, impacting food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinators is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965 during the Voskhod 2 mission. He floated outside his spacecraft for twelve minutes, demonstrating the feasibility of extravehicular activity. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future space exploration.
What is the process of cloud seeding and why is it used? Cloud seeding involves dispersing substances such as silver iodide or salt into clouds to encourage precipitation. It is used to increase rainfall, reduce drought, and improve water supplies in dry regions. Cloud seeding is also employed to minimize hail and enhance snowpack in some areas.
Why are coral reefs important for marine life? Coral reefs provide habitat, food, and breeding grounds for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fisheries and tourism, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890. The ballet is based on the fairy tale of Princess Aurora and features lush music and elaborate choreography. "Sleeping Beauty" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process in which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients and minerals. Transpiration also contributes to the water cycle and affects local humidity.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His historic words, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," were broadcast to millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in human exploration and space science.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, significantly shortening travel time. The canal is a vital artery for international trade and has strategic economic and geopolitical significance.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Camouflage helps animals blend into their environment, making it harder for predators to spot them or easier for them to ambush prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, and even body shapes that mimic surroundings. Camouflage increases an animal’s chance of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who composed the symphony “Symphonie Fantastique”? Hector Berlioz composed “Symphonie Fantastique” in 1830, a groundbreaking work known for its vivid storytelling and innovative orchestration. The symphony follows the dreams and torments of an artist, using musical techniques to depict emotions and events. Berlioz’s composition is considered a masterpiece of the Romantic era.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates body activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, thought, and emotion. The nervous system enables rapid responses and adaptation to internal and external stimuli.
Who wrote the novel “Crime and Punishment”? Fyodor Dostoevsky wrote “Crime and Punishment,” published in 1866. The novel explores themes of morality, guilt, and redemption through the story of Raskolnikov, a young student who commits murder. Dostoevsky’s psychological insight and philosophical depth make it a classic of world literature.
What is the significance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has revolutionized astronomy by capturing detailed images of distant galaxies, nebulae, and stars. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study black holes, and discover new planets. Hubble’s work has greatly expanded our understanding of the cosmos.
Why do we need proteins in our diet? Proteins are essential nutrients that help build and repair tissues, produce enzymes and hormones, and support the immune system. They are made up of amino acids, some of which the body cannot produce and must be obtained from food. A lack of protein can lead to health problems such as muscle loss and weakened immunity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the "Iron Lady," she served for over a decade and implemented significant economic and social reforms. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in British and global politics.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes and sizes. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather and climate.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The painting depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell and is celebrated for its beauty and mythological symbolism. Botticelli’s work is a highlight of art history and is housed in Florence’s Uffizi Gallery.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953, with key contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time for reflection, renewal, and setting goals. Traditions vary around the world, often including fireworks, parties, and rituals to bring good luck. The holiday is observed globally and symbolizes hope for the future.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web has revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the significance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs support an incredible diversity of marine life, providing food, shelter, and breeding grounds for thousands of species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. Healthy coral reefs are vital for the balance and productivity of ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. “Macbeth” remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the role of mitochondria in living cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair by providing energy for all cellular processes. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
To whom did the Virgin Mary allegedly appear in 1858 in Lourdes France? Saint Bernadette Soubirous, a young peasant girl from Lourdes, reported a series of visions in which she encountered the Virgin Mary. These apparitions became widely known and led to Lourdes becoming a major site of Catholic pilgrimage. Bernadette’s experiences were later recognized by the Catholic Church as authentic.
What is in front of the Notre Dame Main Building? In front of the Notre Dame Main Building stands a prominent copper statue of Christ. This statue is a key landmark on campus, often serving as a meeting point for students and visitors. The statue symbolizes the university’s religious heritage and its connection to Catholic tradition.
The Basilica of the Sacred heart at Notre Dame is beside to which structure? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart is situated adjacent to the Main Building at Notre Dame. This proximity highlights the central role of faith and spirituality in campus life. Both structures are among the oldest and most iconic at the university.
What is the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame is a Marian shrine and a peaceful place for prayer and reflection. Modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France, it offers students, faculty, and visitors a quiet space to meditate. Many people light candles at the Grotto as a sign of hope or remembrance.
What sits on top of the Main Building at Notre Dame? Atop the Main Building at Notre Dame is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary. This gleaming figure is visible from various points on campus and serves as a symbol of the university’s dedication to Mary. The statue has become a celebrated part of Notre Dame’s visual identity.
When did the Scholastic Magazine of Notre dame begin publishing? The Scholastic Magazine began publishing in September 1876, making it one of the oldest student publications in the United States. It has chronicled campus life, events, and student opinions for generations. The magazine remains an important outlet for student journalism at Notre Dame.
How often is Notre Dame's the Juggler published? The Juggler, Notre Dame’s literary magazine, is published twice each academic year. It features creative writing, poetry, and visual art submitted by students. The magazine provides a platform for artistic expression and enriches the university’s cultural life.
What is the daily student paper at Notre Dame called? The daily student newspaper at Notre Dame is called The Observer. The paper covers university news, student activities, and issues affecting the campus community. It is widely read and respected as a primary source of information for students and faculty.
How many student news papers are found at Notre Dame? Notre Dame hosts three student newspapers, each serving different interests and segments of the campus. These publications offer diverse viewpoints and opportunities for students to engage in journalism. They are an integral part of campus communication and student life.
In what year did the student paper Common Sense begin publication at Notre Dame? The student newspaper Common Sense began publication at Notre Dame in 1987. It was founded to provide an independent voice for students and to discuss topics not always covered by other campus papers. Since its inception, Common Sense has contributed to campus discourse and debate.
Where is the headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross is located in Rome, Italy. This religious order has a global presence and oversees ministries, educational institutions, and parishes worldwide. Rome serves as its central administrative and spiritual hub.
What is the primary seminary of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The primary seminary for the Congregation of the Holy Cross is Moreau Seminary, located on the campus of Notre Dame. This seminary is dedicated to the formation and education of priests and brothers. It plays a key role in preparing members for service in the church and society.
What is the oldest structure at Notre Dame? The oldest building on the Notre Dame campus is Old College. Constructed in the mid-19th century, Old College has served various functions over the years, including student housing and administrative offices. Its enduring presence is a testament to the university’s long history.
What individuals live at Fatima House at Notre Dame? Fatima House at Notre Dame provides residence for retired priests and brothers associated with the university. The facility offers a comfortable and supportive environment for these individuals in their later years. It also fosters a sense of community and ongoing connection to Notre Dame’s spiritual life.
Which prize did Frederick Buechner create? Frederick Buechner established the Buechner Prize for Preaching, which recognizes excellence in homiletics. The prize encourages thoughtful, inspiring preaching and promotes the role of faith in public discourse. Recipients of the prize are celebrated for their contributions to religious communication.
How many BS level degrees are offered in the College of Engineering at Notre Dame? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame offers eight distinct Bachelor of Science degree programs. These degrees span various fields such as civil, chemical, mechanical, and electrical engineering. The college provides rigorous training and prepares graduates for careers in industry and research.
In what year was the College of Engineering at Notre Dame formed? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame was officially established in 1920. Its creation marked a significant expansion in the university’s academic offerings and commitment to technological innovation. Since then, the college has become a leader in engineering education and research.
Before the creation of the College of Engineering similar studies were carried out at which Notre Dame college? Prior to the formation of the College of Engineering, engineering-related studies were conducted within the College of Science at Notre Dame. Students interested in engineering pursued coursework in mathematics and the natural sciences. This foundation paved the way for the dedicated engineering programs that followed.
How many departments are within the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering? The Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering houses five academic departments. These departments focus on different engineering disciplines and foster collaboration among faculty and students. The hall is known for its modern facilities and commitment to innovation.
The College of Science began to offer civil engineering courses beginning at what time at Notre Dame? The College of Science started offering civil engineering courses at Notre Dame in the 1870s. This early adoption reflected the university’s recognition of the importance of engineering in society. The courses laid the groundwork for the eventual establishment of the College of Engineering.
What entity provides help with the management of time for new students at Notre Dame? The Learning Resource Center at Notre Dame assists new students in managing their time and academic responsibilities. Staff at the center offer workshops, counseling, and resources to help students develop effective study habits. Their support contributes to student success and well-being.
How many colleges for undergraduates are at Notre Dame? There are five undergraduate colleges at Notre Dame, each specializing in different areas of study. These colleges provide a broad range of academic programs and foster a vibrant intellectual community. The diversity of offerings allows students to pursue their academic interests fully.
What was created at Notre Dame in 1962 to assist first year students? In 1962, Notre Dame established the First Year of Studies program to support incoming freshmen. This program helps students adjust to university life, choose courses, and plan their academic paths. It has been recognized nationally for its effectiveness and innovation.
Which organization declared the First Year of Studies program at Notre Dame "outstanding?" U.S. News & World Report recognized Notre Dame’s First Year of Studies program as “outstanding.” The program’s emphasis on mentorship and academic guidance earned it national praise. It remains a model for similar initiatives at other universities.
The granting of Doctorate degrees first occurred in what year at Notre Dame? Notre Dame awarded its first Doctorate degrees in 1924, marking a milestone in its academic history. This development expanded the university’s ability to prepare scholars and researchers. Doctoral programs now play an essential role in Notre Dame’s reputation as a research institution.
What type of degree is an M.Div.? An M.Div. is a Master of Divinity degree, a graduate-level credential for those entering ministry or religious leadership. The program covers theology, pastoral care, and scriptural studies. Graduates are prepared for service in churches, religious organizations, and academic settings.
Which program at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree? The Alliance for Catholic Education at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree. This program is designed to train teachers for service in Catholic schools across the country. It combines rigorous coursework with practical experience in educational settings.
In what year was a Master of Arts course first offered at Notre Dame? Notre Dame first offered a Master of Arts course in 1854, expanding its academic portfolio to include graduate education. This early commitment to advanced study set the stage for the university’s growth. Today, Notre Dame offers a wide range of master’s programs in the arts and sciences.
Which department at Notre Dame is the only one to not offer a PhD program? The Department of Pre-Professional Studies at Notre Dame is the only department that does not offer a PhD program. This department focuses on preparing students for medical, dental, and other professional schools. Its curriculum emphasizes foundational sciences and career readiness.
What institute at Notre Dame studies the reasons for violent conflict? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at Notre Dame investigates the causes of violent conflict and strategies for peacebuilding. The institute conducts research, hosts events, and educates students on global peace issues. Its work is recognized internationally.
What is the title of Notre Dame's Theodore Hesburgh? Theodore Hesburgh holds the title of President Emeritus of the University of Notre Dame. Hesburgh served as president for 35 years, transforming the university into a world-class institution. His legacy includes advancements in academics, diversity, and social justice.
In what year was the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies founded? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies was founded in 1986 at Notre Dame. Its establishment reflected the university’s commitment to peace and global justice. The institute has since become a leader in conflict resolution and peace research.
To whom was John B. Kroc married? John B. Kroc was married to Ray Kroc, the businessman who expanded McDonald's into a global franchise. Their partnership influenced philanthropy and business. The Kroc family’s legacy is visible in charitable and educational initiatives.
What company did Ray Kroc own? Ray Kroc was the owner and driving force behind McDonald's Corporation. He transformed the company from a local burger stand into a worldwide fast food empire. Kroc’s innovative business strategies changed the landscape of global dining.
How many stories tall is the main library at Notre Dame? The main library at Notre Dame, known as the Hesburgh Library, is fourteen stories tall. This iconic building is a hub for research, study, and collaboration. Its mural, “The Word of Life,” is visible from across campus and is a beloved symbol for students.
Who founded the University of Notre Dame? The University of Notre Dame was founded by Father Edward Sorin, a member of the Congregation of Holy Cross, in 1842. Sorin’s vision was to create a leading Catholic institution for higher learning in the United States. His legacy is still celebrated on campus through statues and annual commemorations.
What is the nickname of Notre Dame’s athletic teams? The athletic teams at Notre Dame are known as the Fighting Irish. This nickname reflects the university’s spirit of determination and resilience in sports and other endeavors. The Fighting Irish have a rich history, especially in football, and their mascot is the leprechaun.
Where is the Golden Dome located? The Golden Dome is located on the Main Building of the University of Notre Dame campus. This iconic landmark features a gold-leafed dome topped by a statue of the Virgin Mary. It is one of the most recognized symbols of Notre Dame and a popular spot for photos and campus tours.
What is the significance of the Hesburgh Library mural? The Hesburgh Library mural, also called "The Word of Life" or "Touchdown Jesus," is a massive artwork that faces the football stadium. The mural depicts Jesus with his arms raised, reminiscent of a referee signaling a touchdown. It is a beloved symbol of both academic excellence and the university’s athletic culture.
Who can ring the Victory Bell after a football win? The Victory Bell at Notre Dame is rung by members of the football team after a home victory. This tradition allows players to celebrate their success and share the moment with fans gathered nearby. The bell itself is located near the stadium and has become an important part of game day rituals.
Which building houses the Department of Physics at Notre Dame? The Department of Physics is housed in Nieuwland Science Hall at Notre Dame. This building contains classrooms, laboratories, and faculty offices dedicated to physics research and instruction. Nieuwland Hall is a hub for scientific activity and student learning on campus.
What is the name of Notre Dame's annual literary festival? Notre Dame’s annual literary festival is known as the Notre Dame Literary Festival. The event brings together authors, poets, and students for readings, workshops, and discussions. It fosters a vibrant literary culture and provides opportunities for creative engagement.
Which chapel is located in the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Crypt Chapel is located beneath the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at Notre Dame. It serves as a place for daily prayer, reflection, and special Masses. The chapel’s serene atmosphere and historic architecture make it a cherished site for students and visitors.
What is the Notre Dame Marching Band famous for? The Notre Dame Marching Band is famous for being one of the oldest university bands in the United States, established in 1846. The band performs at football games, pep rallies, and university ceremonies, energizing crowds with its music and precision. Its traditions are interwoven with the university’s history and spirit.
What does the Center for Social Concerns focus on? The Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame focuses on promoting social justice, community engagement, and service learning. It offers programs that connect students with opportunities to serve others locally and globally. Through research, teaching, and outreach, the center helps students address pressing social issues.
Who is the patron saint of Notre Dame? The patron saint of Notre Dame is the Virgin Mary, who is honored in many campus landmarks, including the Golden Dome and the Grotto. Her presence reflects the university’s Catholic identity and spiritual heritage. Many campus traditions and celebrations are dedicated to her.
What was the original purpose of the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame was built as a place for Marian devotion, modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France. It provides a quiet space for prayer, reflection, and candle lighting, serving as a spiritual oasis for students and visitors. Over the years, it has become one of the university’s most beloved sites.
Which sports facility is named after Knute Rockne? The Knute Rockne Memorial Gymnasium is named after the legendary Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne. The facility honors his contributions to the university’s athletic program and legacy as one of the greatest coaches in college football history. It is used for various athletic and recreational activities.
What student organization manages service projects at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team manages many service projects at Notre Dame. This organization coordinates volunteer efforts, community partnerships, and social justice initiatives. Students involved gain valuable experience in leadership and civic engagement.
Who is the current president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, the current president of Notre Dame is Reverend John I. Jenkins, C.S.C. He has served in this role since 2005, overseeing significant growth in academics and campus life. Father Jenkins is known for his commitment to the university’s mission and values.
Which building at Notre Dame contains the Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is Notre Dame’s motto? The official motto of Notre Dame is “God, Country, Notre Dame.” This phrase reflects the university’s commitment to faith, service, and patriotism. It is often cited at official events and is emblematic of the university’s guiding principles.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs at Notre Dame is known for its interdisciplinary approach to international studies and policy. The school offers degrees, research opportunities, and global internships. Its mission is to promote peace, development, and cross-cultural understanding worldwide.
Who designed the Main Building at Notre Dame? The Main Building at Notre Dame was designed by architect Willoughby J. Edbrooke in the late 19th century. The structure features the famous Golden Dome and has undergone several renovations to preserve its grandeur. Edbrooke’s design is celebrated for its elegance and historic significance.
Which athletic conference does Notre Dame football compete in? Notre Dame football competes as an independent team, not affiliated with any athletic conference for football. This independence allows for a flexible schedule and matchups with a variety of opponents. For other sports, Notre Dame participates in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
What is the Mendoza College of Business known for? The Mendoza College of Business at Notre Dame is renowned for its emphasis on ethical leadership and values-based education. The college offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in business disciplines. Mendoza graduates are recognized for their integrity and professional achievement.
Where is the Center for Ethics and Culture located? The Center for Ethics and Culture is located on the Notre Dame campus and serves as a hub for research, education, and dialogue on ethical issues. The center sponsors lectures, conferences, and publications that address moral questions in society. It plays a vital role in fostering intellectual engagement with ethics.
What was the first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame? The first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame was Farley Hall, which opened in 1973 following the university’s transition to coeducation. Farley Hall helped pave the way for greater gender diversity and inclusion on campus. Today, many residence halls support Notre Dame’s vibrant community of women students.
Which building houses Notre Dame’s chemistry labs? Notre Dame’s chemistry labs are housed in the Stepan Chemistry Hall. This building is equipped with state-of-the-art laboratories, research facilities, and teaching spaces. Stepan Hall supports cutting-edge research and training in chemistry and related fields.
Who was the first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame? The first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame was Frazier Thompson, who graduated in 1947. Thompson’s achievement marked an important milestone in the university’s history of diversity and inclusion. His legacy continues to inspire students from all backgrounds.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development? The Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development aims to address global challenges such as poverty, health, and education through research and partnerships. The initiative connects faculty and students with organizations around the world. Its projects focus on sustainable development and positive social impact.
Which building is home to the Notre Dame School of Architecture? The Notre Dame School of Architecture is housed in Bond Hall, a beautifully renovated structure located near the heart of campus. Bond Hall features studios, classrooms, and exhibition spaces for architecture students. The building fosters creativity and collaboration in architectural education.
What is the name of the Notre Dame student radio station? The Notre Dame student radio station is called WSND-FM. The station broadcasts a variety of music, news, and student-produced programs. WSND-FM provides hands-on experience for students interested in broadcasting and media.
Who was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame? The first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame was Nathan O. Hatch, appointed in 1996. Hatch’s leadership brought new perspectives to university administration and academic planning. He later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the largest academic building at Notre Dame? The largest academic building at Notre Dame is the Hesburgh Library, which spans fourteen stories and contains millions of volumes. This facility is a central resource for research, study, and collaboration. Its size and resources make it a cornerstone of campus life.
How many acres does the Notre Dame campus cover? The University of Notre Dame campus covers approximately 1,250 acres in South Bend, Indiana. The grounds include academic buildings, residence halls, athletic facilities, and scenic lakes. The expansive campus supports a vibrant community and a wide range of activities.
How many residence halls are at Notre Dame? Notre Dame has thirty-two undergraduate residence halls, each with its own unique culture and traditions. These halls are central to student life, fostering friendships and community involvement. Residence halls host events, service projects, and support students throughout their university experience.
Who was the first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame? The first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame was Ernest Walton, who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951 for his work on atom splitting. Walton served as a visiting professor at Notre Dame, contributing to the university’s reputation for scientific excellence. His achievements are honored on campus.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is known for its unique blend of contemporary and traditional sacred music. The choir performs at liturgical services, concerts, and special events, enriching the spiritual life of the university. Its repertoire includes original compositions and arrangements.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Writing Center? The Notre Dame Writing Center provides support to students working on essays, research papers, and other writing projects. Tutors offer feedback, guidance, and resources to help students improve their writing skills. The center plays a key role in academic success and communication.
Which lake is located on the Notre Dame campus? Saint Joseph’s Lake is one of two lakes located on the Notre Dame campus. It offers scenic views, walking paths, and opportunities for reflection and recreation. The lake is a popular destination for students seeking relaxation or inspiration.
Who was the first female president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, Notre Dame has not yet had a female president. The university’s leadership has historically been male, drawn from the Congregation of Holy Cross. However, women have played significant roles in administration, faculty, and student life.
What is the Notre Dame Center for STEM Education focused on? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education is dedicated to improving teaching and learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It offers training, research, and outreach programs for educators and students. The center’s work enhances STEM education locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run business club? The student-run business club at Notre Dame is the Student International Business Council (SIBC). The club organizes consulting projects, networking events, and international trips for students interested in business careers. SIBC is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first president of the University of Notre Dame? The first president of the University of Notre Dame was Father Edward Sorin, who founded the university in 1842. Sorin’s leadership established a strong foundation for Catholic education in America. His vision and commitment continue to inspire the university today.
What is the name of Notre Dame's football stadium? Notre Dame Stadium is the iconic home of the Fighting Irish football team. It has hosted countless memorable games since its opening in 1930. The stadium is a centerpiece of campus life and tradition, drawing thousands of fans each season.
Where is the Snite Museum of Art located? The Snite Museum of Art is situated on the Notre Dame campus, near the O'Shaughnessy Hall. The museum houses a diverse collection of artworks ranging from ancient to contemporary pieces. It serves as an educational resource and cultural venue for students and visitors.
What is the purpose of the Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns is dedicated to promoting social justice, service learning, and community engagement. It offers programs and resources that connect students with local and global service opportunities. Through its initiatives, the center fosters a commitment to ethical leadership and social responsibility.
Who was the first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame? The first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame was Mary Ann Proctor, who graduated in 1972 after the university became coeducational. Her achievement marked a significant moment in Notre Dame’s history, opening doors for future generations of women. Since then, women have played an increasingly prominent role on campus.
Which building is home to Notre Dame’s College of Engineering? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame is primarily housed in the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering. This modern facility features state-of-the-art labs, classrooms, and collaborative spaces. It supports cutting-edge research and innovation across multiple engineering disciplines.
What is the main student center at Notre Dame called? The Duncan Student Center is the main student hub at Notre Dame. It offers facilities for recreation, dining, and student organizations, as well as study and meeting spaces. Duncan Center is a focal point for campus life and community activities.
What is the purpose of the First Year of Studies program? The First Year of Studies program is designed to help incoming freshmen transition to university life. It provides academic advising, support services, and introductory courses to guide students in selecting their majors. The program is nationally recognized for its effectiveness in supporting first-year students.
Who is the author of Notre Dame’s Alma Mater? The Alma Mater of Notre Dame was composed by Joseph Casasanta, a professor and director of bands at the university. His composition “Notre Dame, Our Mother” is sung at official ceremonies and athletic events. The song expresses the university’s spirit and devotion to the Virgin Mary.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs is renowned for its interdisciplinary approach to international relations and global development. It offers programs that prepare students for leadership roles in diplomacy, policy analysis, and humanitarian work. Students benefit from opportunities for study abroad, internships, and research.
Which Notre Dame building features a mural known as “The Word of Life”? The Hesburgh Library features the famous mural “The Word of Life,” commonly called “Touchdown Jesus.” The mural, visible from the football stadium, depicts Jesus with arms raised, overlooking campus. It is a beloved symbol of the university’s blend of faith and academics.
Who was the first African American football player at Notre Dame? Wayne Edmonds was the first African American football player at Notre Dame, joining the team in 1953. His presence marked a significant step toward integration and diversity in college athletics. Edmonds’ legacy paved the way for future athletes of all backgrounds at Notre Dame.
What is the function of Moreau Seminary? Moreau Seminary serves as the primary residence and training facility for men preparing to join the Congregation of Holy Cross. The seminary offers spiritual formation, theological study, and community life. It is an integral part of Notre Dame’s religious mission and campus community.
Which lake is a popular spot for reflection and recreation at Notre Dame? Saint Mary’s Lake is a scenic and tranquil spot on the Notre Dame campus, popular for walking, reflection, and outdoor activities. The lake is surrounded by trees and walking paths, providing a peaceful retreat for students and visitors. Many traditions, such as sunrise walks, are associated with the lake.
Who was the architect of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart was designed by Fr. Sorin and French architect Albert C. Ménard in the late 19th century. The basilica features stunning stained glass windows and ornate decoration. It remains a center for worship and community gatherings at Notre Dame.
What is the Mendoza College of Business’s core value? The core value of the Mendoza College of Business is “Ask More of Business,” emphasizing ethical leadership and social responsibility. The college encourages students to consider the impact of their decisions on society. Graduates are recognized for their integrity and commitment to positive change.
Which campus organization coordinates student volunteer efforts? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team coordinates much of the student volunteer work at Notre Dame. Through partnerships and service projects, the organization fosters community engagement and leadership development. It helps students connect classroom learning with real-world service.
Who was the first lay provost at Notre Dame? Nathan O. Hatch was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame. He brought new perspectives to academic leadership and was instrumental in expanding research initiatives. Hatch later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the nickname for Notre Dame’s marching band? The Notre Dame Marching Band is affectionately known as “The Band of the Fighting Irish.” Established in 1846, it is one of the oldest collegiate bands in the United States. The band plays a key role in campus traditions and athletic events.
What is the purpose of the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies is dedicated to research, education, and policy advocacy for peace and conflict resolution. The institute offers graduate and undergraduate programs in peace studies. Its faculty and students contribute to global efforts for justice and reconciliation.
Which building contains Notre Dame’s main chemistry laboratories? Stepan Chemistry Hall houses the main chemistry laboratories at Notre Dame. The building is equipped with advanced research facilities and teaching spaces. It supports both undergraduate education and innovative research in chemistry.
Who was the first Nobel laureate affiliated with Notre Dame? Ernest Walton, a physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951, was a visiting professor at Notre Dame. His groundbreaking work in nuclear physics, specifically on the splitting of the atom, is celebrated on campus. Walton’s affiliation brought prestige to the university’s science programs.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is renowned for its uplifting performances of sacred and contemporary music. The choir contributes to liturgical life and university ceremonies. Its members travel and record, sharing Notre Dame’s musical heritage with audiences around the world.
Which student organization promotes STEM outreach at Notre Dame? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education promotes outreach, teacher training, and educational research in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It connects students and educators with resources and community projects. The center’s work enhances STEM learning locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run consulting group? The Student International Business Council (SIBC) is Notre Dame’s student-run consulting organization. SIBC coordinates projects and trips that give students real-world experience in international business. The group is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first director of the Snite Museum of Art? The first director of the Snite Museum of Art was David S. Findlay, who led the museum in its early years. Findlay helped build the museum’s reputation for excellence in art education and collection development. His leadership established the museum as a vital cultural resource for the university.
What is the Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture’s mission? The Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture works to promote human dignity through research, education, and public engagement. The center sponsors events, publications, and lectures on ethical issues in contemporary society. Its work fosters thoughtful dialogue and reflection on moral questions.
Which building houses the Notre Dame Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is the function of the Hesburgh Library? The Hesburgh Library serves as the main academic library at Notre Dame, supporting research and study with extensive resources and services. It houses millions of volumes, special collections, and quiet study areas. The library is a cornerstone of intellectual life on campus.
Which organization manages service learning programs at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns manages service learning programs that connect students with community partners. The center provides opportunities for experiential learning and civic engagement. It helps students integrate academic study with service to others.
Who is the current athletic director at Notre Dame? As of 2025, the athletic director at Notre Dame is Jack Swarbrick. Swarbrick has overseen major developments in university athletics, including facility upgrades and conference affiliations. His leadership supports the continued success and integrity of Notre Dame’s sports programs.
What is the name of the lake near the Grotto at Notre Dame? Saint Joseph’s Lake is located near the Grotto and offers scenic beauty and recreational opportunities. The lake is surrounded by walking paths and is a favorite spot for reflection and gatherings. Its presence adds to the natural charm of the campus.
What was the first residence hall built at Notre Dame? Sorin Hall was the first residence hall constructed at Notre Dame, opening in 1889. It has served generations of students and remains an active part of campus life. Sorin Hall is known for its traditions and close-knit community.
Who composed Notre Dame’s fight song? Notre Dame’s fight song, “The Notre Dame Victory March,” was composed by Michael and John Shea in 1908. The song is a staple at athletic events and rallies, inspiring students and fans. Its lyrics and melody are recognized by alumni and supporters around the world.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the lunar surface during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired generations.
What is the capital city of Japan? Tokyo is the capital city of Japan and is one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world. Known for its blend of modern skyscrapers, historic temples, and vibrant culture, Tokyo is a global center for business and technology. The city also hosts major international events and is a popular tourist destination.
What causes the seasons to change on Earth? The changing seasons are caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight and differences in daylight hours throughout the year. As a result, different parts of the planet experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter at different times.
What is photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for nearly all living organisms. Photosynthesis also helps regulate atmospheric carbon dioxide, playing a vital role in Earth’s ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play is a tragic love story that explores themes of family, fate, and youthful passion. Shakespeare’s work has been adapted countless times and remains a classic in literature and theater.
What is the largest animal on Earth? The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth, reaching lengths of over 30 meters and weighing up to 200 tons. Blue whales are found in oceans around the world and feed primarily on tiny shrimp-like creatures called krill. Despite their size, these gentle giants are endangered due to human activities.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords are used to protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They serve as a basic form of security, helping to keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong passwords are essential for safeguarding digital life and preventing cybercrime.
What is the process of making chocolate from cacao beans? Chocolate is made by harvesting cacao pods and extracting the beans, which are then fermented, dried, and roasted. The roasted beans are ground into cocoa mass, which can be processed into chocolate liquor and combined with sugar and milk to make different chocolate products. The process requires skill and craftsmanship to produce high-quality chocolate.
Who discovered penicillin and what impact did it have? Penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact that was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Discovered in 1799, it features the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. By comparing these languages, scholars were able to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops in the atmosphere, which act as tiny prisms by refracting and reflecting the light. This process separates the light into its component colors, creating a spectrum visible as a rainbow. The phenomenon is most commonly seen when the sun shines after a rain shower.
What is the Olympic Games and when did it originate? The Olympic Games are a major international sporting event featuring athletes from around the world competing in various disciplines. The modern Olympics began in Athens in 1896, inspired by the ancient Greek tradition of athletic competitions held in Olympia. Today, the Olympics promote global unity, sportsmanship, and excellence.
Who is considered the “Father of Computers”? Charles Babbage is often called the “Father of Computers” for his design of the first mechanical computer, the Analytical Engine, in the 19th century. Although his machines were never fully built in his lifetime, Babbage’s concepts laid the groundwork for modern computing. He also contributed to the development of mathematical tables and algorithms.
Why is recycling important for the environment? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower greenhouse gas emissions. By reusing materials like paper, plastic, and metal, recycling prevents pollution and saves energy compared to producing new products from raw materials. It is a key component of sustainable living and environmental protection.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis in plants involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll, which triggers chemical reactions that convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides energy for plant growth and releases oxygen into the atmosphere. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight specific pathogens, such as viruses or bacteria. They contain weakened or inactivated forms of the pathogen, which safely prompt the body to produce antibodies. As a result, vaccinated individuals are less likely to become ill if exposed to the real disease.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. The heart is vital for maintaining circulation and overall health.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed society by making real-time conversation possible across cities and continents. Bell’s work paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the significance of Mount Everest? Mount Everest is the tallest mountain in the world, rising 8,848 meters above sea level in the Himalayas. Climbing Everest represents a major challenge for mountaineers due to its extreme altitude and harsh conditions. The mountain is a symbol of human perseverance and adventure.
How does a solar panel generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity that can power homes and devices. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that reduces dependence on fossil fuels.
Who is the author of “Pride and Prejudice”? “Pride and Prejudice” was written by Jane Austen, an English novelist whose works are known for their wit and social commentary. The novel, published in 1813, explores themes of love, class, and marriage in early 19th-century England. Austen’s writing remains influential and widely read today.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. The process ensures that essential nutrients reach cells throughout the body.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, offering a chance to reflect on the past and set goals for the future. Celebrations often include parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is observed worldwide as a symbol of renewal and hope.
What is the Internet and how does it work? The Internet is a global network of computers that communicate through standardized protocols. It enables the sharing of information, access to websites, and online services such as email and social media. The Internet has transformed how people connect, learn, and do business.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci, a Renaissance artist and polymath, between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and realistic detail, attracting millions of visitors to the Louvre Museum in Paris. It is considered one of the greatest masterpieces in art history.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) contains the genetic instructions for the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color, blood type, and susceptibility to disease. DNA is passed from parents to offspring and is central to the study of genetics.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows predictable routes. This behavior helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
What is the process of making bread? Bread is made by mixing flour, water, yeast, and salt to form dough, which is then allowed to rise. The dough is baked until it becomes light and airy, with a golden crust. Baking bread is both a science and an art, practiced in cultures around the world.
Who discovered electricity? Electricity was not discovered by a single person, but Benjamin Franklin made key contributions by experimenting with lightning and inventing the lightning rod. Later scientists such as Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday advanced the understanding of electric current and electromagnetism. Their collective work led to the development of modern electrical technology.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching over 13,000 miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China’s cultural heritage. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings as air flows over and under them, thanks to their shape and speed. Engines provide thrust, while ailerons and rudders control direction. The principles of aerodynamics and engineering allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and atmospheric conditions, often caused by human activities such as burning fossil fuels. It affects ecosystems, sea levels, and global health, making it a critical issue for future generations. Addressing climate change requires coordinated action worldwide.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation also preserves food and enhances flavors, playing a key role in culinary traditions.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. She was known for her strong leadership style and economic reforms, which earned her the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British and global politics.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to recover and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor, a gas, due to heat energy. This process commonly occurs on the surface of lakes, oceans, and rivers as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle and helps regulate Earth's climate.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press allowed for the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. These organelles convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do trees shed their leaves in autumn? Trees shed their leaves in autumn to conserve water and energy during the colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, chlorophyll production slows, causing leaves to change color and fall. This adaptation helps trees survive winter and prepare for new growth in spring.
Who was the first president of the United States? George Washington was the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797. He played a key role in winning American independence and establishing the nation's government. Washington is often remembered for his leadership, integrity, and commitment to democracy.
What is the significance of the Taj Mahal in India? The Taj Mahal is a famous mausoleum located in Agra, India, built by Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal. Its stunning white marble architecture and intricate decorations attract millions of visitors each year. The Taj Mahal is considered a symbol of love and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
How do plants reproduce? Plants reproduce either sexually, through flowers and seeds, or asexually, through methods like runners and cuttings. Sexual reproduction involves pollination and fertilization, resulting in genetic diversity. Asexual reproduction produces identical offspring and allows plants to spread quickly in suitable environments.
What is the main purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote international cooperation, peace, and security. It provides a forum for countries to resolve conflicts, coordinate humanitarian aid, and address global challenges. The UN works on issues such as human rights, development, and environmental protection.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do people use renewable energy sources? People use renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power because they are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s natural resources. Renewable energy helps reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. It also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
What is a black hole in space? A black hole is a region in space where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape. Black holes form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycles. Scientists study black holes to learn about the limits of physics and the nature of the universe.
Who wrote the novel “1984”? George Orwell wrote the novel “1984,” published in 1949, which depicts a dystopian society under constant surveillance and authoritarian rule. The book explores themes of freedom, truth, and the power of propaganda. “1984” remains influential in discussions about privacy and government control.
How do vaccines work to protect health? Vaccines work by introducing a harmless part of a pathogen into the body, stimulating the immune system to recognize and fight the real disease. This process creates memory cells that respond quickly if exposed to the infection in the future. Vaccines have helped eradicate and control many dangerous diseases.
What is the significance of the Eiffel Tower? The Eiffel Tower is a global icon located in Paris, France, and was constructed for the 1889 World’s Fair. It was initially criticized but later became a symbol of French innovation and pride. Today, the Eiffel Tower attracts millions of tourists and represents the city’s unique character.
What is the water cycle and why is it important? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It ensures that water is continuously recycled, supporting life, agriculture, and weather patterns. The water cycle is vital for maintaining healthy ecosystems and freshwater supplies.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight and contributed to advances in space technology. Tereshkova is celebrated as a pioneer for women in science and exploration.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the process by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over time, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his groundbreaking work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
What is the importance of the internet in modern society? The internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through web browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share and access information, leading to the digital age. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern internet.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How is electricity generated in a hydroelectric power plant? Hydroelectric power plants use flowing water to turn turbines, which generate electricity. This renewable energy source is clean and efficient, making use of natural rivers and dams. Hydroelectricity helps power cities and reduces reliance on fossil fuels.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The piece celebrates human unity and brotherhood and is widely performed around the world. “Ode to Joy” has become a symbol of hope and is used in numerous cultural and political events.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and imagination.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities, such as burning fossil fuels, can increase greenhouse gases and contribute to global warming. Understanding the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent was a landmark achievement in mountaineering. The expedition inspired many future climbers to attempt the world’s tallest peak.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis to occur. It gives plants their green color and is essential for converting light energy into chemical energy. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food and oxygen.
How do magnets work? Magnets produce a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and can affect electric currents. This field is created by the alignment of electrons within the material. Magnets are used in many applications, from compasses and motors to data storage devices.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. The process involves significant changes in structure, function, and behavior.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, which revolutionized physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
Why do we have time zones? Time zones were established to standardize time across different regions of the world as Earth rotates. Each zone represents a specific offset from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), making travel and communication easier. Time zones help synchronize activities and schedules globally.
What is the importance of water for living organisms? Water is essential for all living organisms, serving as a solvent, temperature regulator, and medium for chemical reactions. It makes up a significant portion of cells and supports processes like digestion and circulation. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
What is the significance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Who invented the theory of evolution by natural selection? Charles Darwin proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection in his book "On the Origin of Species" published in 1859. His observations during the voyage of the HMS Beagle, especially in the Galapagos Islands, led him to develop the idea that species change over time due to environmental pressures. Darwin’s work revolutionized biology and our understanding of life.
What is the function of red blood cells in humans? Red blood cells are responsible for transporting oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carrying carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are essential for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth's surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be caused by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gas, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “To Kill a Mockingbird”? Harper Lee wrote “To Kill a Mockingbird,” which was published in 1960 and quickly became an American classic. The novel explores themes of racial injustice, moral growth, and empathy through the eyes of a young girl named Scout. Its impact on literature and social change continues to be felt today.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth's resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How does the human brain process information? The human brain processes information by receiving signals from the senses, interpreting them, and generating responses. Neurons communicate through electrical and chemical signals, forming complex networks that enable thinking, memory, and decision-making. The brain’s ability to adapt and learn is known as neuroplasticity.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her groundbreaking research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie remains a role model for women in science.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the role of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is gravity and how does it affect objects on Earth? Gravity is the force that attracts objects toward one another, most notably pulling everything toward Earth's center. It keeps us grounded, enables the formation of planets, and governs the motion of celestial bodies. Without gravity, daily activities and natural phenomena would be impossible as objects would float away.
Who was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes? Marie Curie was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes—one in Physics in 1903 and another in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie’s legacy continues to inspire scientists around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This occurs primarily in the chloroplasts, thanks to the pigment chlorophyll. Photosynthesis is fundamental for life on Earth because it provides food and oxygen for most living organisms.
Why do we have different time zones? Time zones were created to standardize time across regions as Earth rotates and experiences daylight at different moments. Each zone is roughly one hour apart, helping synchronize activities such as transportation and communication. Without time zones, coordinating events or travel would be confusing and chaotic.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who invented the airplane? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903 at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Their success marked the beginning of modern aviation and revolutionized transportation. The Wright brothers’ ingenuity paved the way for the development of commercial and military aircraft.
What is DNA and why is it important? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that carries genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to breakthroughs in medicine, forensics, and biotechnology.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops, which refract and reflect the light. This separates the light into different colors, creating a spectrum visible as a bow in the sky. Rainbows are most often seen after rain showers when the sun shines from a low angle.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet”? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The tragedy explores themes of revenge, madness, and morality through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It is one of Shakespeare’s most famous works and a cornerstone of English literature.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we can save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers worldwide. Reaching the top of the world remains a symbol of perseverance and courage.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by enabling voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and transformed the way people connect. Bell’s legacy is evident in today’s phones, internet, and global networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion ensures energy, growth, and repair for all bodily functions.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, allowing instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons, generating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission proved that women could withstand the rigors of spaceflight and opened doors for future female astronauts. Tereshkova remains a celebrated pioneer in space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his lab. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the purpose of the International Space Station? The International Space Station (ISS) serves as a unique laboratory orbiting Earth, where astronauts conduct scientific research in microgravity. It fosters international cooperation among agencies like NASA, Roscosmos, ESA, JAXA, and CSA. The ISS also acts as a testbed for technologies that will be needed for future missions to the Moon and Mars.
Who was the first African American president of the United States? Barack Obama was elected the 44th President of the United States in 2008, becoming the first African American to hold the office. His presidency lasted two terms, during which he implemented significant healthcare reforms and promoted social justice. Obama’s leadership marked a historic moment in American politics.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Why do we experience tides along coastlines? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes the water to rise and fall in regular cycles, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Moby-Dick”? Herman Melville wrote “Moby-Dick,” which was published in 1851 and is considered a masterpiece of American literature. The novel follows the obsessive quest of Captain Ahab to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick. Its themes include nature, revenge, and the limits of human knowledge.
What is an ecosystem and why is it important? An ecosystem is a community of living organisms interacting with each other and their physical environment. It includes plants, animals, microbes, and non-living elements like soil and water. Healthy ecosystems provide services such as clean air, water, food, and climate regulation.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the significance of the Great Barrier Reef? The Great Barrier Reef, located off the coast of Australia, is the largest coral reef system in the world. It supports an incredible diversity of marine life and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The reef is also important for tourism, fisheries, and scientific research, but faces threats from climate change.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that help regulate bodily functions such as metabolism, immunity, and cell growth. They cannot be synthesized in sufficient quantities by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who was the first person to propose the heliocentric model of the solar system? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the water cycle and how does it work? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment via evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water from oceans, lakes, and rivers evaporates, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous movement is crucial for distributing water and supporting life on Earth.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in Renaissance art.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who discovered electricity? While many scientists contributed to the understanding of electricity, Benjamin Franklin’s experiments with lightning in the 18th century were pivotal. He proved that lightning was a form of electricity, invented the lightning rod, and helped lay the foundation for future research. Later, scientists like Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday expanded on his work.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we celebrate Earth Day? Earth Day, celebrated on April 22, raises awareness about environmental protection and encourages actions to safeguard the planet. It began in 1970 and has become a global event with millions participating in cleanups, tree planting, and educational programs. Earth Day promotes sustainability and stewardship of natural resources.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion supports overall health and well-being.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring energy, repairing tissues, and consolidating memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems such as fatigue, poor concentration, and weakened immunity.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are designed to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are vital organs responsible for exchanging gases between the body and the environment. They take in oxygen during inhalation and release carbon dioxide during exhalation. Proper lung function is essential for delivering oxygen to tissues and maintaining overall health.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Bahamas during his voyage for Spain. However, indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years before his arrival. Columbus’s voyages opened the door for European exploration and colonization.
What is the capital city of Australia? Canberra is the capital city of Australia, chosen as a compromise between rivals Sydney and Melbourne. The city is home to the country’s government institutions, museums, and cultural sites. As a planned city, Canberra features wide boulevards, parks, and modern architecture.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall in autumn because trees prepare for winter by conserving water and energy. The reduction in sunlight and cooler temperatures trigger chemical changes that cause leaves to change color and eventually detach. This process helps trees survive harsh winter conditions and regrow new leaves in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the late 18th century. His innovations powered the Industrial Revolution by enabling machinery, locomotives, and ships to operate more efficiently. The steam engine transformed industries and transportation worldwide.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. Opened in 1869, it is one of the world’s most important waterways for global trade. The canal greatly reduces travel time and shipping costs for international commerce.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. The novel explores themes of love, morality, and social class in Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” remains a classic of English literature and is widely studied and adapted.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves transferring pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It can occur via wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, awarded in 1903 for her pioneering research on radioactivity. She shared the prize with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel. Marie Curie’s work laid the foundation for advances in nuclear science and medicine.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum, built nearly 2,000 years ago, was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles in ancient Rome. It is an architectural marvel and a testament to Roman engineering. Today, the Colosseum is a symbol of Rome’s history and attracts millions of tourists every year.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. During sleep, the brain processes experiences and prepares for the next day. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and long-term health problems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although some controversies remain about the accuracy of his expedition. His journey involved traveling over ice with sled dogs and enduring extreme conditions. The achievement was celebrated as a major milestone in exploration.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using bacteria or enzymes, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then pressed, salted, and aged to develop flavor and texture. Cheese-making is both a science and an art, with many varieties produced around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians. “Guernica” is one of Picasso’s most powerful and politically significant works.
What is the importance of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy consumption. By reusing plastic materials, we prevent them from ending up in landfills and oceans where they can harm wildlife. Recycling is a key part of efforts to build a more sustainable and environmentally friendly society.
Who discovered the law of buoyancy? Archimedes, a Greek mathematician and inventor, discovered the law of buoyancy in the 3rd century BCE. His principle explains why objects float or sink in fluids based on the displaced volume. Archimedes’ work is fundamental to physics and engineering.
What is the capital city of Brazil? Brasília is the capital of Brazil, designed and built in the late 1950s to promote development in the country’s interior. It is known for its modernist architecture and unique city planning. Brasília serves as the center of government and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was distributed. His invention enabled the mass production of books and contributed to the spread of literacy and knowledge. The printing press played a key role in the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their massive scale and precise construction have fascinated historians and engineers for centuries. The pyramids are a symbol of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain one of the world’s greatest architectural achievements.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy that explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. The play follows the rise and fall of Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” is renowned for its dramatic intensity and powerful language.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is vital for powering cellular activities. Cellular respiration is fundamental to the survival of all aerobic organisms.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight helped break barriers for women in aviation and inspired future generations. Earhart’s courage and achievements remain celebrated worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet enables instant communication, access to information, and online commerce, transforming the way people live and work. It has revolutionized education, entertainment, and social interaction. The Internet continues to drive innovation and connect people across the globe.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute," which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes of love and enlightenment. "The Magic Flute" remains one of Mozart’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity supports ecosystem health, provides resources such as food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. High biodiversity makes environments more resilient to change and supports a wide variety of life. Protecting biodiversity is critical for sustainability and the well-being of all species.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important for life on Earth? Photosynthesis is the process by which green plants and some other organisms use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process is essential because it produces oxygen for animals to breathe and forms the base of most food chains. Without photosynthesis, life as we know it could not exist on Earth.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how has it changed society? The World Wide Web was invented by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989, who developed a system for sharing information using hyperlinks and web pages. The invention revolutionized how people access information, communicate, and do business globally. Today, the web connects billions of people and supports countless applications in daily life.
What causes earthquakes and what impact do they have? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates beneath Earth's surface, which release energy as seismic waves. These natural events can result in widespread destruction, including collapsed buildings and infrastructure damage. Earthquakes also influence landscape formation and can trigger tsunamis or landslides.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in two different fields? Marie Curie was the first woman to win Nobel Prizes in two different fields—Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her work on radioactivity led to major advances in science and medicine. Curie’s achievements paved the way for future generations of women scientists.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is a massive fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is one of the world’s most iconic architectural achievements. The Wall also symbolizes China’s enduring strength and historical legacy.
Why do birds migrate and how do they navigate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, breeding grounds, or warmer climates, often traveling thousands of kilometers. They use environmental cues such as the sun, stars, and Earth’s magnetic field to navigate. Migration helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and what scenes are depicted? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the Creation of Adam and the Fall of Man. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements of Renaissance art.
What is DNA and why is it important for living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that stores genetic information in all living organisms. It determines traits, governs development, and controls cellular functions through coded instructions. Understanding DNA has led to breakthroughs in genetics, medicine, and forensic science.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously declared, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” Armstrong’s achievement marked a new era in space exploration and inspired future missions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues while removing waste products. It beats continuously, adjusting its rate to physical activity and emotional states. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and survival.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower are sustainable because they are replenished naturally and do not deplete resources. Using renewables reduces pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, helping combat climate change. Transitioning to renewable energy is key for a cleaner and more stable future.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet” and what is its main theme? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The play explores themes of revenge, madness, and moral corruption through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It remains one of the most influential works in Western literature.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach where acids and enzymes act, and finishes in the intestines. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized daily life by providing safe and reliable lighting. The light bulb paved the way for widespread electrification and modern convenience.
What causes the seasons to change throughout the year? The changing of seasons is caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles and intensities of sunlight in different regions throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova remains a pioneering figure in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems remain resilient to changes and provides resources such as food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is vital for environmental health and human survival.
Why do volcanoes erupt and what are their effects? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through vents. Eruptions can create new landforms, influence climate, and enrich soils, but also pose hazards to people and property. Studying volcanoes helps scientists predict eruptions and mitigate risks.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty narrative and timeless themes have made the book a classic.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it influence Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas emissions, leading to global warming. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is essential for addressing climate change.
Who composed the Ninth Symphony and what is its significance? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the Ninth Symphony, which is renowned for its final movement, “Ode to Joy.” The symphony celebrates human brotherhood and joy, and has been adopted as the anthem of the European Union. Beethoven’s Ninth remains one of the most celebrated works in classical music.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization. This process is often aided by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of many crops and wild plants.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary of New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic ascent was a milestone in mountaineering and inspired adventurers around the world. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human determination.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is essential for drinking, cooking, and sanitation. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which are caused by contaminated water. Access to clean water is fundamental for community health and development.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh winter conditions until resources are more plentiful. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears, bats, and some rodents.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, making voice communication over long distances possible. The telephone transformed business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for modern telecommunications.
How do solar panels produce electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, electrons are released, creating an electric current. Solar energy is renewable, clean, and increasingly used in homes and businesses.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce ATP, the energy currency. They convert nutrients into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for all cellular activities and overall organism health.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His team used sled dogs and careful planning to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement is recognized as a landmark in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are essential organs in the respiratory system that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. When we inhale, the lungs bring oxygen into the bloodstream, and when we exhale, they remove carbon dioxide produced by cells. Healthy lungs are vital for energy, metabolism, and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the journey from Dover to Calais in nearly 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s achievement inspired generations of long-distance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is a type of cell division in which a single cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and the maintenance of genetic stability in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures that each new cell receives a complete set of chromosomes.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The four distinct seasons—spring, summer, autumn, and winter—affect ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” which was published in 1847 and remains a classic of English literature. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. Its themes of love, morality, and social class continue to resonate with readers around the world.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without having to sail around Africa, greatly reducing travel time and costs. The canal is a vital link in global trade and strategic geopolitics.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection, hunting, or raising young. Group living can help individuals avoid predators, find food more efficiently, and care for offspring. Examples include wolves hunting in packs, birds flocking together, and primates forming social communities.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” and her activism helped promote international peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy endures as a symbol of dedication to nonviolence.
What is the process of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation from oceans and lakes, condensation to form clouds, precipitation as rain or snow, and runoff back to bodies of water. This cycle is crucial for distributing freshwater, supporting life, and regulating climate. Without the water cycle, ecosystems and agriculture would suffer.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions cause lava to build up above the ocean surface. Over time, repeated eruptions and accumulation of volcanic rock create new land masses. Famous examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were formed by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who painted the "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch artist of the 17th century, painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring." The artwork is celebrated for its radiant light, subtle details, and enigmatic expression. Vermeer’s technique and use of color make this painting a masterpiece of Baroque art.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to sustain life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflect on achievements, and spend time with loved ones. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and special foods. Birthdays are a way to honor an individual’s life and create lasting memories.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim is disputed. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme cold and difficult terrain using dog sleds and Inuit knowledge. The journey expanded human understanding of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation helps ensure a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Saving water also reduces energy use and protects natural habitats. With growing populations and climate change, water conservation is increasingly vital for human and environmental health.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall from trees in autumn as part of an adaptation to conserve water and energy during colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, trees reabsorb nutrients from their leaves and form a protective layer where the leaf meets the branch. This process prepares trees for winter and new growth in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it practical for use in industry and transportation. His innovations drove the Industrial Revolution, transforming manufacturing, mining, and travel. Watt’s contributions helped shape the modern world.
What is the role of the immune system? The immune system protects the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that work together to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for recovery from illness and long-term well-being.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling long distances to warmer waters.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, fate, and morality. The play explores the consequences of unchecked power through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks the throne. “Macbeth” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and political intrigue.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or wind. Pollination is vital for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of food crops.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help safeguard personal information, financial data, and communications. Strong passwords are essential for maintaining digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight demonstrated courage, skill, and determination, inspiring women in aviation and beyond. Earhart’s legacy continues to encourage exploration and breaking barriers.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise strengthens muscles and bones, improves cardiovascular health, and boosts mental well-being. Physical activity helps maintain a healthy weight, reduces the risk of chronic diseases, and increases energy levels. Exercise is an essential component of a healthy lifestyle.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking some or all of the sunlight for a short period. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses cover only part of it. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the refrigerator? Carl von Linde, a German engineer, developed the first practical mechanical refrigerator in 1876. His invention made it possible to preserve food safely and revolutionized food storage and transportation. Refrigerators are now an indispensable part of modern kitchens.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their larval stage to adulthood, involving significant changes in form and function. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do people vote in elections? Voting allows citizens to participate in the democratic process, influence government decisions, and hold leaders accountable. Elections give people a voice in shaping laws and policies that affect their lives. Voting is a fundamental right and responsibility in democratic societies.
Who painted the ceiling of the Palace of Versailles’ Hall of Mirrors? Charles Le Brun, a renowned French painter and decorator, designed and painted the magnificent ceiling of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles. His work celebrated the power and achievements of King Louis XIV. The Hall of Mirrors remains an iconic example of Baroque art and architecture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the method by which green plants use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place mainly in the leaves, where chlorophyll absorbs sunlight and initiates the chemical reactions. Photosynthesis not only sustains the plant but also provides oxygen for other living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan started the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe in 1519, although he died before the journey was completed. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and that the world's oceans are connected. This achievement was a milestone in global exploration and trade.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It helps regulate climate, replenish freshwater supplies, and sustain plant and animal life. Without the water cycle, ecosystems would collapse and water would become scarce.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, which gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, resulting in yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps the plant conserve energy for winter.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing people to talk over long distances. His invention paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication systems. Bell's work continues to influence how we connect with each other today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It has four chambers and beats continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is vital for overall well-being and energy.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or scarcity of food by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, bodily functions decrease dramatically, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears and bats.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is known for its mysterious smile and realistic detail, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The painting is displayed at the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her pioneering work on radioactivity. Curie's discoveries have had a profound impact on science and medicine.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, carries the genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to advances in medicine, genetics, and biotechnology.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They are architectural marvels and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously said, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," upon stepping onto the lunar surface. Armstrong's achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the function of kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems and human activities.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized indoor lighting and made electric illumination widely accessible. Edison's work paved the way for modern electrical infrastructure.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for overall health and vitality.
Why do people recycle? People recycle to reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution. Recycling helps save energy, decreases the need for new raw materials, and supports environmental sustainability. It is an important practice for protecting ecosystems and combating climate change.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it significant? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 after observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China's rich history. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who wrote the novel "Pride and Prejudice"? Jane Austen wrote "Pride and Prejudice," published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen's work is celebrated for its wit, insight, and enduring popularity.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the importance of pollinators in nature? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds play a crucial role in the reproduction of many plants by transferring pollen from one flower to another. This process enables fruit and seed production, supporting food webs and agriculture. Without pollinators, many ecosystems and crops would struggle to survive.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited the Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it vital? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process not only provides food for plants but also releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is essential for most living organisms. Photosynthesis forms the foundation of most food chains on Earth.
Why do earthquakes happen? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in the Earth’s crust shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement can cause the ground to shake and sometimes leads to significant damage to buildings and infrastructure. Earthquakes are most common near plate boundaries and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The book follows the adventures of Bilbo Baggins as he embarks on a quest with a group of dwarves to reclaim their treasure from a dragon. “The Hobbit” is a classic of fantasy literature and a precursor to Tolkien’s “The Lord of the Rings.”
What is the water cycle and how does it affect weather? The water cycle describes the movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water evaporates from oceans and lakes, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous cycle influences weather patterns and ensures the availability of fresh water.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, sharing the award with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel in 1903. Her research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that contains the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egypt. The Rosetta Stone remains one of the most important archaeological finds in history.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and laid the groundwork for modern telecommunications. Bell’s contributions extend to education and technology, making him a key figure in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and creativity.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion begins in the mouth, where food is broken down by chewing and saliva, and continues in the stomach and intestines with the help of enzymes and acids. Nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream, and waste is expelled from the body. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and health.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time of renewal and hope. People reflect on the past year, set goals, and participate in traditions like fireworks, parties, and making resolutions. The holiday is observed worldwide and brings communities together.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers globally. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the significance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects people, businesses, and governments across the globe, enabling instant communication, information sharing, and commerce. It has transformed education, entertainment, and social interaction, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she implemented major economic and political reforms and played a prominent role in international affairs. Thatcher’s legacy continues to influence British and global politics.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. Healthy heart function is vital for overall well-being and survival.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that makes leaves green, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This change helps plants prepare for winter by conserving energy and nutrients.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. His creation allowed documents and information to be linked and accessed via browsers, transforming communication and access to knowledge. The World Wide Web is now a fundamental part of daily life for billions.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to produce bread, beer, wine, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and is important in culinary traditions and industry.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressures remain relevant and widely studied.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power generate electricity without depleting natural resources or producing greenhouse gases. They help combat climate change and reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Investing in renewables supports a sustainable future and economic growth.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs can vary by species and even by individual, serving as identifiers and social signals. Birdsong is also important for maintaining ecological balance and biodiversity.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His achievement inspired swimmers worldwide and established the Channel as a major challenge in open water swimming. Webb’s endurance and determination are celebrated in sports history.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When you inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when you exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Caribbean, although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years prior. His voyages opened the way for widespread European exploration and colonization. Columbus’s journeys had profound effects on history, culture, and global trade.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in specialized structures called chloroplasts and helps supply much of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are organic compounds that the body requires in small amounts for normal growth, metabolism, and health. They help regulate vital processes such as immunity, cell repair, and energy production. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? “Jane Eyre” was written by Charlotte Brontë and published in 1847. The novel follows the life of an orphaned girl who overcomes hardship and finds love with Mr. Rochester. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong heroine and exploration of themes like independence and morality.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise improves cardiovascular health, strengthens muscles and bones, and helps maintain a healthy weight. It also boosts mood, reduces stress, and lowers the risk of chronic diseases. Incorporating physical activity into daily routines is key to long-term well-being.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a driving force behind the Industrial Revolution. His innovations enabled more efficient transportation and manufacturing. The steam engine changed society by powering trains, ships, and factories.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799, inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Hieroglyphic. It played a crucial role in deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or breeding grounds, often traveling vast distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environmental conditions. Famous migrations include the journey of monarch butterflies and the wildebeest of Africa.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. The artwork is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and environmental conditions, often driven by human activities. It affects ecosystems, food security, and global health. Addressing climate change is critical for protecting the planet and future generations.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Her leadership, known as the “Thatcher era,” was marked by significant economic reforms and a strong stance in international affairs. She remains a controversial and influential figure in British history.
What is the process of sedimentation in rivers? Sedimentation is the accumulation of particles like sand, silt, and clay in riverbeds, lakes, or reservoirs. This process shapes landscapes, creates fertile soils, and can influence water quality. Human activities such as dam construction can accelerate sedimentation and affect aquatic habitats.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with mates, defend territory, and warn of danger. Songs and calls vary among species and can even help identify individuals. Birdsong plays a role in social bonding and the maintenance of healthy ecosystems.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” one of his most famous tragedies, around 1606. The play explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of the Scottish general Macbeth. “Macbeth” remains a staple of theater and literature worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is often credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though later research has questioned his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme conditions and helped expand geographic knowledge of the polar region. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for explorers today.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated worldwide with festivities, fireworks, and traditions. It offers a chance to reflect on the past, set goals for the future, and spend time with loved ones. The holiday is observed in diverse ways across cultures.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm that work together to facilitate breathing. This system is vital for delivering oxygen to the bloodstream and removing metabolic waste.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medal in the modern era was awarded to James Connolly in 1896 for the triple jump event in Athens. His victory marked the beginning of the tradition of awarding gold medals for first place. Connolly's achievement is remembered as a milestone in Olympic history.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period in Europe? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, leading to a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced influential figures such as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for the modern age through its emphasis on humanism and innovation.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants require sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process in which they convert light energy into chemical energy for growth and survival. Sunlight enables the production of glucose, which fuels cellular activities and development. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to thrive or reproduce.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, discovered the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His three laws describe how planets orbit the sun in elliptical paths and how their speed varies depending on their distance from the sun. Kepler’s findings were foundational for later astronomical research.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using enzymes and bacteria, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then shaped, pressed, and aged to develop flavor and texture. The process varies depending on the type of cheese, resulting in a wide variety of tastes and appearances.
Why is the Pacific Ocean important? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than one-third of the planet’s surface. It plays a critical role in regulating global climate, supporting biodiversity, and enabling international trade. Its vast resources and strategic location make it essential for economic and environmental stability.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it more efficient and practical for industrial use. His innovations powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society worldwide.
What is the importance of sleep for children? Sleep is crucial for children’s physical and mental development, supporting growth, learning, and emotional well-being. It helps regulate hormones, strengthens the immune system, and consolidates memories. Lack of sleep can lead to behavioral issues, poor academic performance, and health problems.
What is global warming and why is it a concern? Global warming refers to the long-term rise in Earth's average temperature due to increased greenhouse gas emissions from human activities. It leads to melting glaciers, rising sea levels, and more extreme weather events. Addressing global warming is critical to protecting ecosystems and human societies.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which became a classic of American literature. The novel explores themes of adolescence, alienation, and identity through the character Holden Caulfield. Its impact has endured, influencing generations of readers and writers.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone was key to understanding the language and culture of ancient Egypt.
Why do animals form herds or flocks? Animals form herds or flocks for protection, efficient foraging, and social interaction. Group living helps reduce the risk of predation, increases chances of finding food, and facilitates mating. These behaviors are common in many species, including birds, mammals, and fish.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her feat demonstrated courage and skill, inspiring women to pursue careers in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and gender equality.
What is the importance of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, oxygen, and nutrients throughout the body and removes waste products. Composed of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, it supports organ function and overall health. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, healing, and survival.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used mechanical relays to perform calculations and laid the foundation for modern computing. Zuse’s work influenced subsequent developments in computer technology.
What is the process of digestion in animals? Digestion in animals involves breaking down food into smaller molecules that can be absorbed and used for energy, growth, and repair. It starts with ingestion, followed by mechanical and chemical processing in the digestive tract. Enzymes and acids facilitate the conversion of food into nutrients.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like wind, solar, and hydro power are sustainable and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. They help lower pollution, mitigate climate change, and provide long-term energy security. Transitioning to renewables is essential for protecting the environment and supporting future generations.
Who painted the masterpiece “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians with powerful imagery. “Guernica” is considered one of the most important anti-war artworks of the 20th century.
What is the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis? Chlorophyll is a green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling the process of photosynthesis. It captures light energy and helps convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced extreme cold, ice hazards, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 that reshaped nations, societies, and international relations. It involved major powers, resulted in millions of deaths, and led to the creation of the United Nations. The war’s consequences continue to influence global politics and culture.
Why do we need water to survive? Water is essential for all living organisms as it supports cellular processes, regulates body temperature, and aids digestion. It acts as a solvent, transports nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The play centers on the character Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army, and his downfall due to manipulation. “Othello” is recognized for its psychological depth and enduring relevance.
What is the process of cell division in living organisms? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a parent cell splits to create two identical daughter cells. This process is fundamental for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Proper cell division ensures genetic material is accurately distributed to new cells.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited Earth aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s journey opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the importance of education for society? Education empowers individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking, enabling them to contribute to their communities and economies. It promotes equality, innovation, and democratic values. A well-educated society is better equipped to solve problems and adapt to change.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate traditions, beliefs, and heritage, bringing communities together in joy and reflection. They foster understanding, preserve customs, and strengthen social bonds. Festivals often include music, dance, food, and rituals that highlight the diversity of human experience.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing communication and the spread of knowledge. His invention made books and written materials more accessible, promoting literacy and learning. The printing press is considered one of the most important innovations in history.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and neutralize pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the role of the atmosphere on Earth? The atmosphere acts as a protective shield around Earth, absorbing harmful solar radiation and maintaining the planet’s temperature. It contains the air we breathe—mainly nitrogen and oxygen—and supports weather systems. Without the atmosphere, life as we know it would not be possible.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in the human body? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered and described the circulation of blood in 1628. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed system, revolutionizing medical science. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
Why do we use currency in trade? Currency provides a standardized medium of exchange that makes buying and selling goods and services easier and more efficient. It replaced the barter system, allowing societies to grow and economies to expand. Modern currencies can be coins, paper money, or digital forms.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle ensures the continuous movement of water between Earth’s surface and the atmosphere through evaporation, condensation, and precipitation. It is vital for replenishing freshwater sources, supporting agriculture, and regulating climate. The water cycle sustains all life on the planet.
Who invented the steam engine and why was it important? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. The steam engine powered factories, ships, and trains, fueling the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed society, leading to rapid technological and economic progress.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Like plants, algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place in specialized cell structures called chloroplasts. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates beneath Earth’s surface shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can cause the ground to shake, sometimes resulting in significant destruction. Monitoring earthquakes helps scientists understand Earth’s structure and prepare for natural disasters.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. This iconic surrealist artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting remains a powerful example of creativity and imagination in modern art.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against harmful invaders such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It consists of organs, cells, and proteins that identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or to reproduce, often traveling hundreds or thousands of miles. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include monarch butterflies, whales, and many bird species.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and connected by oceans. The expedition expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact the planet? The greenhouse effect is caused by gases like carbon dioxide and methane trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excessive greenhouse gases lead to global warming. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for fighting climate change.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein” in 1818, creating the tale of Victor Frankenstein and his monstrous creation. The novel explores themes of science, ambition, and ethical responsibility. Shelley’s work is considered a cornerstone of both science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water, which are naturally replenished and do not run out. It helps reduce pollution, mitigates climate change, and provides sustainable power for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and healthier planet.
Why do we experience seasons? Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the cyclical changes of temperature and daylight known as seasons. The pattern influences ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, transforming how people communicate and access information. His creation allowed for the easy sharing of documents and data across the globe. The World Wide Web is now a crucial part of modern life, from education to commerce.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian monuments built over 4,500 years ago as tombs for pharaohs. Their massive size and precise construction have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the ingenuity and ambition of ancient civilizations.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova of the Soviet Union became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard the Vostok 6 spacecraft. Her mission proved that women could endure the challenges of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It operates continuously and adapts to the animal’s activity level and environment. A healthy heart is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do people recycle and what are the benefits? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve resources, and minimize environmental pollution. By processing materials like paper, glass, and metal for reuse, recycling saves energy and lowers greenhouse gas emissions. It contributes to sustainable living and a healthier planet.
Who discovered penicillin and what was its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical advances in history.
What is the importance of education in society? Education provides individuals with the knowledge and skills needed to solve problems, innovate, and contribute to their communities. It promotes equality, reduces poverty, and drives economic growth. A well-educated population strengthens democratic institutions and fosters social progress.
Who wrote “The Odyssey”? Homer, an ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Odyssey,” an epic poem recounting Odysseus’s journey home after the Trojan War. The story explores themes of heroism, loyalty, and the human struggle against adversity. “The Odyssey” has influenced literature and storytelling for millennia.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, specifically mitosis, is the process by which a cell splits to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, development, and tissue repair in multicellular organisms. Accurate cell division ensures genetic material is properly passed on.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, or magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and escapes through openings. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy exists over his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme cold and dangerous conditions. His achievement expanded our understanding of polar geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that captures sunlight for photosynthesis, converting light energy into chemical energy. It gives plants their green color and is vital for producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not sustain life on Earth.
What is the importance of the Sun for life on Earth? The Sun is the primary source of energy for all life on Earth, providing light and warmth that sustains ecosystems. Its energy drives photosynthesis in plants, which forms the basis of most food chains. Without the Sun, Earth would be cold, dark, and incapable of supporting life.
Who discovered the law of gravity and how did it change science? Sir Isaac Newton discovered the law of gravity in the 17th century, explaining how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights unified the motion of celestial bodies and objects on Earth, laying the foundation for classical physics. Newton’s work transformed scientific understanding and influenced countless discoveries.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the air we breathe. Oxygen enters the bloodstream in the lungs, while carbon dioxide is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Why do plants need water to grow? Water is critical for plants because it transports nutrients, maintains cell structure, and enables photosynthesis. It also helps regulate temperature and keeps tissues turgid. Without water, plants wilt, cannot make food, and eventually die.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, a scientist who creates a living being from dead body parts. Shelley’s work explores themes of ambition, ethics, and the consequences of unchecked scientific progress.
What is the process of metamorphosis in butterflies? Metamorphosis in butterflies involves four stages: egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa (chrysalis), and adult. During the pupal stage, the caterpillar undergoes dramatic changes to become a butterfly. This process allows butterflies to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do seasons change throughout the year? Seasons change because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun. This tilt causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter in a predictable cycle.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a historic achievement in space exploration. Gagarin’s flight paved the way for future missions and inspired generations.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis. It converts solar energy into chemical energy, providing food and oxygen for nearly all living organisms. Without chlorophyll, plants could not survive or sustain life on Earth.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, or magma, beneath Earth’s surface. When the pressure becomes too great, magma escapes through cracks, causing an eruption. Volcanic eruptions can shape landscapes, create new land, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work is foundational to today’s global communication networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, symbolizing renewal and hope. People celebrate with parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is a time for reflection, resolutions, and welcoming fresh opportunities.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Bible, including the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The chapel attracts millions of visitors annually who marvel at Michelangelo’s genius.
What is the importance of biodiversity in nature? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems stay healthy and resilient to changes, providing food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is essential for environmental stability and human well-being.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold weather or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it important? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in a petri dish. Penicillin became the first widely used antibiotic, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Its discovery marked a turning point in the fight against bacterial infections.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize Egypt’s rich cultural heritage and achievements in architecture.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the tragedy “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and frequently performed works.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for our planet’s future.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” Thatcher led significant economic and political reforms. Her leadership reshaped British society and influenced global politics.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewables is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
How do magnets work and what are their uses? Magnets create a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and influences electric currents. They are used in compasses, motors, generators, and data storage devices. Magnets play a vital role in everyday technology and scientific research.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share and access information online through websites and browsers. His invention transformed communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an essential part of daily life worldwide.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This is crucial for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle affects sleep, animal behavior, and daily activities.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy remains. His expedition overcame extreme cold and treacherous ice to achieve this goal. The journey expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the significance of Stonehenge? Stonehenge is a prehistoric monument in England consisting of a ring of massive standing stones. Archaeologists believe it was constructed as a ceremonial or astronomical site over 4,000 years ago. Its mysterious origins and impressive engineering continue to fascinate researchers and visitors alike.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which drastically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work helped save millions of lives and paved the way for further advances in immunology. Salk chose not to patent the vaccine, prioritizing public health over personal profit.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity also contributes significantly to Earth’s oxygen supply.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun combined with their own inertia. The balance between gravity and forward motion keeps planets in stable paths called orbits. This principle, explained by Isaac Newton, governs the motion of all objects in our solar system.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational work in Western literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the importance of wetlands? Wetlands are ecosystems where land is saturated with water, providing habitat for many species of plants and animals. They act as natural filters, purifying water and controlling floods. Wetlands also store carbon, helping to mitigate climate change, and support biodiversity.
How does a tornado form? Tornadoes form when warm, moist air meets cold, dry air, creating instability in the atmosphere. If wind speeds at different altitudes vary, a rotating column of air called a mesocyclone can develop. When this column touches the ground, it becomes a tornado, capable of causing significant damage.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works, including “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” are known for their imaginative storytelling and vivid descriptions of Swedish life. Lagerlöf’s achievement paved the way for future female writers.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. The type and appearance of clouds depend on atmospheric conditions and altitude.
Why do whales migrate? Whales migrate to find food and suitable breeding grounds, often traveling thousands of kilometers each year. They move between cold, nutrient-rich waters for feeding and warmer regions for mating and giving birth. Migration helps whales survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible via browsers. His invention revolutionized how people communicate, share information, and conduct business globally. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern digital age.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are organs that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is removed. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall health.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetized needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward magnetic north. This allows travelers and navigators to determine directions and find their way. Compasses have been vital tools for exploration and navigation throughout history.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The work features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting is considered an iconic masterpiece of surrealism.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It works to address global challenges such as poverty, human rights, and climate change. The UN provides a forum for dialogue and collective action on important issues.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe, sheltered place for their eggs and young. Nests protect offspring from predators and harsh weather, and their construction varies widely among species. Building and maintaining nests is a key part of many birds’ reproductive strategies.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in humans? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered the circulation of blood in the early 17th century. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed circuit. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? Mark Twain wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,” published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood adventures along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work is celebrated for its humor, social commentary, and vivid depiction of American life.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is crucial for global trade and international relations.
How do plants absorb nutrients from the soil? Plants absorb nutrients through their roots, which take in water and dissolved minerals. The nutrients are transported up to the leaves, where they support growth and photosynthesis. Healthy soil and root systems are essential for robust plant development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though there is some controversy about his claim. His expedition marked a milestone in polar exploration and inspired future adventurers. The journey required overcoming extreme conditions and logistical challenges.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria and provides the energy needed for cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for life in animals, plants, and many microorganisms.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates that make up Earth's crust. When plates shift or collide, energy is released in the form of seismic waves, which we feel as shaking. Earthquakes can cause destruction but also help shape landscapes over time.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends elements of fantasy, comedy, and symbolism, and is celebrated for its innovative music and storytelling. “The Magic Flute” remains one of Mozart’s most popular and influential works.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that was key to deciphering hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone enabled scholars to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used electromechanical relays and could perform complex calculations automatically. Zuse’s work laid the groundwork for modern computing technology.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin is the body’s largest organ, providing a protective barrier against pathogens, injury, and dehydration. It regulates temperature, produces vitamin D, and contains sensory receptors. Healthy skin is vital for overall well-being and disease prevention.
Why do dolphins communicate with clicks and whistles? Dolphins use clicks and whistles to communicate with each other, navigate, and hunt for food. These sounds can convey information about identity, location, and emotional state. Dolphin communication is highly sophisticated and reflects their intelligence and social nature.
Who wrote “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The fantasy novel follows Bilbo Baggins on a quest to win a share of a dragon’s treasure. Tolkien’s imaginative world laid the foundation for his later work, “The Lord of the Rings,” and inspired countless adaptations.
What is the importance of the Pacific Ocean? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than 60 million square miles. It serves as a major route for global trade and influences weather patterns around the world. The Pacific is home to countless marine species and supports important ecosystems from coral reefs to coastal rainforests.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it change society? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a practical source of power for factories, trains, and ships. The steam engine fueled the Industrial Revolution, transforming transportation and manufacturing. Watt’s innovation led to rapid economic growth and urbanization.
What is the function of white blood cells in humans? White blood cells are an essential part of the immune system, defending the body against infections and diseases. They patrol the bloodstream and tissues, identifying and destroying harmful bacteria, viruses, and other invaders. A healthy count of white blood cells is vital for fighting illness and maintaining health.
Why do deserts form? Deserts form in areas where rainfall is very low, often due to geographic factors such as mountains blocking moist air or high pressure zones that prevent cloud formation. The lack of water leads to sparse vegetation and extreme temperature variations. Deserts can be hot or cold and are found on every continent.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating the challenges of adolescence and identity in New York City. The novel’s themes of alienation and rebellion have made it a lasting classic in American literature.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, marking a rebirth of art, science, and learning. Figures like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo made lasting contributions. The period laid the foundation for the modern world by encouraging creativity and critical thinking.
How does the circulatory system work? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, and oxygen throughout the body using the heart, arteries, veins, and capillaries. It also helps remove waste products like carbon dioxide. Proper circulation is necessary for organ function, temperature regulation, and overall health.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring flight from Newfoundland to Ireland broke records and inspired millions around the world. Earhart’s achievements advanced women’s roles in aviation and remain legendary today.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from a flower’s male part to its female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or the wind and is essential for the reproduction of many plants. Pollination supports food production, biodiversity, and healthy ecosystems.
Why do we experience eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, such as when the Moon passes between the Earth and Sun (solar eclipse) or the Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). Eclipses provide valuable opportunities for scientific study and have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the computer mouse? Douglas Engelbart invented the computer mouse in the 1960s while working at Stanford Research Institute. His invention allowed users to interact with computers through a simple point-and-click interface. The mouse revolutionized computing and remains an essential tool for navigating digital environments.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. The stone’s discovery unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which anchor them in the soil and draw up resources via specialized cells. Water and minerals travel through the stem to the leaves, where they support processes like photosynthesis. Healthy roots are essential for plant growth and resilience.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated the limits of human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in open-water swimming.
What is the importance of the printing press? The printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century, allowed for the mass production of books and the spread of information. It made knowledge more accessible, contributed to rising literacy rates, and helped fuel the Renaissance and Reformation. The printing press is considered one of the most influential inventions in history.
Why do animals form packs or herds? Animals form packs or herds to improve their chances of survival by finding food, defending against predators, and protecting their young. Social groups also enable cooperation for tasks like hunting and migration. Herd behavior can be seen in species ranging from wolves to elephants.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores the destructive power of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” is one of Shakespeare’s darkest and most frequently performed tragedies.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when organic remains are buried by sediment and slowly replaced by minerals over millions of years. This process preserves the shapes of ancient plants and animals, providing clues to Earth’s history. Fossils help scientists study evolution, extinction, and past environments.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed the existence of a negatively charged particle smaller than an atom, transforming our understanding of atomic structure. The discovery of the electron laid the groundwork for modern physics and electronics.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, greatly shortening the route for ships traveling between Europe and Asia. Opened in 1869, it is a critical artery for global trade and has played a strategic role in international affairs. The canal continues to be vital for commerce and navigation.
How do bees produce honey? Bees produce honey by collecting nectar from flowers and storing it in their hives. They use enzymes to break down the nectar and then evaporate excess water to create the thick, sweet substance. Honey serves as food for the bee colony and has been harvested by humans for thousands of years.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering and inspired countless adventurers. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It addresses global challenges like poverty, human rights, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a platform for diplomacy and international collaboration.
Why do we need a balanced diet? A balanced diet provides the body with essential nutrients like carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals. Proper nutrition supports growth, energy, immune function, and overall health. Eating a variety of foods helps prevent deficiency diseases and supports long-term well-being.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for breathing and energy production.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War and the hero Achilles. The poem explores themes of honor, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational text in Western literature.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation ensures that clean, fresh water is available for drinking, agriculture, industry, and natural ecosystems. Conserving water helps prevent shortages, reduces energy use, and protects the environment. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using water wisely make a big difference.
What is the purpose of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on international public health. It coordinates efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and promote health education worldwide. WHO also responds to global emergencies and sets international health standards.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the geographic North Pole in 1909, though the claim has been debated. His expedition faced extreme cold, dangerous ice, and logistical challenges. Peary’s journey inspired further Arctic exploration and scientific study.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a critical role in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of the food web. They also contribute significantly to global oxygen production.
Why do we experience wind on Earth? Wind is caused by the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun, which creates differences in air pressure. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, resulting in wind. Winds help distribute heat, influence weather patterns, and are used as a renewable energy source.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? “Macbeth” was written by William Shakespeare in the early 17th century and is one of his most famous tragedies. The play explores ambition, guilt, and the supernatural through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” continues to be studied and performed worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and online commerce. It has transformed education, business, and social relationships, making the world more interconnected than ever. The Internet drives innovation and economic growth in nearly every sector.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to control and nearly eradicate the disease. His work saved countless lives and demonstrated the power of scientific research. The vaccine’s success led to widespread immunization campaigns around the world.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that provided the key to understanding hieroglyphic writing. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Its decipherment unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
Why do animals adapt to their environment? Animals adapt to their environment to survive and reproduce under changing conditions. Adaptations may involve physical traits, behaviors, or physiological changes that offer advantages in food gathering, predator avoidance, or climate tolerance. Over time, adaptation leads to evolution and biodiversity.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, completing the journey in just under 15 hours. Her achievement broke records and inspired generations of female aviators. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of courage and progress in aviation.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources that are replenished, such as sunlight, wind, and water. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps fight climate change. Investing in renewable energy supports a sustainable future for people and the planet.
Who painted the “Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus Christ’s final meal with his disciples before his crucifixion. It is renowned for its composition, emotional impact, and artistic innovation.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the mechanism by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over generations, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his influential work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Earth’s tilt relative to its orbit around the sun causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the changes in temperature and weather known as seasons. The cycle of seasons affects ecosystems, agriculture, and human activities.
Who was the first person to successfully swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, covering the distance between England and France in just under 22 hours. His feat was considered extraordinary at the time and sparked interest in long-distance swimming. Today, crossing the channel remains a prestigious challenge for swimmers.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall vitality in mammals.
Who discovered the structure of the atom? Ernest Rutherford conducted experiments in the early 20th century that led to the discovery of the atom’s structure, including its nucleus. His work revealed that atoms consist of a dense central nucleus surrounded by electrons. Rutherford’s findings laid the foundation for modern atomic theory.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 involving most of the world’s nations. It led to significant changes in political boundaries, technological advancements, and the establishment of the United Nations. The war’s impact continues to shape international relations and historical understanding.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again. Hibernation is common among mammals such as bears, bats, and ground squirrels.
Who invented the microscope? Zacharias Janssen, a Dutch spectacle-maker, is credited with inventing the first compound microscope in the late 16th century. The microscope revolutionized science by allowing observation of tiny organisms and cells. Later improvements by scientists like Antonie van Leeuwenhoek expanded its use in research and medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet and making life possible. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, is credited with composing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and conflict and has influenced Western literature for centuries. “The Iliad” is still studied and admired for its storytelling and cultural impact.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to produce foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer. Fermentation enhances flavors, preserves food, and has played a role in human diets for thousands of years.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with each other, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs and calls vary between species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is important for social bonding, reproduction, and maintaining ecological balance.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the voyage, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do solar panels work to generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy through a process called the photovoltaic effect. When sunlight strikes the cells, electrons are released and generate a flow of electricity. Solar power is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that features the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher hieroglyphics, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum and remains an iconic symbol of linguistic discovery.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement broke barriers for women in aviation and inspired generations to pursue their dreams. Earhart’s courage and adventurous spirit continue to captivate people worldwide.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, water, and carbon dioxide. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides the ATP needed for all cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for the survival of most living organisms.
Why do we have eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, most commonly when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun (solar eclipse) or when Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). These events happen due to the alignment of the Sun, Earth, and Moon. Eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are important for scientific study.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847 under the pen name Currer Bell. The novel explores themes of independence, morality, and romance through the life of its strong-willed heroine. “Jane Eyre” is considered a classic of English literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy pathogens such as bacteria and viruses, and also play a role in inflammation and healing. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for overall immunity.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, to hunt more efficiently, or to care for young. Social living can also help individuals find mates and share resources. Group behavior is seen in many species, from mammals like wolves to insects like bees.
What is the importance of the Industrial Revolution? The Industrial Revolution, which began in the late 18th century, marked a major turning point in history with the rise of factories, urbanization, and new technologies. It transformed economies from agrarian to industrial and improved transportation and communication. The Industrial Revolution greatly increased productivity but also brought social and environmental challenges.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments using cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms were made up of smaller particles, changing our understanding of matter. The discovery of the electron paved the way for advancements in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur via wind, water, or animals like bees and butterflies. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do we need exercise? Regular exercise helps maintain physical and mental health, strengthen muscles and bones, and boost the immune system. It also reduces the risk of chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity. Exercise improves mood and energy levels, contributing to overall well-being.
Who was the first person to discover America? Although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years, Christopher Columbus is often credited in Western history for “discovering” America in 1492. He landed in the Caribbean while searching for a route to Asia. His voyages led to lasting contact between Europe and the Americas, changing the course of history.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for protecting the environment.
Why do plants need sunlight? Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy for growth. Sunlight allows plants to produce food, oxygen, and other vital compounds. Without sufficient light, plants cannot thrive and ecosystems suffer.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian composer, wrote “The Four Seasons” in 1723. This set of violin concertos vividly depicts the changing seasons through music, with lively melodies and dramatic contrasts. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular works in classical music.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Proper circulation is essential for energy, temperature regulation, and health.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work laid the foundation for the widespread use of electricity.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It coordinates humanitarian aid, supports development, and works to resolve conflicts through diplomacy. The UN also upholds human rights and addresses global challenges like climate change.
Why do turtles lay eggs on beaches? Female turtles lay eggs on beaches because the sand provides a safe and warm environment for incubation. After hatching, the young turtles make their way to the ocean, facing many dangers along the way. This reproductive strategy helps turtles maintain their populations, despite high mortality rates.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy surrounds this claim. Peary’s expedition endured extreme cold and hardship to accomplish the feat. Reaching the North Pole was a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer, enhancing flavor and shelf life. Fermentation has been practiced for thousands of years and is vital in culinary traditions.
Why do people learn foreign languages? Learning foreign languages improves communication, expands cultural understanding, and opens up opportunities for travel and work. It also enhances cognitive abilities and can make learning other subjects easier. Multilingualism is increasingly valuable in our interconnected world.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus tells his disciples that one of them will betray him. “The Last Supper” is renowned for its composition, emotion, and technical innovation.
What is the importance of clean air? Clean air is necessary for health, as polluted air can cause respiratory problems, heart disease, and other illnesses. It also supports ecosystems and agriculture by providing oxygen and reducing toxins. Efforts to reduce air pollution benefit both people and the environment.
Who was the first person to swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, completing the journey in less than 22 hours. His feat was celebrated as a triumph of endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in the world of sports.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It involves phases such as prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Proper mitosis ensures genetic material is accurately passed to new cells.
Why do we celebrate birthdays? Birthdays mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and are celebrated to honor their life and achievements. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and well wishes from family and friends. Celebrating birthdays strengthens social bonds and provides an opportunity for reflection and joy.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she led significant economic and political reforms and played a major role on the international stage. Thatcher’s leadership continues to influence British politics.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Common methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination or UV exposure. Clean water is essential for public health and daily life.
Why do bees make honey? Bees make honey by collecting nectar from flowers and converting it into a sweet, viscous substance through enzymatic processes. Honey serves as a food source for bees during winter and poor weather. It is also harvested by humans and valued for its nutrition and medicinal properties.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to access and share information online through interconnected documents. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an indispensable part of modern life.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When we inhale, oxygen passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism, is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy, cellular function, and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to successfully circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519 and completed by his crew in 1522 after Magellan’s death. This journey proved that the Earth is round and that the world’s oceans are interconnected. The voyage marked a milestone in global exploration and navigation.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a developmental transformation that insects undergo from one stage of life to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar changes into a butterfly through several stages including pupa and adult. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and roles during their life cycle.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that regulate metabolism, support immunity, and aid in growth and repair. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained through food. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to health problems such as fatigue, weakened immune function, and disease.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the 18th century. His innovations greatly increased efficiency and paved the way for the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 and was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Featuring the same text in three scripts—hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek—the stone allowed scholars to understand ancient Egyptian writing and history. Its discovery opened new doors to Egyptology and the study of ancient civilizations.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, temporarily blocking the Sun’s light. This alignment can result in a partial or total eclipse, depending on the observer’s location. Solar eclipses are rare and dramatic events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818, which is widely considered the first science fiction novel. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the limits of scientific ambition. Shelley’s work has inspired countless adaptations and remains relevant in discussions about ethics and technology.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer sits in the Earth’s stratosphere and absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. Without this protective layer, living organisms would be at greater risk of cancer, cataracts, and other health issues. International efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have helped restore and protect this vital shield.
Why do rivers meander? Rivers meander because flowing water erodes the outer banks and deposits sediment on the inner banks of bends, causing the river’s path to curve over time. This natural process creates winding channels and floodplains. Meandering helps distribute sediment and nutrients, supporting diverse ecosystems along the river.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, becoming the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is widely used in baking, brewing, and preserving foods such as bread, beer, and yogurt. Fermentation not only enhances flavors but also increases food safety and nutritional value.
How do magnets work? Magnets have a magnetic field created by the movement and alignment of electrons within the material. This field attracts certain metals, such as iron, and allows magnets to interact with other objects. Magnets are used in many everyday devices, including motors, compasses, and data storage tools.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The artwork, known for its swirling skies and vibrant colors, is considered a masterpiece of post-impressionist art. “The Starry Night” has inspired countless artists and is admired worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature drops and physiological activity slows down, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and certain rodents.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing how information is accessed and shared online. His invention enabled the creation of web browsers and websites, leading to the digital age. Today, the World Wide Web is an integral part of daily life and commerce.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His historic step marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement demonstrated human ingenuity and the possibilities of science and technology.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by natural forces such as water, wind, or ice. It shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Human activities like deforestation can accelerate erosion and lead to environmental challenges.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks power at any cost. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most performed and studied plays.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do airplanes stay in the air? Airplanes stay in the air by generating lift through their wings, which have a shape that causes air to move faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey faced extreme cold, difficult terrain, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals and humans? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It adapts to activity levels and environmental changes, working continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is crucial for survival and overall well-being.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries around the world. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, coordinating humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like poverty and climate change. The UN also helps uphold human rights and supports development initiatives worldwide.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, formulated the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His work described how planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun, which improved upon previous models. Kepler’s laws played a crucial role in the development of modern astronomy and physics.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Proper digestion is essential for maintaining good health and supporting all bodily functions.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, called magma, beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence, love, and self-respect. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong, complex heroine and its exploration of social class, morality, and gender roles.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth’s resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How do bees contribute to the environment? Bees play a critical role in pollinating plants, which helps produce fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Their pollination supports biodiversity and stable food supplies for both humans and wildlife. Without bees, many crops and wild plants would struggle to survive, making them essential for healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, earning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity transformed science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields worldwide.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system enables humans to breathe in oxygen and expel carbon dioxide. It consists of organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, working together to support cellular respiration. Proper functioning of this system is vital for maintaining energy levels and overall health.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo by boat? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail solo around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the Spray was chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” which became a classic of maritime literature. Slocum’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo navigation and inspired generations of sailors.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its inscription in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—enabled scholars to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs for the first time. Understanding the Rosetta Stone opened the door to learning about Egypt’s ancient history and culture.
How do plants adapt to dry environments? Plants in dry environments often develop adaptations such as deep roots, thick waxy cuticles, or the ability to store water in stems and leaves. Some also use strategies like closing their stomata during the day to reduce water loss. These adaptations improve survival in arid climates and allow plants to thrive where water is scarce.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s. His work helped eradicate polio in many parts of the world, saving countless lives and preventing paralysis. Salk famously chose not to patent the vaccine, making it widely accessible to those in need.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are driven by wind, water temperature differences, salinity, and the rotation of Earth. These currents help distribute heat and nutrients across the globe, influencing weather patterns and marine ecosystems. Understanding ocean currents is vital for navigation, climate science, and preserving ocean health.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic material is copied accurately and passed on to new cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection against predators, increased hunting efficiency, and social interaction. Group living can also help with raising young and defending territory. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds flocking together during migration.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s struggle for independence and love, set against the harsh realities of Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong protagonist and exploration of themes like morality, class, and gender.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a platform for resolving international conflicts, coordinating humanitarian aid, and supporting human rights. The UN’s agencies also address global challenges such as health, education, and environmental protection.
How do vaccines help prevent disease? Vaccines introduce a weakened or inactive form of a pathogen to stimulate the immune system. This prepares the body to recognize and fight the real disease if exposed in the future. Vaccines have been instrumental in controlling and eradicating diseases like smallpox, polio, and measles.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team, which included Matthew Henson and several Inuit guides, endured extreme cold and treacherous conditions. Peary’s accomplishment remains a milestone in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of chambers and valves that ensure blood flows in the correct direction. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and supports activity, growth, and development.
Why do we experience weather changes? Weather changes occur due to interactions between the sun’s energy, the atmosphere, oceans, and land surfaces. Factors like air pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind shape daily weather patterns. These changes affect agriculture, transportation, and daily life around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a powerful protest against the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural uses dramatic black, white, and gray tones to depict the horrors of war and human suffering. “Guernica” remains a symbol of anti-war sentiment and artistic expression.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It facilitated the exchange of goods, cultures, religions, and ideas, shaping world history. The Silk Road’s legacy continues to influence global commerce and cultural diversity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966. She was known for her strong leadership, economic reforms, and controversial emergency rule. Gandhi’s tenure left a lasting impact on Indian politics and society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in producing oxygen and supporting aquatic food webs. Their ability to photosynthesize is essential for marine ecosystems and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic eruptions create new landforms and affect climate and ecosystems.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most significant breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the environment? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, was the first person to walk in space in 1965. He spent over 12 minutes outside his spacecraft, connected by a tether and facing unexpected challenges. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future spacewalks and advancements in space exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
How do airplanes generate lift to fly? Airplanes generate lift by moving air over their wings, which are shaped to create a pressure difference. Faster airflow above the wing and slower airflow below causes the aircraft to rise. Engines provide thrust, while control surfaces help steer and stabilize the plane.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experimentation, only to face tragic consequences. “Frankenstein” explores themes of ambition, isolation, and the dangers of unchecked scientific pursuit.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell, generating energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do we have seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s accomplishment became a symbol of human endurance and inspired future swimmers.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process can be carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was instrumental in deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three languages: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. By comparing these, scholars were able to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs and better understand Egypt’s history.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to combat a disease that caused paralysis and death worldwide. His vaccine was administered to millions of children and led to a dramatic decline in polio cases. Salk’s work paved the way for global vaccination campaigns and public health improvements.
What is the function of the atmosphere on Earth? Earth’s atmosphere protects living organisms by blocking harmful solar radiation and regulating temperature. It provides the oxygen necessary for respiration and enables weather systems that distribute water and heat. The atmosphere is crucial for sustaining life and maintaining environmental balance.
Why do leaves appear green in spring and summer? Leaves appear green due to the presence of chlorophyll, a pigment that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. During spring and summer, chlorophyll is abundant as plants actively produce food. In autumn, chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments and causing leaves to change color.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works often draw on folklore and regional history, with “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils” being especially well known. Lagerlöf’s storytelling and vivid imagination influenced generations of writers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It involves the replication and separation of chromosomes, ensuring each new cell receives the correct genetic material. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when energy stored in Earth’s crust is suddenly released, usually due to movement along faults or tectonic plate boundaries. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Scientists monitor earthquakes to better understand and prepare for these natural events.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey took him through dangerous waters and required remarkable navigation skills. Slocum’s adventures were chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspiring future explorers.
What is the importance of the Sumerians in history? The Sumerians are credited with creating one of the world’s first civilizations in ancient Mesopotamia. They developed writing (cuneiform), established cities, and advanced mathematics, law, and astronomy. Their legacy influenced later cultures and laid the foundations for modern society.
Why do animals form groups or herds? Animals form groups or herds for protection, increased foraging success, and social interaction. Group living can help defend against predators, find food more efficiently, and care for young. Examples include schools of fish, flocks of birds, and herds of mammals.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online using browsers and hyperlinks. The Web transformed communication, education, commerce, and entertainment, connecting billions of people globally. It remains a cornerstone of the digital age.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, with “The Creation of Adam” being especially famous. Michelangelo’s work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification removes contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, chlorination, distillation, and reverse osmosis. Clean water is essential for public health, agriculture, and industrial processes.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to synchronize the calendar year with the solar year, which is about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, leap years prevent seasonal drift over time. This adjustment keeps our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team endured extreme cold and hardship to achieve this milestone. The journey helped expand knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and neutralizing pathogens like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It includes organs, cells, and proteins that work together to defend against illness. A healthy immune system is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with others, attract mates, establish territory, and warn of danger. Each species has unique songs and calls that can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding and ecological balance.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream in the 1920s. Fitzgerald’s lyrical prose and vivid characters have made it a classic of American literature.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur through wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in just under 22 hours, battling cold water and strong currents. Webb’s achievement inspired countless endurance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their size, precision, and enduring presence have fascinated historians and tourists alike. The pyramids are symbols of ancient ingenuity and remain among the world’s most iconic monuments.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made electric power widely accessible. Edison’s work led to further advances in technology and changed daily life for people around the world.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division is called mitosis when a cell splits to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It ensures that genetic material is accurately distributed during cell replication.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s accomplishment inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of education? Education provides knowledge, skills, and opportunities for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democracy and social progress.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to allow air to move faster over the top than underneath. This difference in air pressure creates an upward force, while engines provide thrust. Proper control surfaces allow pilots to steer and stabilize the aircraft.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing linguists to understand a language that had been lost for centuries. Its discovery revolutionized the study of ancient Egypt and opened the door to understanding more of its history.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew continued the journey and returned to Spain in 1522. Their voyage proved the Earth could be circled by sea and greatly expanded global exploration.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis involves several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, followed by cytokinesis.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons on Earth are caused by the tilt of our planet’s axis as it orbits the Sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight at different times of the year, making days longer or shorter and temperatures warmer or colder. This cycle shapes the climate, agriculture, and natural rhythms of life worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experiments. Shelley’s work is considered one of the earliest examples of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, ethics, and humanity.
What is the function of the respiratory system? The respiratory system enables the exchange of gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—between our bodies and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, which work together to facilitate breathing. Proper respiratory function is essential for delivering oxygen to cells and removing waste gases.
Why do some animals have camouflage? Camouflage helps animals blend in with their surroundings to avoid predators or sneak up on prey. Patterns, colors, and even body shapes can help an animal become nearly invisible in its environment. This adaptation increases an animal’s chances of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a key driver of the Industrial Revolution. Earlier versions were developed by Thomas Newcomen and Thomas Savery, but Watt’s design made steam power more efficient. Steam engines transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process in which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun. This keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excess greenhouse gases from human activities can cause global warming. Managing greenhouse emissions is critical for addressing climate change.
Who was the first female Nobel Prize winner? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, making her the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s research changed the field of chemistry and medicine.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe over thousands of years. It enabled the exchange of goods, ideas, cultures, and technologies between distant civilizations. The Silk Road helped shape global history and the development of many societies.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can result from tectonic plate movement, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and affects climate and ecosystems.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Creation of Adam is one of the most famous images in Western culture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial producers in aquatic ecosystems, supporting food webs and generating much of the world’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity is vital for life in oceans and lakes.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although there is some controversy over the exact details of his expedition. He traveled with a team of assistants and Inuit guides, enduring extreme conditions. The achievement represented a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night occur because Earth rotates on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This rhythm influences sleep patterns and behavior in humans and animals.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication across long distances for the first time. His invention transformed society and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work continues to influence technology and how people connect.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Macbeth,” which explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. Set in medieval Scotland, the tragedy follows the rise and fall of a nobleman who seeks the throne through murder. “Macbeth” is a staple of English literature and has been adapted countless times.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It addresses issues such as human rights, development, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a forum for resolving conflicts and coordinating humanitarian efforts.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person in space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person in space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in the history of space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower provide clean, sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Investing in renewables creates jobs and supports a resilient energy future.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of cell respiration and why is it important? Cell respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored as ATP and powers essential cellular functions like growth, repair, and movement. Without cell respiration, living organisms could not survive, as they would lack the energy needed for life.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe starting in 1519, though he died before completing the journey. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the world could be sailed around and that the oceans were interconnected. This historic journey greatly expanded global understanding and trade routes.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. It housed hundreds of thousands of texts and attracted scholars from across the Mediterranean. Its destruction remains a symbol of the loss of cultural and scientific knowledge.
Why do we have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns on the skin of our fingers formed before birth. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have the same fingerprints. Fingerprints are widely used in forensic science and security systems because of their uniqueness.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat from the sun in the atmosphere, keeping Earth warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas levels, leading to global warming and climate changes. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental stability.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, just months before his death. The opera is celebrated for its enchanting music and allegorical story, blending fantasy with Enlightenment ideals. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients absorbed from food, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces important proteins for blood clotting. It also stores glucose and helps regulate metabolism. A healthy liver is vital for digestion and overall well-being.
Why do some animals migrate seasonally? Many animals migrate seasonally to find food, mate, or escape harsh weather conditions. Migration can involve journeys of thousands of kilometers, such as birds flying south for winter or wildebeest crossing Africa’s plains. These migrations help species survive and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the first mechanical clock? The first mechanical clocks were invented in medieval Europe during the 13th century, with Richard of Wallingford and Henry De Vick among early pioneers. These clocks used gears and weights to measure time more accurately than earlier sundials or water clocks. Mechanical clocks revolutionized timekeeping and daily life.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plant cells. It absorbs sunlight and uses its energy to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose during photosynthesis. Chlorophyll is essential for plant growth and for producing the oxygen we breathe.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905 for her lifelong efforts to promote peace and disarmament. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" inspired the peace movement across Europe. Von Suttner’s legacy lives on in international peace advocacy.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? Volcanic eruptions occur when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises through cracks, building pressure until it bursts through the surface. Eruptions can release lava, ash, and gases, reshaping landscapes and affecting climate. Volcanic activity is closely monitored to protect communities living near volcanoes.
Why do leaves change color in fall? Leaves change color in fall because shorter days and cooler temperatures cause chlorophyll to break down, revealing pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. These pigments produce vibrant yellow, orange, and red hues. The process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter dormancy.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan navigating society and personal ambition in Victorian England. Dickens’ exploration of themes like social class, redemption, and identity has made the book a literary classic.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in history? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It allowed the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and technologies across vast distances. The Silk Road played a crucial role in shaping global history and cultural development.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on parts of Earth’s surface. Depending on the alignment, eclipses can be total, partial, or annular. Solar eclipses are rare and attract observers and scientists worldwide.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics that revolutionized healthcare, saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and harmful microorganisms from water through methods such as filtration, boiling, chlorination, and distillation. Purified water is essential for safe drinking, cooking, and hygiene. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though the claim remains debated. His expedition braved extreme cold and treacherous ice to reach the northernmost point on Earth. Peary’s journey expanded scientific knowledge and inspired further polar exploration.
What is the significance of the Parthenon in Greece? The Parthenon is an ancient temple on the Acropolis of Athens, built in the 5th century BCE to honor the goddess Athena. It exemplifies classical Greek architecture and artistic achievement. The Parthenon remains a symbol of democracy, culture, and Western civilization.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. During sleep, the brain processes information and the immune system strengthens. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems, mood disturbances, and impaired cognitive function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious, reflecting Dalí’s interest in psychoanalysis. It is one of the most recognizable pieces of Surrealist art.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen, much like plants. This process supports aquatic food chains and helps regulate oxygen levels in water bodies. Algae are important producers in marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Who was the first person to run a marathon? The marathon commemorates the legendary run of Pheidippides, a Greek messenger who ran from Marathon to Athens in 490 BCE to announce victory over the Persians. The modern marathon was introduced at the first Olympic Games in 1896. Today, marathons are held worldwide and attract runners of all ages.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is a vital link for global trade and international relations.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Bears, bats, and some rodents are well-known hibernators, spending months in a dormant state. Hibernation helps these animals endure harsh conditions until resources become available.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and attack pathogens like viruses and bacteria. A strong immune system is crucial for maintaining health and recovering from illness.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” around 1603, exploring themes of jealousy, betrayal, and race. The tragedy centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his downfall orchestrated by the villain Iago. "Othello" remains a powerful work in the study of human emotion and prejudice.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, from plants and animals to microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy environments, provides food and medicine, and helps ecosystems recover from disturbances. Preserving biodiversity is essential for the planet’s resilience and sustainability.
What is the process of cellular respiration in living organisms? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored in the form of ATP, which powers cellular functions. The process takes place in the mitochondria and is essential for growth, movement, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan is credited with leading the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died during the journey, his crew completed the trip in 1522, proving the world could be circled by sea. This achievement expanded European knowledge of global geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert solar energy into chemical energy, producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to sustain themselves or support life on Earth.
Why do we experience lightning during storms? Lightning occurs when electrical charges build up in clouds and discharge, creating a sudden flash of light. This happens because different parts of a cloud carry positive and negative charges, and when the difference becomes large enough, electricity jumps between them or to the ground. Lightning helps balance electrical energy in the atmosphere.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in art history.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water on, above, and below the surface of the Earth. It includes processes like evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. This cycle is vital for distributing fresh water, supporting life, and influencing climate patterns.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His work made electric lighting accessible to homes and businesses, transforming daily life. Edison’s invention paved the way for the widespread use of electricity.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms within a particular habitat or ecosystem. High biodiversity ensures ecosystem resilience, provides food, medicine, and supports natural processes. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a healthy and sustainable environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive changing seasons and environmental challenges. Examples include birds flying south in winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the consequences of scientific discovery. Shelley’s work is considered a pioneering text in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet. While this effect is necessary for life, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her research on radioactivity changed science and medicine forever. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It involves mechanical and chemical processes starting in the mouth and continuing through the stomach and intestines. Proper digestion supports overall health and vitality.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. Cooler temperatures and shorter days trigger this process, resulting in vibrant reds, oranges, and yellows. The color change is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates unity and brotherhood and has become an anthem for peace. “Ode to Joy” is performed worldwide and holds deep cultural significance.
What is the function of red blood cells? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs. They contain hemoglobin, which binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are critical for energy and overall well-being.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunication. Bell’s work transformed how people connect with each other.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions. Stretching over thousands of miles, it is a symbol of Chinese ingenuity and perseverance. Today, the wall is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a major tourist attraction.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring physical and mental energy, consolidating memories, and repairing tissues. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems and impaired cognitive performance.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon in 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in aquatic ecosystems and contribute significantly to global oxygen production. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and helps regulate the Earth’s atmosphere.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic tale of two young lovers whose families are locked in a bitter feud. It explores timeless themes of love, fate, and conflict.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and help reduce pollution. They provide a cleaner alternative to fossil fuels and combat climate change. Investing in renewables is key to a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited with being the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced harsh conditions and controversy, but Peary’s accomplishment is recognized in polar exploration history. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for adventurers.
What is the function of the heart? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall wellbeing.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air more quickly over the top than the bottom. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics enable airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants use sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. This occurs in the chloroplasts, where the pigment chlorophyll captures light energy. Photosynthesis is essential for life on Earth, as it forms the basis of most food chains and replenishes atmospheric oxygen.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, starting in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving that the world could be circumnavigated by sea. The voyage greatly expanded European knowledge of world geography.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through Earth's atmosphere, surface, and underground. Processes such as evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff continuously recycle water, maintaining ecosystems and supporting life. The water cycle is crucial for weather patterns, agriculture, and freshwater resources.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature, heart rate, and breathing decrease significantly. This adaptation allows animals like bears and bats to endure harsh winters until conditions improve.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication and paved the way for the telecommunications industry. Bell's work led to further innovations such as the mobile phone and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Discovered in 1799, it allowed scholars to decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs for the first time. The Rosetta Stone unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight directly into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it excites electrons, creating an electric current that can power homes, businesses, and devices. Solar energy is a renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectation in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty style and keen observations have made the book a classic, still widely read and adapted today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It has four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and vitality.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years are added every four years to keep the calendar year synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.25 days. By adding an extra day to February, we prevent the calendar from drifting out of alignment with the seasons. Without leap years, seasonal dates would gradually shift over time.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold called Penicillium notatum killed bacteria in a petri dish. This led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical discoveries in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing greenhouse emissions is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, and is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. The largest, the Great Pyramid, was constructed for Khufu and showcases remarkable engineering skills. The pyramids remain symbols of Egypt's history and are major tourist attractions.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future generations of female astronauts.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is vital for maintaining health and supporting bodily functions.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers whose families are feuding, leading to heartbreak and loss. Shakespeare’s exploration of love, fate, and conflict has made the play a timeless classic.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and combats climate change. Investing in renewable energy is essential for a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create fertile soils, and can impact climate and ecosystems.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott, thanks to careful planning and use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently over long distances.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. Proper circulation is essential for health, healing, and energy.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the late 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. This invention powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll and sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial for aquatic ecosystems, producing much of the world’s oxygen and serving as the foundation of many food chains. Their efficient photosynthesis supports life in oceans and lakes.
Why do people use sunscreen? Sunscreen helps protect the skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun, reducing the risk of sunburn, premature aging, and skin cancer. It contains ingredients that absorb or reflect UV rays, forming a barrier against damage. Regular use of sunscreen is important for maintaining healthy skin, especially during outdoor activities.
Who wrote the “Harry Potter” series? J.K. Rowling wrote the “Harry Potter” series, which consists of seven books published between 1997 and 2007. Her stories follow the journey of a young wizard, Harry Potter, as he battles dark forces at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. The series has captivated millions worldwide and inspired movies, plays, and theme parks.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum is an ancient amphitheater in Rome, Italy, completed in 80 AD under Emperor Titus. It hosted gladiatorial games, public spectacles, and dramatic performances, symbolizing the power of the Roman Empire. Today, the Colosseum stands as a major tourist attraction and a testament to Roman engineering and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients from the soil through their roots, which branch out to maximize contact with the ground. Tiny root hairs increase surface area, allowing minerals and moisture to enter the plant’s vascular system. The absorbed substances travel upward to the leaves, supporting growth and photosynthesis.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Peace? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize, receiving the honor in 1905 for her efforts in promoting international peace and advocating against war. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired many to pursue nonviolent solutions to conflict. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to shape peace movements worldwide.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations dedicated to public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, respond to emergencies, and improve healthcare systems. The WHO provides guidance, sets standards, and supports countries in safeguarding the health of their populations.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe environment for their eggs and young chicks. Nests protect offspring from predators, harsh weather, and other dangers, offering warmth and security. The materials and design of nests vary among species, reflecting adaptation to different habitats.
Who discovered the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, dramatically reducing cases of the disease worldwide. His work was a breakthrough in medical science, leading to widespread immunization campaigns. Polio vaccines have saved millions of lives and helped nearly eradicate the disease.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. This creates visible droplets or ice crystals that cluster together, forming clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns around the globe.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, a surrealist masterpiece featuring melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape. The painting explores themes of time, memory, and the subconscious mind. Dalí’s work is celebrated for its imaginative imagery and technical skill.
What is the role of the nervous system? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily functions, processing sensory information and sending signals to muscles and organs. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and a network of nerves throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, sensation, and response to the environment.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5th, raises awareness about environmental issues and promotes action to protect our planet. The day encourages individuals, communities, and governments to address problems such as pollution, deforestation, and climate change. Activities include tree planting, cleanups, and educational campaigns.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist of the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Games. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic tradition after centuries of inactivity. Gold medals have since become a symbol of excellence and achievement in sports.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, opened in 1869. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, saving time and fuel. The canal is a vital link in global trade and has strategic significance for international shipping.
How do bees communicate within the hive? Bees communicate using a “waggle dance,” a series of movements that convey the direction and distance to food sources. They also use pheromones and vibrations to share information about threats, health, and colony activities. This complex communication system ensures the survival and efficiency of the hive.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Othello,” a tragedy about jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona, whose love is destroyed by the manipulations of Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful exploration of human emotions and social issues.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? A volcanic eruption occurs when magma rises from beneath Earth’s surface, driven by pressure and gas accumulation. The magma escapes through vents, forming lava flows, ash clouds, and sometimes explosive blasts. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and can affect climate and ecosystems.
Why do athletes train regularly? Athletes train regularly to improve strength, stamina, technique, and mental focus. Consistent training helps prevent injuries, enhances performance, and prepares athletes for competition. Training routines are tailored to specific sports and individual needs, supporting long-term success.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with reaching the North Pole in 1909, though his achievement remains subject to debate. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme conditions using sled dogs, specialized gear, and careful planning. His journey expanded knowledge of the Arctic and inspired future exploration.
What is the importance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient monuments in Egypt built as tombs for pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the geographic North Pole. This simple device helps with navigation and orientation, especially before the advent of GPS technology. Compasses have been essential tools for explorers, sailors, and hikers for centuries.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing the way information is accessed and shared. His creation introduced websites, hyperlinks, and browsers, making the internet user-friendly and interactive. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education globally.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each containing the same genetic material. It occurs in several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Mitosis is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do people study history? People study history to understand the events, cultures, and decisions that shaped the world we live in today. History provides lessons about successes and failures, helps explain current issues, and fosters empathy for others. Studying history encourages critical thinking and informed citizenship.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed the opera “The Magic Flute” in 1791. The work blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes, featuring memorable arias and symbolic characters. “The Magic Flute” is celebrated for its musical brilliance and enduring popularity.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert light energy into glucose, providing food and oxygen for life on Earth. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce the energy needed to grow and survive.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, casting a shadow on Earth and temporarily blocking sunlight. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses occur when only part of the Sun is obscured. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events.
What is the significance of the moon landing in 1969? The moon landing in 1969 marked the first time humans set foot on another celestial body, with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walking on the lunar surface as part of NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. This achievement represented a major milestone in space exploration and demonstrated the possibilities of human ingenuity. The event inspired generations and advanced scientific research about the moon and space travel.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century, describing how every mass attracts every other mass with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights explained the motion of planets and objects on Earth. Newton’s work laid the foundation for classical physics and remains central to our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part (anther) to the female part (stigma) of a flower, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often assisted by wind, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of most plants and for the production of many fruits and vegetables.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts by ensuring only authorized users can access sensitive information and services. Strong passwords prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and identity theft. They are a fundamental aspect of digital security, especially as more personal and financial activities move online.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She was recognized for her advocacy against war and for international peace. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" and her activism helped shape the early peace movement in Europe.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the warming of Earth’s atmosphere caused by certain gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, trapping heat from the sun. It keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if intensified by human activities. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century, revolutionizing the production of books and written materials. The press made information more accessible and accelerated the spread of education and scientific ideas. Gutenberg’s invention played a key role in the Renaissance and the modernization of society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are key producers in aquatic ecosystems and generate a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and global carbon cycles.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better environmental conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often occurs seasonally. This behavior increases survival and reproductive success for many species, including birds, whales, and butterflies.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, power, and fate. First performed in the early 17th century, the play explores the psychological effects of guilt and the consequences of unchecked ambition. "Macbeth" remains one of Shakespeare’s most studied and performed works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It helps prevent diseases such as cholera and dysentery and supports overall health and well-being. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health and community development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim has been debated. His expedition overcame extreme cold and challenging terrain, setting a precedent for polar exploration. The achievement expanded geographic knowledge of the Arctic region.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and alcoholic beverages. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and provides important nutrients.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn as chlorophyll breaks down due to cooler temperatures and shorter daylight hours. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps trees conserve energy and prepare for winter.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict biblical stories from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements in the history of art.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, from genes to species to entire communities. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources like food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is essential for the stability and sustainability of the planet.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed personal and business communication and paved the way for the development of modern telecommunications. Bell’s work remains influential in technology and society.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling conserves natural resources, reduces waste, and lowers pollution by reusing materials like paper, plastic, glass, and metal. It saves energy and helps protect the environment from landfill overflow and resource depletion. Recycling is a key component of sustainable living and responsible consumption.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, weather patterns, and daylight hours. The cycle of seasons influences agriculture, wildlife, and human activities.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of scientific ambition, ethics, and isolation, following Victor Frankenstein’s creation of a sentient creature. "Frankenstein" is considered a foundational work in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They help convert nutrients from food into usable energy and play roles in cell signaling and apoptosis. Healthy mitochondria are essential for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic expedition showed the world that the highest peak could be conquered. Their achievement inspired future generations of climbers and adventurers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase extraordinary engineering and have fascinated historians and archaeologists for centuries. The pyramids serve as a symbol of Egypt’s rich history and cultural achievements.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth for nearly three days aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired women around the world to pursue careers in science and technology.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects billions of people globally, providing access to information, communication, commerce, and entertainment. It has transformed how we work, learn, and interact, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and social change in countless fields.
How do solar panels work? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electricity. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons that generate a flow of electrical current. Solar energy is renewable, reduces dependence on fossil fuels, and helps combat climate change.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for bringing oxygen into the body and removing carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism. It includes the lungs, airways, and muscles that facilitate breathing. Healthy respiration is essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, was the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey in the sloop “Spray” was a remarkable feat of navigation and endurance. Slocum’s account, “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspired generations of adventurers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is a process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the original cell. It’s essential for growth, tissue repair, and asexual reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic consistency across cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, improved hunting, and social interaction. Group living can help deter predators and increase success in finding food. Social bonds also aid in raising offspring and passing on survival skills.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, leading to its widespread use during the Industrial Revolution. His innovations made steam engines more efficient and practical for factories and transportation. Watt’s work transformed industry and society.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, contains the same text in Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its decoding by Jean-François Champollion allowed scholars to finally understand ancient hieroglyphic writing. The stone is now housed in the British Museum and is a symbol of linguistic discovery.
How does the human body regulate temperature? The human body maintains a stable internal temperature through processes like sweating, shivering, and adjusting blood flow. The hypothalamus in the brain acts as a thermostat, triggering responses to heat or cold. Proper temperature regulation is vital for cellular function and health.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” was written by Mark Twain and published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood in a small town along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work captures the spirit of American youth and the complexities of growing up.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circling Africa. Opened in 1869, the canal greatly reduced travel time and boosted international trade. Today, it remains a critical passage for global shipping.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflecting on past experiences and looking forward to the future. Birthday celebrations often include gatherings, gifts, and special traditions. They serve as opportunities for social connection and gratitude.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller, negatively charged particles, challenging the idea that atoms were indivisible. Thomson’s findings were foundational to the development of modern physics and chemistry.
What is the significance of Mount Kilimanjaro? Mount Kilimanjaro is Africa’s highest peak, rising 5,895 meters above sea level in Tanzania. Its snow-capped summit and diverse ecosystems attract climbers and scientists from around the world. Kilimanjaro is a symbol of natural beauty and environmental change, as its glaciers have been shrinking.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the magnetic north pole. This device helps travelers and explorers determine direction, especially before the advent of GPS. Compasses have been vital for navigation for centuries.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She advocated for disarmament and international cooperation, influencing Alfred Nobel himself to create the peace prize. Her book “Lay Down Your Arms” was instrumental in promoting peace movements.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment that gives plants their green color and is essential for photosynthesis. It captures sunlight, allowing plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into energy and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Why do we need vitamins and minerals? Vitamins and minerals are vital nutrients that support growth, immune function, and overall health. They help regulate hundreds of bodily processes, from bone strength to nerve signaling. Deficiencies can lead to disease, so a balanced diet is important for well-being.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fairy tale elements, symbolism, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its themes of enlightenment and triumph over adversity resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is the importance of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It is essential for the reproduction of most plants and the production of fruits and vegetables. Pollinators like bees, birds, and bats play a vital role in sustaining ecosystems.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. They introduce a harmless part of the pathogen, training the body to respond quickly if exposed to the real disease. Vaccination has helped control and eradicate many serious illnesses.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. The work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of earth’s surface by wind, water, ice, or gravity. It shapes landscapes, forms valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Preventing excess erosion is important for environmental conservation.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, breed, or avoid harsh weather, often traveling long distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations. Examples include birds flying south in winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, revolutionizing physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
What is the importance of education? Education provides people with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population contributes to stronger economies and more just societies.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online. His creation transformed communication, commerce, and learning. The Web is now a cornerstone of modern life for billions of people.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood, delivering oxygen and nutrients throughout an animal’s body. It maintains circulation and helps remove waste products. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and activity in all animals.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on Earth. Depending on alignment, eclipses can be partial, total, or annular. Solar eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are studied for their effects on nature.
What is the process of mitosis in living cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the parent. This is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic stability across generations of cells.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it impact society? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use in industry and transportation. The steam engine powered factories, trains, and ships, driving the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed economies and the way people lived and worked.
What is the function of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plants and is essential for photosynthesis. It absorbs light energy, which is then used to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or release oxygen for other living things.
Why do stars twinkle in the night sky? Stars appear to twinkle because their light passes through different layers of Earth's atmosphere, which are constantly shifting due to temperature and air movement. This causes the light to bend and change intensity in a process called atmospheric refraction. Twinkling is more noticeable for stars closer to the horizon.
Who was the first emperor of Rome? Augustus, originally known as Octavian, became the first emperor of Rome in 27 BCE. He established the Roman Empire after defeating Mark Antony and Cleopatra and ending the period of civil wars. Augustus’ reign brought stability, reforms, and the Pax Romana, a long era of relative peace.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It is vital for replenishing freshwater supplies, supporting ecosystems, and regulating climate. The cycle ensures that water is continuously recycled and available for living organisms.
Who wrote the novel "Frankenstein"? Mary Shelley wrote "Frankenstein," first published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being from dead tissue, only to be haunted by his creation. "Frankenstein" is considered one of the earliest works of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, responsibility, and isolation.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth's crust suddenly shift along faults or boundaries, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can be triggered by volcanic activity, human actions, or natural plate movements. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry. Bell’s work led to the development of the telephone network and later technologies like the internet.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for protecting the environment.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey involved months of travel over ice and harsh conditions, with the help of Inuit guides and sled dogs. Peary’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals camouflage themselves to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play "Macbeth"? William Shakespeare wrote "Macbeth" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. "Macbeth" remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When you inhale, oxygen enters the lungs and passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product, moves from the blood into the lungs to be exhaled. This process is vital for energy production and overall health.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing the fall of an apple. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law laid the foundation for classical physics and transformed our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to keep our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, we compensate for the fractional difference and ensure that seasons stay in sync with the calendar. Without leap years, seasonal drift would gradually occur over centuries.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the global telecommunications industry. Bell’s legacy is evident in the phones and networks we use today.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and love. The novel explores themes of social class, gender, and morality, and is regarded as a classic of English literature. Brontë’s work remains influential and widely read today.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary, a New Zealand mountaineer, and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa guide from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in the history of exploration and mountaineering. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest challenges for adventurers.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. The process begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. Proper digestion is essential for health and well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for their green color, breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who wrote the play “A Midsummer Night’s Dream”? William Shakespeare wrote “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” in the late 16th century. The play combines elements of fantasy, romance, and comedy as it explores the adventures of lovers and fairies in an enchanted forest. It remains one of Shakespeare’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, and works continuously to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, growth, and survival.
Who discovered the electron and what was its significance? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His discovery revealed that atoms were not indivisible, as previously thought, but contained smaller charged particles. This breakthrough transformed our understanding of atomic structure and led to major advances in physics and chemistry.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, delivering humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like climate change. The UN plays a crucial role in fostering diplomacy and protecting human rights worldwide.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process by which they convert light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy that powers this transformation, allowing plants to grow and produce oxygen. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to survive or reproduce.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861, which follows the life of an orphan named Pip as he navigates Victorian society. The novel explores themes of ambition, social class, and personal growth, and is considered one of Dickens’s greatest works. Its memorable characters and insights into human nature have made it a classic.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a barrier erected by East Germany in 1961 to separate East and West Berlin during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 symbolized the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and the reunification of Germany. The Berlin Wall remains an important historical reminder of political division and the power of freedom.
How does a compass work? A compass is a navigational instrument that uses a magnetized needle to indicate direction relative to Earth’s magnetic poles. The needle aligns itself with the planet’s magnetic field, pointing towards magnetic north. Compasses are essential for navigation, especially before the advent of GPS technology.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends whimsical fantasy with serious themes of love, wisdom, and justice. Its memorable arias and characters have made it a beloved part of the classical repertoire.
What is the importance of recycling plastics? Recycling plastics helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy usage compared to producing new plastic. By reprocessing used plastics, we prevent them from accumulating in landfills and oceans, where they can harm wildlife and ecosystems. Recycling also supports sustainable industry and environmental protection.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, efficient hunting, and social interaction. Living together can help deter predators, increase chances of finding food, and facilitate learning and cooperation. Group living is common in species ranging from insects to mammals and is essential for survival in some environments.
Who was the first person to discover Antarctica? While many explorers sighted parts of Antarctica, Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, a Russian explorer, is credited with the first recorded sighting of the continent in 1820. His expedition provided valuable maps and observations of the southern polar region. The discovery paved the way for future scientific research and exploration.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells break down glucose and oxygen to produce energy in the form of ATP. This process occurs in the mitochondria and releases carbon dioxide and water as byproducts. Cellular respiration is essential for powering all cellular activities in living organisms.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism and explores themes of time, dreams, and reality. Dalí’s imaginative vision continues to intrigue viewers and inspire artists.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on global public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and respond to health emergencies. The WHO’s guidance and research help save lives and improve well-being worldwide.
Why do we use passwords for online security? Passwords protect online accounts and systems from unauthorized access by serving as a form of identity verification. A strong password helps guard against hacking, identity theft, and data breaches. Regularly updating and safeguarding passwords is essential for personal and organizational cybersecurity.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for peace and disarmament influenced the creation of the Nobel Peace Prize itself. Von Suttner’s legacy endures in the modern peace movement.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon is a vast geological formation in Arizona, carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. It is renowned for its dramatic landscapes, colorful rock layers, and rich fossil record. The Grand Canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and attracts millions of visitors annually.
How does solar energy benefit the environment? Solar energy generates electricity from sunlight, reducing reliance on fossil fuels and lowering greenhouse gas emissions. It is renewable, abundant, and produces minimal pollution compared to traditional energy sources. Solar power supports sustainability and helps fight climate change.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story follows Othello, a Moorish general, as he falls victim to manipulation and suspicion. "Othello" remains a powerful examination of human emotion and social dynamics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from egg to larva, pupa, and adult. This process allows for dramatic changes in structure, function, and behavior. Metamorphosis is common in butterflies, beetles, and many other insect species.
Who invented the lightbulb? Thomas Edison is often credited with inventing the first practical incandescent lightbulb in 1879. His development of a durable filament and electrical system revolutionized lighting and made it accessible to homes and businesses. Edison’s invention transformed daily life and spurred further technological progress.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients necessary for growth and development. They also store food and help stabilize the plant against wind and erosion. Healthy roots are essential for plant survival and productivity.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5, raises awareness about environmental issues and encourages global action for sustainability. Activities include cleanups, tree planting, and educational campaigns. The day inspires individuals and communities to protect the planet for future generations.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae utilize photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into energy, producing glucose and releasing oxygen as a byproduct. This process is similar to that found in land plants but occurs in aquatic environments, making algae essential for oxygen production in oceans and lakes. Algae are a primary food source for many aquatic organisms and play a major role in global carbon cycling.
Who was the first human to orbit the Earth? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to orbit the Earth on April 12, 1961 aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1. His flight lasted 108 minutes and marked a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin's achievement opened the door to human spaceflight and inspired generations of astronauts.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria in history? The Library of Alexandria was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world, located in Egypt. It was a center of learning and scholarship, attracting scholars from many cultures and preserving vast collections of manuscripts. The library’s destruction is often regarded as a great loss for human knowledge and history.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes are commonly found along tectonic plate boundaries because this is where plates either collide or move apart, allowing magma from beneath the Earth’s crust to escape. Subduction zones and rift valleys provide pathways for molten rock to rise and erupt at the surface. These geological processes shape landscapes and create fertile soils but can also pose hazards to nearby populations.
Who developed the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which dramatically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. Before the vaccine, polio caused paralysis and death in thousands of people, mostly children. Salk’s invention is considered one of the greatest medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer prevents excessive UV radiation from reaching the Earth’s surface, reducing the risk of skin cancer and protecting ecosystems. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its vital function.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892 in St. Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and has become a classic holiday tradition, featuring memorable music and enchanting dances. “The Nutcracker” is performed by ballet companies around the world each winter.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are primarily driven by wind, the Earth’s rotation, temperature differences, and variations in salinity. These currents help distribute heat, regulate climate, and transport nutrients and marine life across vast distances. Ocean currents play a key role in global weather patterns and the health of marine ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her imaginative storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Her most famous work, “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” remains popular in Sweden and abroad.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria of cells and provides the energy needed for growth, movement, and maintenance. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and supports all bodily functions.
Why do we use decimal and metric systems in science? The decimal and metric systems are used in science because they provide a standardized, easy-to-use framework for measurement based on powers of ten. This allows for precise calculations and consistent communication across different countries and scientific fields. The metric system simplifies conversion between units and supports global collaboration.
Who built the Taj Mahal and what was its purpose? The Taj Mahal was built by Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan in the 17th century in memory of his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal. The white marble mausoleum is renowned for its stunning architecture and intricate details. It stands as a symbol of love and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
What is the importance of groundwater? Groundwater is water stored beneath the Earth’s surface in soil and rock formations, providing drinking water for billions of people. It supports agriculture and industry and helps maintain river flows during dry periods. Protecting groundwater from pollution is critical for long-term environmental and human health.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. The light bulb led to widespread electrification and transformed daily life and industry.
What causes tides in the oceans? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes periodic rising and falling of sea levels, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems and are predictable based on celestial mechanics.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with the crucial contributions of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. Understanding DNA has revolutionized medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for over two thousand years. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road greatly influenced world history, commerce, and cultural development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition was meticulously planned, using sled dogs and survival expertise to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months, lowering body temperature and heart rate. Hibernation allows animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” which explores themes of jealousy, trust, and betrayal through the tragic story of a Moorish general and his wife Desdemona. The play delves into complex human emotions and the destructive power of manipulation. “Othello” remains a powerful work frequently performed and studied.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is essential for health, agriculture, and industry around the world.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The printing press allowed for mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. It played a crucial role in the Renaissance, Reformation, and the rise of modern science.
What is the role of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and overall well-being.
What is the role of the skeleton in the human body? The skeleton provides structural support, protects internal organs, and enables movement by serving as an attachment point for muscles. It is made up of 206 bones in adults, including the skull, spine, and limbs. The skeleton also produces blood cells and stores essential minerals such as calcium and phosphorus.
Who was the first person to discover America according to historical evidence? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492, although Norse explorer Leif Erikson reached North America centuries earlier. Columbus’s voyages marked the beginning of sustained European exploration and colonization of the Americas. His arrival had profound and lasting effects on history, culture, and indigenous peoples.
What is the process of respiration in living organisms? Respiration is the process by which organisms exchange gases with their environment, taking in oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide. In humans and animals, this occurs mainly in the lungs, while plants use structures called stomata. Cellular respiration then converts oxygen and glucose into energy, vital for survival.
Why do earthquakes occur and what are their effects? Earthquakes occur due to the sudden release of energy along faults or tectonic plate boundaries in Earth’s crust. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Earthquakes can lead to property damage, loss of life, and changes in landscapes such as landslides or tsunamis.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland lasted nearly 15 hours and made her a global icon of courage and aviation. Earhart’s achievements inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer helps prevent skin cancer, cataracts, and damage to plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork is famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is celebrated as a masterpiece of surrealism and modern art.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth and survival. They also store food and help stabilize the plant during storms or drought. Some roots, such as those in carrots or beets, are specialized for storage and nutrition.
Why do we need sleep and what happens during sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to rest and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal? John Baxter Taylor Jr. became the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal as part of the U.S. medley relay team in 1908. His achievement marked a significant milestone in sports history and paved the way for greater inclusion in athletics. Taylor’s legacy continues to inspire athletes today.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from egg to adult, passing through distinct stages such as larva, pupa, and imago. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows for specialization and adaptation to different environments during an insect’s life cycle.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows Holden Caulfield, a disaffected teenager navigating the challenges of growing up in post-war America. Salinger’s work is celebrated for its authentic voice and exploration of themes like alienation and identity.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce for centuries.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. His swim from Dover to Calais took nearly 22 hours and demonstrated extraordinary endurance. Webb’s accomplishment inspired future generations of swimmers and set a benchmark for open water challenges.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation is vital for ensuring a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Conserving water helps protect ecosystems, reduce energy use, and prevent shortages during droughts. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using efficient appliances can make a significant difference.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and was capable of performing complex calculations. Zuse’s innovation paved the way for the development of modern computers and information technology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965. His extravehicular activity lasted just over 12 minutes and presented numerous challenges, including a suit that inflated unexpectedly. Leonov’s achievement marked a significant milestone in human space exploration.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century. The play blends elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue as it explores themes of forgiveness, power, and transformation. “The Tempest” remains a favorite among audiences and scholars for its imaginative storytelling.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor due to heat, typically from the sun. This process is a crucial part of the water cycle, helping to regulate temperature and move water from bodies like lakes and oceans into the atmosphere. Evaporation supports cloud formation and ultimately precipitation, sustaining ecosystems around the world.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail alone around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the sloop Spray took more than three years and covered over 46,000 miles. Slocum’s adventure inspired generations of sailors and is considered a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are vital components of the immune system, protecting the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy harmful bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens through various mechanisms. A healthy count of white blood cells is essential for fighting off illnesses and maintaining overall health.
Why do we have continents and how did they form? Continents exist because of Earth's tectonic plates, which float atop the semi-fluid mantle and have shifted over millions of years. The movement of these plates caused the landmasses to break apart and drift, forming the seven continents we know today. This process, called plate tectonics, continues to shape Earth's surface and geography.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows the struggles of teenager Holden Caulfield as he deals with alienation and the challenges of growing up. Salinger’s work became a classic of American literature, resonating with young readers for its candid exploration of adolescence.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, greatly reducing shipping time and costs. The canal is a vital link in world commerce and has strategic importance for many nations.
How do plants reproduce asexually? Plants can reproduce asexually through methods such as runners, tubers, bulbs, and cuttings. In asexual reproduction, new plants grow from parts of the parent plant, resulting in genetically identical offspring. This strategy allows plants to rapidly colonize areas and survive in stable environments.
Who was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal? Charlotte Cooper, a British tennis player, was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal in 1900 at the Paris Games. Her victory marked a significant milestone in sports history, paving the way for women’s participation in future Olympics. Cooper’s achievement inspired countless female athletes worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it work? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide and methane, trap heat from the sun. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if greenhouse gases increase excessively. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Why do animals undergo metamorphosis? Metamorphosis is a biological process where animals, such as insects and amphibians, undergo dramatic changes in form during their life cycle. This transformation allows them to exploit different habitats and resources at various stages of life. Metamorphosis increases survival chances and supports species diversity.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape and is considered one of Dalí’s most famous pieces. The painting explores themes of time, reality, and the subconscious mind.
What is the process of filtration and where is it used? Filtration is the separation of solid particles from fluids (liquids or gases) using a porous barrier or filter. It is widely used in water purification, air cleaning, and laboratory procedures. Filtration helps remove contaminants and improve the quality of substances in daily life and industry.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 during experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller negatively charged particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern electronics and our understanding of atomic structure.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the second longest river in the world and flows through South America, mainly Brazil and Peru. It supports the largest tropical rainforest and is home to thousands of plant and animal species. The river is crucial for transportation, biodiversity, and the climate of the region.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and brain to rest, repair, and consolidate memories. During sleep, various processes occur, such as hormone regulation and immune system strengthening. Insufficient sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His carefully planned expedition used sled dogs and precise navigation to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the process of fermentation and why is it important? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation also plays a role in biofuel production and medicine.
Who wrote “The Divine Comedy”? Dante Alighieri, an Italian poet, wrote “The Divine Comedy” in the early 14th century. The epic poem describes a journey through Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, exploring themes of morality, redemption, and human nature. Dante’s work is considered a masterpiece of world literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the role of mitochondria in animal cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the “powerhouses” of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities in animals.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find better food sources, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows established routes. This behavior increases survival rates and helps maintain healthy populations across regions.
What is the importance of clean water for communities? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. She was known for her strong leadership and economic reforms, earning the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British politics and global affairs.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae, like in plants, uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall in history? The Berlin Wall was built in 1961, dividing East and West Berlin and symbolizing the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 marked the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and paved the way for German reunification. The wall remains a powerful symbol of division and freedom.
Who was the first person to propose the concept of the atom? The ancient Greek philosopher Democritus first proposed the idea of the atom around 400 BCE, suggesting that all matter is made up of tiny, indivisible particles. His theory laid the groundwork for modern atomic science, though it took centuries for experimental evidence to support it. Today, the atom is a central concept in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological processes. It occurs through factors such as wind, water, temperature changes, and plant roots. Weathering shapes landscapes and provides soil for plant growth.
Why do humans have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns formed by ridges on the skin of our fingers and thumbs. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have exactly the same fingerprints. Forensic science relies on fingerprints for solving crimes and confirming identities.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in world history? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It enabled the exchange of goods like silk, spices, and precious metals, as well as ideas, religions, and technologies. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping civilizations and fostering cultural diversity.
Who invented the process of vaccination? Edward Jenner developed the first successful vaccine in 1796 by using cowpox to protect people from smallpox. His work laid the foundation for immunology and modern vaccination practices. Vaccines have since saved millions of lives by preventing infectious diseases.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and acts as a protective barrier against injury, infection, and harmful UV radiation. It helps regulate temperature, produces vitamin D, and allows for sensations such as touch and pain. Healthy skin is essential for overall health and well-being.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun and their own inertia, which keeps them moving in a curved path. This balance between gravity and motion creates the stable orbits seen in our solar system. The laws of planetary motion were first described by Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established basic rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters a variety of characters and faces moral challenges as he seeks success and love. The novel is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the process of urbanization and its effects? Urbanization is the movement of people from rural areas to cities, resulting in the growth of urban centers. It often leads to economic development, increased job opportunities, and improved infrastructure. However, urbanization can also cause challenges such as overcrowding, pollution, and loss of green spaces.
Why do humans experience emotions? Emotions are complex responses to stimuli that help us communicate, make decisions, and adapt to our environment. They are regulated by the brain and hormones and are influenced by genetics and experiences. Emotions play a vital role in mental health and social interactions.
What is the importance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has provided breathtaking images and valuable data about the universe. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study distant galaxies, and discover exoplanets. Hubble’s findings have transformed our understanding of space.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966 and served until 1984. She was known for her bold leadership and significant political reforms, as well as for declaring a controversial state of emergency in the 1970s. Gandhi remains a prominent figure in Indian history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process is vital in aquatic ecosystems, where algae produce much of the world’s oxygen and serve as the basis of many food chains. Algae also contribute to carbon cycling and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes often form along tectonic plate boundaries because magma from the mantle rises through cracks created by plate movement. Subduction zones and rifts are especially prone to volcanic activity. These eruptions can create new landforms and impact global climate.
What is the significance of the Renaissance? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to 17th centuries that marked a renewed interest in art, science, and humanism. It began in Italy and spread throughout Europe, producing masterpieces in painting, literature, and architecture. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western thought and creativity.
Who invented the World Wide Web and why is it important? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share information through linked documents and websites. This innovation revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, making the internet accessible to billions. The World Wide Web is now central to daily life and global connectivity.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in France. The artwork’s swirling skies and vivid colors reflect Van Gogh’s emotional turmoil and creative genius. “The Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic paintings in art history.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and serves as a protective barrier against pathogens, physical injuries, and harmful environmental factors. It also helps regulate body temperature through sweating and maintains hydration by preventing excessive water loss. Additionally, the skin contains nerve endings that allow us to sense touch, pain, and temperature.
Who was the first person to reach the moon and what did he say? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. Upon stepping onto the lunar surface, he famously said, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” His achievement marked a pivotal moment in space exploration and inspired people worldwide.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world and the second longest. It flows through the heart of the Amazon rainforest, supporting diverse ecosystems and countless species of plants and animals. The river is vital for transportation, local economies, and global climate regulation.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? Birthdays are celebrated to mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and acknowledge the passage of time. They offer an opportunity for friends and family to gather, express appreciation, and share joy. Birthday traditions vary across cultures but often include ceremonies, gifts, and special foods.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, love, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona. “Othello” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of evaporation and where is it seen in nature? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat energy. It commonly occurs in lakes, rivers, oceans, and even puddles after rainfall as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is a crucial part of the water cycle and helps regulate climate and weather patterns.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling, imagination, and depiction of Swedish folklore and rural life. Lagerlöf’s works continue to be celebrated for their literary merit and cultural significance.
What is the significance of the Statue of Liberty? The Statue of Liberty, located in New York Harbor, was a gift from France to the United States in 1886. It stands as a symbol of freedom, democracy, and hope for immigrants arriving in America. The statue is an iconic landmark and a testament to the enduring friendship between the two nations.
Why do volcanoes form and erupt? Volcanoes form when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises through weak spots or openings in the surface. Eruptions occur when pressure builds up and forces magma, gas, and ash outward, sometimes violently. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes, creates new landforms, and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the founder of Buddhism? Siddhartha Gautama, known as the Buddha, founded Buddhism in the 5th century BCE in ancient India. After attaining enlightenment, he taught principles of compassion, mindfulness, and the path to overcoming suffering. Buddhism has since spread across the world and influenced countless cultures and philosophies.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process, carried out by chlorophyll, supports aquatic food webs and generates a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Algae are critical for maintaining healthy aquatic ecosystems.
What is the importance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is a marvel of engineering and a symbol of China’s historical strength and unity. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who invented the first practical light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first commercially practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than previous methods like candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work contributed to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach is a muscular organ that receives food from the esophagus and breaks it down using acids and enzymes. It churns the food into a semi-liquid mixture called chyme, which is then sent to the small intestine for further digestion and nutrient absorption. The stomach plays a key role in the digestive process.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and later attempted to circumnavigate the globe in 1937. Although she disappeared during her final journey, Earhart’s pioneering spirit and achievements inspired generations of aviators and adventurers. Her legacy remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the significance of the periodic table? The periodic table organizes all known chemical elements by their atomic number, electron configuration, and recurring chemical properties. Invented by Dmitri Mendeleev, it allows scientists to predict the behavior of elements and discover new ones. The periodic table is an essential tool in chemistry, physics, and many other sciences.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian Baroque composer, wrote “The Four Seasons,” a set of four violin concertos, in 1723. Each concerto represents a different season and is celebrated for its vivid musical imagery and technical brilliance. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular and frequently performed pieces of classical music.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, cooperation in hunting or foraging, and social interaction. Living in groups can increase survival chances by deterring predators, sharing resources, and caring for young. Examples include packs of wolves, flocks of birds, and schools of fish.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson, a British physicist, discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms are composed of smaller subatomic particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern atomic theory and technology.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century, blending elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue. The play explores themes of forgiveness, power, and the human condition through the story of Prospero and his daughter Miranda. “The Tempest” is widely regarded as one of Shakespeare’s greatest works.
What is the process of cell division in bacteria? Bacteria reproduce through a process called binary fission, in which a single cell divides into two identical daughter cells. This rapid form of cell division allows bacteria to multiply quickly under favorable conditions. Binary fission is essential for bacterial growth, adaptation, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate Africa by sea? Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias was the first to round the southern tip of Africa, the Cape of Good Hope, in 1488. His voyage opened up the sea route from Europe to Asia, leading to the age of global exploration and trade. Dias’s achievement helped establish Portugal as a leading maritime power.
Why do we need education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities, fostering personal growth and societal progress. It promotes innovation, reduces poverty, and encourages equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies, supports democratic governance, and helps solve global challenges.
What is artificial intelligence and how is it used today? Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to computer systems capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving, and decision-making. Today, AI is used in fields like healthcare for diagnosing diseases, in finance for detecting fraud, and in everyday life with virtual assistants and recommendation systems. As AI continues to evolve, it is transforming industries and raising important ethical questions.
Who mapped the human genome and why was it significant? The Human Genome Project, completed in 2003 by an international team of scientists, successfully mapped all the genes in human DNA. This achievement provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and personalized medicine. Knowing the complete sequence of the human genome has accelerated advances in biotechnology and medical research.
What is the importance of coral reefs for marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital habitats that support a vast diversity of marine life, offering shelter, food, and breeding grounds for countless species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. However, coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation critical.
Why do humans need sleep and what happens without it? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to impaired cognitive function, weakened immunity, and increased risk of diseases. Maintaining healthy sleep habits is crucial for overall well-being and productivity.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist in the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Olympics. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic Games, which had been dormant for centuries. Since then, gold medals have symbolized athletic excellence and international competition.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. This usually happens when warm air meets cooler temperatures at higher altitudes or when air is forced to rise over mountains. Cloud formation plays a key role in Earth's water cycle and weather patterns.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate shared traditions, beliefs, and histories, bringing communities together for music, food, dance, and rituals. They help preserve cultural heritage, foster social bonds, and promote understanding among different groups. Festivals also serve as opportunities for education and tourism.
Who discovered radio waves and their significance? Heinrich Hertz discovered radio waves in the late 19th century, demonstrating that they could be produced and detected with electrical equipment. His work laid the foundation for wireless communication, including radio, television, and cell phones. Today, radio waves are essential for global information exchange and technology.
What is the role of bees in pollination? Bees are crucial pollinators that transfer pollen between flowers as they collect nectar, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process supports the growth of many fruits, vegetables, and nuts, and helps maintain healthy ecosystems. The decline of bee populations poses a serious threat to food security and biodiversity.
Why do countries have national symbols? National symbols, such as flags, anthems, and emblems, represent a country’s identity, history, and values. They foster unity and pride among citizens and are used during official ceremonies and international events. National symbols can also serve as powerful reminders of a nation's struggles and achievements.
Who invented the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, leading to widespread immunization and a dramatic decline in polio cases worldwide. His discovery helped prevent a disease that once caused paralysis and death in thousands of children. Salk’s work is celebrated as a major achievement in public health.
What is the significance of the Renaissance in European history? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to the 17th century that originated in Italy and spread across Europe. It marked a renewed interest in art, science, and literature, leading to remarkable advancements and the rise of figures like Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for modern Western civilization.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, easier hunting or foraging, and better chances of raising offspring. Group living, such as in packs, herds, or colonies, can also provide social interactions and aid in learning behaviors. Examples include wolves, dolphins, and bees, all of which benefit from cooperation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her achievement challenged gender roles and inspired women in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s disappearance during a later flight remains one of history’s great mysteries.
What is the process of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic involves collecting used items, sorting them by type, cleaning them, and melting them down to form new products. This reduces waste in landfills and conserves resources, but not all plastics are easily recyclable. Advances in technology and consumer awareness are helping to improve plastic recycling rates.
Why is the Amazon River important? The Amazon River is the largest river by volume in the world and supports the Amazon rainforest, one of the most biodiverse places on Earth. It provides water, transportation, and sustenance to millions of people and countless species. The river also influences global weather and climate patterns.
Who developed the theory of relativity and its impact? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His work led to advances in physics, such as nuclear energy and GPS technology. Einstein’s theories continue to shape scientific research and technological innovation.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in Earth’s atmosphere absorbs harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun, protecting living organisms from damage. Efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have led to recovery of the ozone layer in recent decades. Maintaining its health is vital for life on Earth and for preventing skin cancer and other issues.
Why do people write poetry? Poetry allows people to express emotions, ideas, and experiences in creative and evocative ways. It can capture beauty, challenge norms, and communicate complex feelings that may be hard to convey in ordinary language. Poetry has been an important part of human culture for thousands of years, inspiring and connecting people across generations.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in less than 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge for athletes worldwide.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. This system is vital for sustaining life and supporting the function of all organs.
Who discovered the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s. His discovery led to widespread immunization programs that drastically reduced polio cases worldwide. The vaccine’s success helped prevent paralysis and death, changing public health history.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, which returns water to Earth’s surface. Condensation helps regulate temperature and humidity in the atmosphere.
Why do we need minerals in our diet? Minerals such as calcium, iron, and potassium are essential for building bones, carrying oxygen, and regulating nerve function. They act as cofactors for enzymes and help maintain fluid balance. A balanced intake of minerals supports growth, energy, and overall health.
Who was the first person to reach the moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a turning point in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement in Europe from the 14th to the 17th century, characterized by a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced great thinkers and artists like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western civilization.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which have tiny hairs that increase surface area for uptake. These substances travel up the stem to the leaves where photosynthesis occurs. The process enables growth, development, and the production of food for other organisms.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating issues of identity, alienation, and loss in postwar America. The novel is considered a classic of American literature and resonates with readers worldwide.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones such as insulin to regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a critical role in both the digestive and endocrine systems. Proper pancreatic function is essential for metabolism and energy balance.
Why do volcanoes form on Earth? Volcanoes form when magma from Earth’s mantle rises through cracks in the crust, often at tectonic plate boundaries. The magma erupts as lava, ash, and gases, creating volcanic landforms over time. Volcanoes can shape landscapes, influence climate, and create fertile soils for agriculture.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for disarmament and her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired the peace movement in Europe. Von Suttner’s honor helped elevate women’s voices in international affairs.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides ATP, the energy currency for cellular functions. Cellular respiration powers growth, movement, and repair in all living things.
Why do deserts receive so little rainfall? Deserts are located in regions with high-pressure systems, dry winds, and few clouds, preventing moisture from accumulating. Mountain ranges can also block rain-bearing winds, creating rain shadows. Low precipitation and evaporation rates result in arid conditions and sparse vegetation.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change history? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century. The press enabled the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. Gutenberg’s invention sparked the spread of literacy and ideas, fueling the Reformation and the Renaissance.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in the stratosphere absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, reducing the risk of skin cancer and eye disorders. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as reducing CFC emissions, have helped restore its protective role.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” first performed in 1791. The opera blends magical elements, philosophical themes, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its story combines adventure, romance, and the triumph of good over evil.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the evaporation of water from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps cool the plant, move nutrients, and maintain the flow of water from the roots. Transpiration also influences weather patterns and the water cycle.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals provide opportunities for communities to express traditions, honor history, and strengthen social bonds. They often feature music, dance, food, and religious or historical rituals. Festivals promote diversity, understanding, and a sense of belonging.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in nearly 22 hours. His achievement inspired future generations of open-water swimmers and remains a benchmark in endurance sports. Webb’s legacy is celebrated in swimming history.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections, viruses, and harmful substances. They identify and destroy pathogens, and some remember past infections to respond faster next time. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for immune protection.
Who discovered the structure of benzene? Friedrich August Kekulé proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865, revolutionizing organic chemistry. His discovery explained benzene’s stability and paved the way for understanding aromatic compounds. Kekulé’s insights remain foundational in modern chemistry.
What is the process of weathering and why is it important? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals by wind, water, ice, and biological activity. It produces soil and shapes landscapes, influencing ecosystems and agriculture. Weathering is essential for the formation of fertile ground and the cycling of nutrients.
Who wrote the play “Death of a Salesman”? Arthur Miller wrote “Death of a Salesman,” first performed in 1949. The play explores the struggles of Willy Loman, a salesman facing disillusionment and family conflict. Miller’s work is a cornerstone of American theater, examining themes of identity, ambition, and societal expectations.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions, allowing organisms to sense and respond to their environment. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, transmitting signals throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, emotion, and reflexes.
What is the function of the skeleton in animals? The skeleton provides structural support, protects vital organs, and enables movement through muscles attached to bones. It also plays a role in producing blood cells and storing minerals such as calcium. Healthy bones are essential for growth, strength, and overall well-being.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart made history in 1932 as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement inspired women in aviation and showed that perseverance and courage could break barriers. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s rights.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. These droplets gather together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes depending on atmospheric conditions. Clouds play a crucial role in regulating temperature and distributing precipitation.
Why do we use decimal numbers in mathematics? Decimal numbers are based on the base-10 system, which is easy to use because humans have ten fingers. This system allows for efficient arithmetic operations, clear representation of fractions, and standardized measurement. Decimals are essential in science, engineering, and everyday calculations.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism, challenging viewers’ perceptions of time and reality. Dalí’s innovative style influenced many artists and changed the course of modern art.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage and skin cancer. Without the ozone layer, life on Earth would be at greater risk from intense solar radiation. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
Who was the founder of the Mongol Empire? Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire in the early 13th century, uniting various nomadic tribes under his leadership. His military campaigns created one of the largest empires in history, stretching across Asia and Europe. Genghis Khan’s legacy includes innovations in governance, trade, and culture.
What is the process of water filtration? Water filtration removes impurities and contaminants from water by passing it through layers of sand, gravel, charcoal, or specialized membranes. This process produces clean, safe water for drinking, cooking, and industrial use. Filtration is critical for public health and environmental protection.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when underwater eruptions build up layers of lava and ash that eventually break the ocean surface. Over time, these volcanic islands can grow larger as more eruptions occur and materials accumulate. Examples include Hawaii and Iceland, both formed by volcanic activity.
Who wrote “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which follows the story of Holden Caulfield as he struggles with adolescence and alienation. The novel’s themes of identity, rebellion, and authenticity have resonated with generations of readers. Salinger’s work remains a classic in American literature.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions by transmitting signals between the brain, spinal cord, and other parts of the body. It enables sensation, movement, thought, and emotional responses. A healthy nervous system is essential for survival and adaptation to environmental changes.
Why do camels have humps? Camels have humps to store fat, which can be converted into energy and water when food and water are scarce. This adaptation enables camels to survive long journeys across deserts and harsh climates. Their unique physiology makes them invaluable for transportation and agriculture in arid regions.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, dramatically reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work saved countless lives and helped eradicate polio in many countries. Salk’s contribution is celebrated as a major milestone in medical science.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume in the world and runs through the heart of the Amazon rainforest in South America. It supports a vast diversity of plant and animal life and provides water, transportation, and livelihoods for millions of people. The river is vital for regional climate regulation and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the 21-mile journey in less than 22 hours. His feat demonstrated the possibilities of human endurance and inspired future long-distance swimmers. Webb’s accomplishment is still celebrated in the world of sports.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by absorbing sunlight through chlorophyll, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process supports aquatic food chains and produces much of the world’s oxygen supply. Algae are important for maintaining healthy ecosystems in oceans, lakes, and rivers.
Why do people celebrate festivals? Festivals are celebrated to mark important cultural, religious, or historical events, fostering community spirit and shared traditions. They provide opportunities for socialization, entertainment, and reflection on values and beliefs. Festivals contribute to cultural identity and help preserve heritage across generations.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute” in 1791, blending elements of fantasy, comedy, and enlightenment philosophy. The opera’s music and symbolism have made it a beloved work, performed worldwide. Mozart’s creativity and genius are evident in its enduring popularity.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin acts as a protective barrier against physical injury, pathogens, and harmful substances. It regulates body temperature, enables sensation, and helps synthesize vitamin D when exposed to sunlight. Healthy skin is essential for overall well-being and immune defense.
Why do we use wind turbines for energy? Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy of wind into electricity, providing a clean, renewable energy source. They reduce greenhouse gas emissions and reliance on fossil fuels, helping to combat climate change. Wind power is increasingly used in many countries to support sustainable development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, became the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His success was due to careful planning, experience with polar conditions, and the use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of Antarctica and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who wrote the poem “The Raven”? Edgar Allan Poe wrote “The Raven,” first published in 1845. The poem explores themes of grief, loss, and madness through the haunting visit of a mysterious raven. Poe’s use of rhythm, symbolism, and dark imagery makes “The Raven” a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time and shipping costs. The canal is vital for international trade and global commerce.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process by which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients within the plant. Transpiration also plays a significant role in the water cycle and influences local climate conditions.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Dr. Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, greatly reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. Polio was a crippling and sometimes deadly illness, especially among children. Salk’s vaccine marked a turning point in public health, preventing countless cases of paralysis and death.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a physical barrier that divided East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989. It symbolized the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. The fall of the wall in 1989 marked the beginning of German reunification and the end of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe.
Why do we need protein in our diet? Protein is essential for building and repairing tissues, producing hormones and enzymes, and supporting immune function. It provides the building blocks for muscles, skin, hair, and internal organs. A lack of protein can lead to fatigue, weakened immunity, and poor growth and development.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, combining elements of fairy tale, comedy, and profound philosophical themes. The opera is famous for its memorable melodies and enchanting characters. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most beloved and frequently performed operas in the world.
What is the purpose of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)? UNESCO was established in 1945 to promote international collaboration in education, science, and culture. The organization works to preserve cultural heritage, support universal education, and foster freedom of expression. UNESCO's initiatives help build peace and sustainable development worldwide.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling cold water, strong currents, and exhaustion. Webb’s achievement inspired many future long-distance swimmers and remains a legendary accomplishment in sports history.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when the remains or traces of organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. The process often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineralization where organic material is replaced by minerals. Fossils provide crucial evidence of ancient life and help scientists understand the history of Earth.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions occur underwater and lava accumulates, eventually rising above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were created by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who wrote the novel "The Catcher in the Rye"? J.D. Salinger wrote "The Catcher in the Rye," published in 1951. The novel follows the experiences of Holden Caulfield, a teenager struggling with alienation and identity. Salinger's work is celebrated for its candid exploration of adolescence and its impact on modern literature.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s upper atmosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Preserving the ozone layer is crucial for environmental and human health.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups to improve their chances of finding food, defending against predators, and caring for young. Living in groups allows individuals to work together and share resources. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds forming flocks for migration.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the process of crystallization? Crystallization is the process by which atoms or molecules arrange themselves into a well-ordered, repeating pattern to form a solid crystal. It can occur from solutions, melts, or vapor. Crystallization is important in geology, chemistry, and the manufacturing of products like sugar and salt.
Who was the first female prime minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the role of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. This organ plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we experience wind? Wind is caused by differences in air pressure resulting from the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, creating currents. Wind helps distribute heat, moisture, and seeds, influencing weather and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of genetic inheritance? Genetic inheritance is the passing of traits from parents to offspring through genes found in DNA. Each parent contributes half of an offspring’s genetic material, resulting in a unique combination. Inheritance explains how characteristics like eye color or blood type are transmitted across generations.
Who discovered the vaccine for smallpox? Edward Jenner discovered the vaccine for smallpox in 1796 by using material from cowpox blisters to immunize people. This groundbreaking work laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox. Jenner’s discovery remains one of the greatest achievements in public health.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Why do humans laugh? Laughter is a response to humor, surprise, or social interaction, and it helps strengthen social bonds. It can also reduce stress, improve mood, and trigger beneficial physical changes in the body. Scientists believe laughter evolved as a way to communicate and build trust among groups.
Who painted "The Persistence of Memory"? Salvador Dalí painted "The Persistence of Memory" in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is a hallmark of the Surrealist movement and is displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
What is the purpose of the Red Cross? The Red Cross is an international humanitarian organization founded to provide emergency assistance, disaster relief, and health services. It operates in nearly every country, helping victims of war, natural disasters, and health crises. The Red Cross also promotes education in first aid and international humanitarian law.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis by using sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide to produce glucose and oxygen. Unlike plants, their photosynthetic machinery is located in the cell membrane, not in chloroplasts. Cyanobacteria are among the oldest life forms and have helped shape Earth’s atmosphere.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister broke the four-minute barrier in 1954, running the mile in 3 minutes and 59.4 seconds. His achievement was considered impossible at the time and inspired athletes around the world to push human limits. Bannister’s record was soon surpassed, but his legacy endures.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the ancient world’s largest and most important centers of learning. It housed thousands of scrolls and attracted scholars from many cultures, contributing greatly to the advancement of science and philosophy. Its destruction marked a significant loss of knowledge and cultural heritage.
Why do some animals have camouflage patterns? Camouflage patterns help animals avoid predators or sneak up on prey by blending into their environment. This adaptation can include colors, shapes, and behaviors that match surroundings such as leaves, rocks, or sand. Camouflage increases survival rates and is found in insects, reptiles, mammals, and birds.
Who developed the first theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and have since moved apart. Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics, although they were initially controversial.
What is the process of water purification in treatment plants? Water purification involves several steps, including filtration to remove physical debris, chemical treatment like chlorination to kill microbes, and sometimes advanced processes such as reverse osmosis. These methods ensure that drinking water is safe and free from contaminants. Modern treatment plants are essential for public health.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The artwork depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea, symbolizing love and beauty. Botticelli’s painting is celebrated for its graceful figures and mythological themes.
What is the importance of coral reefs in the ocean? Coral reefs provide habitats for thousands of marine species, protect coastlines from erosion, and support fishing and tourism industries. They are among the most diverse ecosystems but are threatened by pollution, overfishing, and climate change. Conservation of coral reefs is crucial for ocean health.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which explores the impact of the Napoleonic wars on Russian society. The novel is famous for its complex characters, philosophical insights, and vivid historical detail. "War and Peace" is considered one of the greatest works of world literature.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces bile for digestion. It also stores energy and helps regulate blood sugar levels. The liver is vital for metabolism and overall health, and its failure can be life-threatening.
Why do birds migrate seasonally? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climates as seasons change. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows ancient routes. This behavior ensures survival and reproductive success in changing environments.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart achieved fame as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and she later set records for solo flights around the world. Her daring adventures challenged gender norms and inspired future aviators. Earhart disappeared during her attempt to circumnavigate the globe in 1937, leaving a lasting legacy.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental protection.
Who invented the vaccine for rabies? Louis Pasteur developed the first effective rabies vaccine in the late 19th century. His work demonstrated the principles of immunization and saved countless lives. Pasteur’s discoveries helped establish the field of microbiology and modern vaccines.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, limited the powers of the English monarchy and established principles of legal rights and due process. It influenced the development of constitutional law in many countries and is seen as a foundation for democracy. The Magna Carta’s legacy endures in legal systems worldwide.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement typically occurs along faults or plate boundaries and can cause significant damage. Earthquake monitoring and building codes help reduce risks in vulnerable regions.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty" in 1889. The ballet is known for its enchanting music and elaborate choreography, telling the story of Princess Aurora. "Sleeping Beauty" remains a staple of classical ballet and is performed by companies worldwide.
What is the role of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorb floodwaters, and provide habitats for a wide range of plants and animals. They help maintain biodiversity and protect against erosion. Wetland conservation is important for environmental balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. The discovery has revolutionized biology and medicine.
What is the process of cloud formation in meteorology? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds in the sky. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather patterns.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it commonly occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor, usually due to heat from the sun. It commonly occurs on the surface of oceans, lakes, and rivers, contributing to the water cycle. This process is vital for maintaining natural water distribution and regulating climate.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. The light bulb revolutionized society by enabling safe, reliable indoor lighting and extending productive hours after sunset. Edison's invention paved the way for modern electric power systems and transformed homes and cities.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify, attack, and remove harmful pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Maintaining a healthy level of white blood cells is essential for overall well-being.
Why do we experience different climates on Earth? Different climates occur because of variations in latitude, altitude, proximity to oceans, and atmospheric circulation. The tilt of Earth’s axis and its orbit around the sun also influence seasonal changes and temperature patterns. These factors create a diverse range of environments across the planet.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which is regarded as one of the greatest novels of all time. The book explores themes of love, war, fate, and the human condition during the Napoleonic era in Russia. Tolstoy’s work continues to influence literature and philosophy worldwide.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling plants to produce fruits and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail to reproduce, threatening food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinator populations is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. He completed the journey in his boat, the Spray, overcoming storms, loneliness, and navigation challenges. Slocum’s adventure inspired countless sailors and remains a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria use chlorophyll to absorb sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. They are among the oldest organisms on Earth and played a crucial role in oxygenating the atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria continue to support aquatic food webs and global ecosystems.
Why do we need carbohydrates in our diet? Carbohydrates are a primary source of energy for the body, fueling brain function, physical activity, and metabolism. They are broken down into glucose, which cells use to produce ATP, the energy currency of life. Consuming the right balance of carbohydrates supports health and prevents fatigue.
Who composed "Clair de Lune"? Claude Debussy composed "Clair de Lune," one of his most famous piano pieces, in 1890. Its gentle melodies evoke images of moonlight and tranquility, making it a favorite among musicians and audiences alike. Debussy’s composition is a hallmark of Impressionist music.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon, located in Arizona, USA, is a vast geological formation carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. Its layered rocks reveal Earth’s ancient history and attract millions of visitors annually. The canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a symbol of natural beauty and scientific discovery.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His Special and General Relativity theories have had profound impacts on physics, astronomy, and technology. Einstein’s work continues to inspire scientific advances and exploration.
What is the function of the liver in humans? The liver filters blood, metabolizes nutrients, stores vitamins, and detoxifies harmful substances. It also produces bile, which helps digest fats, and plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar levels. A healthy liver is vital for digestion, energy, and overall health.
Why do animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other organisms or objects, helping them avoid predators or attract prey. For example, some butterflies mimic toxic species, while certain insects resemble leaves or twigs. Mimicry increases survival by confusing predators and enhancing adaptation to the environment.
Who painted "Water Lilies"? Claude Monet painted "Water Lilies," a series of about 250 oil paintings created between 1897 and 1926. These works depict Monet’s flower garden in Giverny and are celebrated for their vibrant colors and impressionistic style. "Water Lilies" has influenced generations of artists and is displayed in museums worldwide.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands form when underwater volcanoes erupt, building up layers of lava and ash until they rise above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions create landmasses that support unique ecosystems. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which emerged from volcanic activity in the Pacific Ocean.
Who was the first female astronaut from the United States? Sally Ride became the first American woman to travel to space in 1983 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger. Her mission broke gender barriers in science and inspired generations of women to pursue careers in STEM. Ride’s achievements remain a milestone in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It significantly shortens shipping routes between Europe and Asia, boosting global trade and economic development. The canal is strategically important for international commerce and maritime navigation.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur due to Earth’s tilted axis and its orbit around the sun, causing variations in sunlight and temperature throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in day length and weather patterns, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. The cycle of seasons shapes ecosystems and influences human activities.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440, revolutionizing the spread of information and literacy. The printing press made books affordable and accessible, fueling the Renaissance and scientific progress. Gutenberg’s invention is considered one of the most important in human history.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach stores and mixes food, secretes digestive enzymes and acids, and breaks down proteins into smaller molecules. Its muscular walls churn food to help with chemical digestion before it moves into the intestines. Proper stomach function is essential for nutrient absorption and overall health.
Who wrote the play "The Tempest"? William Shakespeare wrote "The Tempest" around 1610–1611, weaving themes of magic, forgiveness, and power into a story set on a remote island. The play explores the relationship between Prospero, a sorcerer, and the other castaways. "The Tempest" remains one of Shakespeare’s most imaginative and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support immense biodiversity, providing habitats for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fishing and tourism, and contribute to oxygen production. Preserving coral reefs is vital for the health of oceans and the people who rely on them.
What is the process of water desalination and why is it important? Water desalination is the technique of removing salts and minerals from seawater or brackish water to produce freshwater. The process is crucial in regions where natural freshwater sources are scarce, providing clean drinking water for millions of people. Methods include reverse osmosis and distillation, both of which require significant energy but offer solutions for drought-stricken areas.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her courageous feat broke records and inspired women around the world to pursue careers in aviation and other fields traditionally dominated by men. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s history.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital for marine biodiversity, providing habitats and shelter for thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and support fishing and tourism industries. The health of coral reefs is threatened by pollution, climate change, and overfishing, making their conservation a global priority.
Why do people celebrate the Lunar New Year? The Lunar New Year is celebrated in many East and Southeast Asian cultures as the beginning of a new year based on the lunar calendar. Traditions include family reunions, feasts, fireworks, and the exchange of red envelopes with money for good luck. The festival symbolizes renewal, prosperity, and the importance of family and community.
Who developed the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 could perform floating-point arithmetic and was used for engineering calculations. Zuse’s work laid the foundation for modern computing and influenced the design of later electronic computers.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most influential libraries in history. It was a center of learning, attracting scholars from across the Mediterranean and housing countless scrolls on science, philosophy, and literature. The library’s destruction is often seen as a symbol of lost knowledge and the fragility of cultural heritage.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for their eggs and young, protecting them from predators and harsh weather. Nests can be simple or elaborate, made from twigs, grass, mud, or even feathers. The act of nest-building also promotes bonding between parent birds and helps ensure the survival of their offspring.
Who composed the musical "West Side Story"? Leonard Bernstein composed the music for "West Side Story," which premiered in 1957. The musical, with lyrics by Stephen Sondheim, reimagines Shakespeare’s "Romeo and Juliet" in the context of rival street gangs in New York City. Its groundbreaking fusion of classical, jazz, and Latin styles made it a classic of American musical theater.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands are formed when underwater volcanoes erupt, layering lava and ash until they rise above the ocean’s surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands, such as the Hawaiian archipelago. These islands often have unique ecosystems and provide insights into geological processes.
Why do humans need iron in their diet? Iron is an essential mineral that enables the production of hemoglobin, which carries oxygen in the blood. Without enough iron, people can become fatigued and develop anemia, a condition marked by weakness and poor concentration. Dietary sources of iron include red meat, beans, spinach, and fortified cereals.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and later drifted apart. Wegener’s theory eventually led to the development of plate tectonics, revolutionizing earth sciences.
What is the importance of honeybees in agriculture? Honeybees are critical pollinators, supporting the production of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. Their pollination increases crop yields and quality, making them indispensable for food security. Threats to honeybee populations, such as disease and pesticides, pose serious risks to global agriculture.
Why do we have blood types? Blood types are determined by specific antigens on the surface of red blood cells, which help the immune system distinguish between self and foreign cells. Understanding blood types is crucial for safe blood transfusions and organ transplants, as incompatible types can trigger immune reactions. The main blood groups are A, B, AB, and O, each with positive or negative Rh factors.
Who invented the printing press and why is it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The press allowed books and documents to be produced quickly and cheaply, making literacy and knowledge accessible to many. Gutenberg’s invention paved the way for the Renaissance, scientific progress, and the modern world.
What is the process of nitrogen fixation? Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into compounds that plants can absorb and use for growth. This process is carried out by certain bacteria and is essential for the fertility of soils. Nitrogen fixation supports agriculture and natural ecosystems by providing a key nutrient for plant development.
Why do people use compasses for navigation? Compasses are used for navigation because they reliably indicate magnetic north, helping travelers determine direction in unfamiliar terrain. The invention of the compass enabled explorers to sail across oceans and discover new lands. Compasses remain a vital tool in hiking, boating, and orienteering.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the late 15th century, depicting the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell. The painting is celebrated for its graceful lines, mythological subject, and symbolic meaning. "The Birth of Venus" is a highlight of Renaissance art and draws visitors to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.
What is the importance of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitat for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do people celebrate the Day of the Dead in Mexico? The Day of the Dead, or Día de los Muertos, is celebrated in Mexico to honor and remember deceased loved ones. Families create altars, offer food and gifts, and gather in cemeteries to celebrate life and memory. The holiday blends indigenous traditions and Catholic beliefs, emphasizing the cyclical nature of existence.
Who was the first African American woman in space? Dr. Mae Jemison became the first African American woman in space in 1992 aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour. She conducted scientific experiments and inspired many with her achievements in science and education. Jemison continues to advocate for STEM opportunities for underrepresented groups.
What is the process of rock formation? Rock formation occurs through three main processes: igneous rocks form from cooled lava or magma, sedimentary rocks develop from compacted sediments, and metamorphic rocks arise from existing rocks transformed by heat and pressure. These processes shape Earth’s landscapes and provide resources for human use. The rock cycle is fundamental to geology and planetary science.
Who composed the symphony "New World Symphony"? Antonín Dvořák composed the "New World Symphony" (Symphony No. 9) during his stay in the United States in the 1890s. The piece incorporates American musical themes and has become one of the most beloved orchestral works. Dvořák’s symphony reflects his admiration for American culture and landscapes.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria of cells and provides the ATP needed for movement, growth, and other bodily functions. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and underpins all activity in living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat? Sir Francis Chichester was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat, completing his journey in 1967. He sailed the vessel Gipsy Moth IV, overcoming storms and challenging conditions. Chichester’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo ocean navigation and inspired future sailors.
What is the significance of the Human Genome Project? The Human Genome Project was an international scientific effort to map all the genes in human DNA, completed in 2003. It provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and medicine. The project has paved the way for advances in genomics, personalized medicine, and biotechnology.
Why do icebergs float in water? Icebergs float because solid ice is less dense than liquid water, causing buoyancy. Most of an iceberg’s mass is hidden below the surface, with only a small portion visible above water. This phenomenon is crucial for marine navigation and plays a role in ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “War and Peace”? Leo Tolstoy wrote “War and Peace,” a monumental work of Russian literature published in the 1860s. The novel explores themes of love, war, family, and fate through a vast cast of characters set during the Napoleonic Wars. Tolstoy’s masterpiece is celebrated for its depth, realism, and philosophical insight.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs are diverse underwater ecosystems that support thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, provide food and income for millions, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who was the first woman to win the Fields Medal in mathematics? Maryam Mirzakhani became the first woman to win the Fields Medal in 2014 for her outstanding contributions to the geometry and dynamics of Riemann surfaces. Her groundbreaking work opened new areas of research and inspired women in mathematics worldwide. Mirzakhani’s legacy continues through her pioneering ideas.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Photosynthesis in cyanobacteria uses specialized pigments to capture sunlight, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. These ancient microbes played a key role in oxygenating Earth’s atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria remain vital in aquatic ecosystems and biotechnology applications.
Why do volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries because magma rises when plates move apart or one plate is forced under another. This process allows molten rock to reach the surface, creating volcanic eruptions. Plate boundaries are hotspots for geological activity and the formation of new land.
Who composed the opera "La Traviata"? Giuseppe Verdi composed "La Traviata" in 1853, telling the story of a doomed romance between Violetta and Alfredo. The opera is renowned for its emotional music and dramatic plot. "La Traviata" is one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who was the first astronaut to set foot on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first astronaut to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions. Armstrong’s achievement marked a milestone in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone in archaeology? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s written language. The stone is a symbol of linguistic and historical breakthroughs.
Why do some plants produce flowers? Plants produce flowers to facilitate reproduction through the attraction of pollinators and the production of seeds. Flowers contain male and female reproductive organs, enabling genetic diversity. The evolution of flowers has been crucial for the survival and spread of many plant species.
Who invented the first practical steam locomotive? George Stephenson invented the first practical steam locomotive, named "Locomotion No. 1," in 1825. His designs improved transportation, enabling rapid movement of goods and people. Stephenson’s work was fundamental to the development of the railway industry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological means. Physical weathering involves temperature changes and abrasion, while chemical weathering includes reactions with water and air. Weathering shapes landscapes and contributes to soil formation.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains controversial and influential in global history.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental restoration, memory consolidation, and immune system support. It helps regulate hormones, metabolism, and emotional health. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to poor concentration, health problems, and reduced quality of life.
Who wrote the play “The Importance of Being Earnest”? Oscar Wilde wrote “The Importance of Being Earnest” in 1895. The play is a witty satire of Victorian society and explores themes of identity, marriage, and social conventions. Wilde’s humor and clever dialogue have made it a classic of English theater.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. Cloud formation is essential for precipitation and influences weather patterns around the globe.
What is the process of evaporation and how does it affect the water cycle? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat, usually from the sun. This process moves water from surfaces like oceans and lakes into the atmosphere, forming clouds and eventually leading to precipitation. Evaporation is a key driver in the global water cycle, influencing weather and climate.
Who invented the first practical electric light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His light bulb was reliable, long-lasting, and safe for use in homes and businesses. This invention revolutionized society by making electric lighting widely accessible and changing the way people lived after dark.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. In animals, it consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is vital for survival, growth, and energy distribution.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight is essential for plants because it provides the energy needed for photosynthesis, the process by which they produce food. Through photosynthesis, plants convert light energy into chemical energy, creating glucose and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot thrive, and ecosystems would collapse.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream through the story of Jay Gatsby and his lavish parties. “The Great Gatsby” is considered a classic of American literature and remains widely studied and admired.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants, controlling floods, and replenishing groundwater. They support a rich diversity of plant and animal life and serve as breeding grounds for many species. Conserving wetlands is crucial for maintaining ecosystem balance and protecting biodiversity.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent became a symbol of human endurance and exploration. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest achievements in mountaineering history.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most living organisms. However, excess greenhouse gases can lead to global warming and climate change.
Why do animals form social groups? Animals form social groups for protection, finding food, raising offspring, and communicating. Living in groups can increase survival rates and provide opportunities for learning and cooperation. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and dolphins living in pods.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and vibrant colors express Van Gogh’s emotional intensity and creativity. “The Starry Night” is considered one of the most iconic works in art history.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It starts in the mouth with chewing and saliva, continues in the stomach and intestines with enzymes and acids, and ends with nutrient absorption and waste elimination. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created the protocols for linking documents and sharing information through web browsers. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important for the water cycle? Evaporation is the process where liquid water transforms into water vapor due to heat from the sun. This process occurs on the surfaces of oceans, lakes, and rivers, returning water to the atmosphere. Evaporation is crucial for the water cycle, regulating climate and replenishing precipitation.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest on May 29, 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering history. The successful expedition inspired countless climbers and expanded understanding of high-altitude exploration.
What is the function of red blood cells in the human body? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen, giving blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are vital for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who wrote the novel "Don Quixote"? Miguel de Cervantes, a Spanish author, wrote "Don Quixote," published in two parts in 1605 and 1615. The novel follows the adventures of an idealistic knight and is considered one of the greatest works in world literature. "Don Quixote" has influenced countless writers and remains widely read today.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch Baroque painter, created "Girl with a Pearl Earring" around 1665. The painting is famous for its enigmatic expression and masterful use of light and color. It is often called the "Mona Lisa of the North" and remains one of Vermeer’s most celebrated works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation is the process by which water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This transition occurs when warm, moist air rises and encounters cooler temperatures at higher altitudes. Condensation is crucial for creating precipitation and maintaining the Earth’s water cycle.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel into space in 1963 aboard Vostok 6. Her journey lasted almost three days and proved that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, and cognitive functions. Proper functioning of the nervous system is vital for survival and everyday life.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate during winter to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows down significantly, allowing them to use stored body fat for energy. This adaptation is common in mammals such as bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan, as he grows up and pursues his dreams, encountering a host of memorable characters along the way. Dickens’ work is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the significance of the invention of the wheel? The invention of the wheel revolutionized transportation, agriculture, and technology by enabling the movement of goods and people with greater ease. Wheels are essential components of vehicles, machinery, and countless devices. This simple yet profound invention played a key role in the development of civilization.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and gradually moved apart. Although controversial at first, his ideas laid the groundwork for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo as they develop from larvae to adults. It involves distinct stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with dramatic changes in form and function. For example, caterpillars become butterflies through metamorphosis, adapting to different environments and roles.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy required to combine carbon dioxide and water, producing food and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot grow or sustain life on Earth.
Who painted the mural "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" in the late 15th century on the wall of the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during the famous biblical meal and is renowned for its composition and emotional depth. "The Last Supper" remains one of the most iconic works of Renaissance art.
What is the importance of recycling for the environment? Recycling reduces waste, conserves natural resources, and lowers pollution levels by transforming used materials into new products. It helps save energy and decreases the need for raw material extraction, protecting ecosystems. Recycling is a key practice for sustainable living and environmental protection.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and enchanting story have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies and is beloved by audiences of all ages.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces enzymes that help break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon, hormones that regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and metabolic health.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climate conditions. Migration often involves navigating across continents, using landmarks and the Earth's magnetic field for guidance. This behavior is vital for survival and maintaining healthy bird populations.
Who invented the first practical electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first practical electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a reliable source of continuous electric current, paving the way for modern electrical devices. Volta’s work is honored in the unit of electric potential, the volt.
What is the process of erosion and its effects on landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and transports soil from one place to another. While erosion is a natural process, human activities can accelerate it, leading to environmental challenges.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. Shakespeare’s play is one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, help prevent flooding, and provide habitat for a wide variety of plants and animals. They support biodiversity and contribute to the health of surrounding ecosystems. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the law of electromagnetic induction? Michael Faraday discovered the law of electromagnetic induction in 1831, showing that a changing magnetic field can produce an electric current. This principle is the foundation for electric generators, transformers, and many modern technologies. Faraday’s experiments greatly advanced the understanding of electricity and magnetism.
What is the significance of the Apollo 11 mission? The Apollo 11 mission, launched by NASA in 1969, was the first to land humans on the Moon. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the lunar surface, while Michael Collins piloted the command module. The mission represented a major achievement in space exploration and inspired generations worldwide.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for the water cycle because it leads to precipitation, returning water to Earth's surface. Condensation also helps regulate atmospheric temperature and humidity.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria using a microscope? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first to observe bacteria under a microscope in the late 17th century. His homemade lenses allowed him to see tiny organisms he called "animalcules." Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries laid the foundation for microbiology and transformed our understanding of life.
What is the function of platelets in human blood? Platelets are small cell fragments in blood that help clot wounds and prevent excessive bleeding. When an injury occurs, platelets gather at the site and form a plug, releasing chemicals that trigger clotting. This process is vital for healing and protecting the body from infection.
Why do deserts have extreme temperatures? Deserts experience extreme temperatures because they have little moisture in the air to buffer heat changes. During the day, the sun rapidly heats the surface, but at night, the lack of clouds allows heat to escape quickly. This results in very hot days and cold nights in many desert regions.
Who wrote the novel "The Odyssey"? "The Odyssey" is an ancient Greek epic poem attributed to Homer, believed to have been composed in the 8th century BCE. It tells the story of Odysseus’s long and perilous journey home after the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of adventure, loyalty, and perseverance and remains influential in literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide habitats for diverse wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Protecting wetlands is crucial for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She is known for her novel "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which combines adventure and educational themes. Lagerlöf’s work is celebrated for its vivid storytelling and impact on Swedish literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in Earth's climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in the atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping Earth warm enough to support life. Without it, the planet would be too cold for most living organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps them survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Many species follow specific routes and rely on instinct, environmental cues, and learned behaviors.
Who invented the first vaccine and what disease did it target? Edward Jenner developed the first vaccine in 1796 to protect against smallpox. He used material from cowpox blisters to immunize people, pioneering the concept of vaccination. Jenner’s discovery laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces digestive enzymes that break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon to regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and energy management.
Who painted "The Starry Night"? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while he was living in an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The swirling sky and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and innovative style. Today, the painting is considered one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is crucial for global trade and has shaped international relations.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong, unique passwords are essential for safeguarding digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who wrote the play "Waiting for Godot"? Samuel Beckett wrote "Waiting for Godot," first performed in 1953. The play is a landmark of absurdist theater, exploring themes of meaning, time, and human existence through two characters waiting for someone named Godot. Beckett’s work has influenced modern drama and philosophical thought.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? Kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents once formed a single landmass called Pangaea and gradually drifted apart. Although controversial at first, Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their juvenile form to adulthood, involving distinct stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, undergoing dramatic changes in structure and function. This process allows insects to exploit different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world? Sir Robin Knox-Johnston became the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world in 1969 aboard his boat "Suhaili." His journey took 312 days and overcame severe storms and isolation. Knox-Johnston's achievement is celebrated as a monumental milestone in maritime history.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the greatest centers of learning in the ancient world, housing thousands of manuscripts and attracting scholars from many cultures. Its destruction resulted in the loss of invaluable knowledge and records of ancient civilizations. The library remains a symbol of the importance of preserving and sharing human knowledge.
Why do deserts form on Earth? Deserts form due to factors such as low precipitation, high evaporation rates, and geographical barriers like mountains that block moisture-laden winds. Many deserts occur at latitudes where dry air sinks and inhibits cloud formation. Deserts play a role in Earth's climate and are home to unique adaptations in plants and animals.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who navigates social class, ambition, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’s work is renowned for its rich characters and exploration of themes like justice, redemption, and love.
What is the importance of mangrove forests? Mangrove forests protect coastlines from erosion and storm surges, provide habitats for countless marine and terrestrial species, and support local fisheries. Their complex root systems trap sediments and filter pollutants, maintaining water quality. Mangroves are increasingly recognized for their role in carbon storage and climate change mitigation.
Who invented the safety elevator and how did it change architecture? Elisha Otis invented the safety elevator in 1852, introducing a braking mechanism that prevented the cab from falling if the cable broke. This innovation made it feasible to construct taller buildings, leading to the development of skyscrapers. Otis’s invention transformed urban landscapes and modern architecture.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, as condensed water eventually falls as rain or snow. Condensation helps regulate Earth's temperature and is a key stage in the water cycle.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works include "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which is celebrated for its imaginative storytelling and depiction of Swedish folklore. Lagerlöf paved the way for women writers in international literature.
What is the significance of the Mayan calendar? The Mayan calendar was a sophisticated system used by the Maya civilization to track time, predict astronomical events, and determine religious ceremonies. It included several cycles, such as the Haab’ and Tzolk’in, and was more accurate than many contemporary Western calendars. The calendar reflects the advanced mathematical and astronomical knowledge of the Maya.
Why do volcanoes create fertile soils? Volcanic eruptions deposit minerals and nutrients onto the land, enriching the soil and making it highly fertile. As volcanic rocks weather and decompose, they release elements like potassium and phosphorus. Many agricultural regions around the world benefit from soil formed by past volcanic activity.
Who composed the opera "Carmen"? Georges Bizet composed the opera "Carmen," which premiered in 1875. The opera tells the story of a passionate and tragic love affair between Carmen, a free-spirited woman, and Don José, a soldier. "Carmen" is celebrated for its memorable melodies and dramatic intensity, making it one of the most popular operas ever written.
What is the process of erosion and why is it important? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. This process shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and transports nutrients across ecosystems. While erosion is a natural force, excessive human-induced erosion can lead to loss of fertile land and environmental problems.
Who discovered the structure of benzene and its significance? August Kekulé, a German chemist, proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865. His insight solved a long-standing mystery in organic chemistry and paved the way for the development of aromatic compounds. Benzene’s structure underpins much of modern chemistry, including the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and materials.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support a vast diversity of marine life, protect shorelines from erosion, and provide resources for fishing and tourism. They are sometimes called the "rainforests of the sea" due to their biodiversity. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change, pollution, and overfishing, making their conservation critical.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister, a British athlete, became the first person to run a mile in under four minutes on May 6, 1954. His time was 3 minutes, 59.4 seconds, breaking a psychological barrier in athletics. Bannister’s achievement inspired runners worldwide and is considered one of the greatest feats in sports history.
What is the process of plate tectonics and its impact on geography? Plate tectonics is the movement of large plates that make up Earth’s crust, driven by heat from the planet’s interior. This movement causes earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, mountain formation, and the drifting of continents. Plate tectonics continually reshape Earth’s geography and influence natural disasters.
Who painted "The Night Watch"? Rembrandt van Rijn, a Dutch master, painted "The Night Watch" in 1642. The painting is famous for its dramatic use of light and shadow, as well as its dynamic composition of a city militia. "The Night Watch" is a highlight of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and a symbol of Dutch Golden Age art.
What is the function of the nervous system in animals? The nervous system in animals controls and coordinates actions by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, enabling responses to external stimuli, movement, and thought. Proper functioning of the nervous system is essential for survival, behavior, and adaptation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland took nearly 15 hours and demonstrated both her courage and skill as a pilot. Earhart’s accomplishment advanced the role of women in aviation and remains a historic milestone.
What is the process of condensation and why is it important? Condensation is the process where water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid water, forming droplets. This typically occurs when humid air encounters a cooler surface or temperature, creating dew, fog, or clouds. Condensation is essential in the water cycle, as it allows for the formation of precipitation and helps regulate Earth’s climate.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication over long distances for the first time. The device revolutionized both personal and business interactions, making real-time conversations possible across cities and countries. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the function of the circulatory system in the human body? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body using blood vessels. The heart pumps blood to all tissues, maintaining cellular health and homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, immunity, and overall well-being.
Why do seasons change during the year? Seasons change because of Earth’s axial tilt and its orbit around the sun. As the planet moves, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, causing shifts in temperature and daylight hours. These changes influence plant growth, animal behavior, and human activities across the globe.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. "Romeo and Juliet" remains one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who painted the "Starry Night" and why is it significant? Vincent van Gogh painted "Starry Night" in 1889, capturing swirling skies over a quiet town. The work is celebrated for its emotional intensity, bold colors, and innovative brushwork. "Starry Night" is considered a masterpiece of Post-Impressionist art and is studied and admired worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it affect the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His historic step was broadcast worldwide, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Armstrong’s achievement inspired generations and expanded humanity’s understanding of the cosmos.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of education for society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Why do some animals migrate long distances? Animals migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better climate conditions. Migration can span thousands of kilometers, as seen in monarch butterflies, whales, and birds. This behavior helps species survive seasonal changes and is critical for maintaining healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, contains the genetic instructions that determine the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living things. It carries information that is passed down from parents to offspring, ensuring continuity of traits. DNA is essential for cellular processes and is the basis of heredity and evolution.
Who was the first person to run a marathon in under two hours? Eliud Kipchoge, a Kenyan athlete, became the first person to run a marathon in under two hours in 2019 during the Ineos 1:59 Challenge. His time was 1:59:40, although it does not count as an official world record due to controlled race conditions. Kipchoge's achievement is celebrated as a milestone in distance running.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. The conservation of wetlands is essential for maintaining healthy ecosystems and protecting water resources.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, enabling the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. It helps maintain immune function and emotional well-being. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of health issues.
Who composed the opera “Carmen”? Georges Bizet composed the opera “Carmen,” which premiered in 1875. The story is set in Spain and follows the passionate and tragic tale of Carmen, a free-spirited woman. “Carmen” is renowned for its memorable melodies and has become one of the most popular operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Without photosynthesis, life on Earth would not be possible.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Lagerlöf’s works are celebrated for their imagination and deep humanity.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s language and history. The Rosetta Stone is a symbol of linguistic and archaeological breakthroughs.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. “Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we need renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s resources. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Renewable energy also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body via blood. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. A healthy circulatory system is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
Who was the first woman to travel to space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel to space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, was one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional law and individual freedoms, influencing democratic governments worldwide. Its principles remain relevant in contemporary legal systems.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, their body temperature drops, and bodily functions decrease to minimal levels. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” first published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters love, loss, and personal growth as he moves through Victorian society. Dickens’ novel is celebrated for its vivid characters and exploration of social class and morality.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important for plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops humans rely on.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to transmit voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication by making real-time conversation possible over long distances. The telephone paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication networks.
What is the importance of clean air for health and the environment? Clean air is vital for respiratory health, reducing the risk of diseases such as asthma and lung cancer. It also supports healthy ecosystems and prevents damage to crops, forests, and bodies of water. Maintaining clean air is essential for public health and environmental sustainability.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding, reproduction, and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria using a microscope in the late 17th century. His discoveries opened the door to microbiology and the study of microscopic life. Leeuwenhoek’s work revolutionized medicine and our understanding of disease.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for environmental sustainability.
Who composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty,” which premiered in 1890. The ballet is renowned for its beautiful melodies, enchanting story, and elaborate choreography. “Sleeping Beauty” remains a staple of classical ballet repertoires worldwide.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy needed for growth, movement, and cellular activities. Healthy mitochondria are crucial for overall cellular function and organismal health.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during their final meal together, capturing a moment of intense emotion and drama. “The Last Supper” is celebrated as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and religious symbolism.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can create valleys, cliffs, and other landforms by transporting soil and rock from one place to another. Erosion is a key factor in shaping Earth’s surface over time.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership left a lasting legacy in both national and global history.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do glaciers retreat and what does it mean for the planet? Glaciers retreat when melting outpaces snowfall due to rising global temperatures, shrinking their mass and surface area. This contributes to sea level rise and affects freshwater supplies for many regions. Glacier retreat is a visible indicator of climate change and can disrupt ecosystems and human societies.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it revolutionize medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo distinct changes in form and structure throughout their life cycle. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources at each stage, contributing to their evolutionary success.
Who was the first person to invent a working electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first true electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a continuous source of electric current and sparked new experiments in electricity. Volta’s work laid the foundation for modern electrical technology and devices.
What is the role of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is crucial for energy production, growth, and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted relative to its orbital plane around the sun. As the planet travels through its orbit, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. These seasonal changes affect weather patterns, plant growth, and animal behavior.
Who wrote the novel "Wuthering Heights"? Emily Brontë wrote "Wuthering Heights," which was published in 1847. The novel is known for its dark, passionate story of love and revenge set on the Yorkshire moors. Brontë’s only novel has become a classic of English literature, admired for its complex characters and emotional intensity.
What is the function of enzymes in biological systems? Enzymes are proteins that act as catalysts, speeding up chemical reactions in living organisms. They are essential for processes such as digestion, energy production, DNA replication, and cell signaling. Without enzymes, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to sustain life.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Her achievement paved the way for future female astronauts and inspired generations.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It houses an extraordinary variety of plants and animals and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the global climate. The Amazon is also vital for indigenous cultures and biodiversity conservation.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe and secure place for their eggs and young. Nests protect against predators and harsh weather and sometimes help regulate temperature and humidity. The construction and location of nests vary greatly among bird species, reflecting their unique needs and behaviors.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information through linked documents accessible via browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge across the globe.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization is the process by which the remains or traces of living organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. It often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineral replacement or casting. Fossils are crucial for understanding past life and the history of Earth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping modern British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in global history.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, allowing photosynthesis to occur. It enables plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen, providing energy for growth. Chlorophyll also gives plants their characteristic green color.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890 in Saint Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is celebrated for its enchanting music, elegant choreography, and fairy-tale story. It is a staple of classical ballet and performed by companies worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus announces that one of his disciples will betray him. "The Last Supper" is renowned for its composition, emotional intensity, and artistic innovation.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly shortening trade routes. The canal remains vital for global commerce and geopolitics.
Why do humans need vitamins? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the play "Death of a Salesman"? Arthur Miller wrote "Death of a Salesman," which premiered in 1949. The play explores themes of the American Dream, family, and personal failure through the life of Willy Loman, a struggling salesman. Miller’s work is regarded as a classic of American theater and continues to be widely studied and performed.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo a dramatic transformation from one stage of life to another. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with each stage having distinct forms and behaviors. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources throughout their lifecycle.
Who was the first person to invent the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the first practical telephone in 1876. His invention allowed people to communicate over long distances using electrical signals, revolutionizing global communication. Bell’s telephone paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine environments? Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems in the world, supporting thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and provide food and income for millions of people. Coral reefs are also important for medicine and tourism, but they are threatened by pollution and climate change.
Why do humans need vitamins in their diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that the body requires for normal growth, development, and metabolism. They play crucial roles in processes such as immune function, energy production, and cell repair. Since the human body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food to prevent deficiencies and maintain health.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and tells the tale of a young girl's magical adventure with a nutcracker prince. “The Nutcracker” is especially popular during the holiday season and is performed by ballet companies around the world.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys are organs that filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain the body’s fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for overall health and detoxification.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who dreams of rising above his humble beginnings and becoming a gentleman. Dickens explores themes of social class, ambition, and personal growth, making it one of his most celebrated works.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities have increased the concentration of greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is crucial for mitigating environmental impacts.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Hibernation is a survival strategy used by certain animals to conserve energy during periods of cold and food scarcity. During hibernation, animals lower their metabolic rates and body temperatures, often remaining inactive for weeks or months. This allows them to survive harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the printing press and why was it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440 in Germany. The printing press enabled the mass production of books and other written materials, greatly increasing access to information. This technological breakthrough helped spread literacy, science, and ideas, fueling the Renaissance and shaping modern society.
What is the role of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands serve as natural water filters, removing pollutants and improving water quality. They provide habitat for many species, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Wetlands are essential for maintaining ecological balance and are a focus of conservation efforts worldwide.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and masterful technique, making it one of the most recognized artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This takes place mainly in the mitochondria and is essential for powering bodily functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences today.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished and do not deplete Earth’s resources. It helps reduce pollution, combat climate change, and supports sustainable development. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a cleaner, safer future.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it change medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. Penicillin led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. This discovery is considered one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web and what was its impact? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers, making it easy to access and exchange knowledge. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, transforming how people live and work.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports nutrients, oxygen, and hormones to cells throughout the body and removes waste products like carbon dioxide. It includes the heart, blood, and blood vessels, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the Z3 in 1941, widely considered the first programmable, fully automatic digital computer. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and floating-point calculations, laying the groundwork for modern computing. Zuse’s innovations influenced the development of computers worldwide.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, was a charter that limited the power of the English king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It is seen as a foundational document for modern democracy and constitutional law. Its principles influenced legal systems and the development of human rights.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight provides the energy required for photosynthesis, the process by which plants make food from carbon dioxide and water. Without sunlight, plants cannot produce the glucose needed for growth, repair, and reproduction. Sunlight also influences flowering, seed production, and overall plant health.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who faces social and personal challenges as he rises in society. Dickens’s work explores themes of ambition, love, and redemption, and remains a classic of English literature.
What is the purpose of the immune system in humans? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and destroying harmful invaders like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs, including white blood cells and antibodies. A strong immune system is vital for survival and recovery.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro? Hans Meyer, a German geographer, and Ludwig Purtscheller, an Austrian mountaineer, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro in 1889. Their successful ascent opened the way for scientific studies and tourism in the region. Kilimanjaro remains a popular destination for climbers from around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis and its importance for life? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process creates the food and oxygen that sustain nearly all life on Earth. Without photosynthesis, ecosystems would collapse, and most living organisms would not survive.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet,” which premiered in 1938. Based on Shakespeare’s tragic play, the ballet is known for its dramatic music and expressive choreography. Prokofiev’s score has become one of the most beloved works in the ballet repertoire.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world and is home to an incredible diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. It plays a key role in regulating the global climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen. The Amazon is also a source of medicines and supports unique ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling people to transmit speech over long distances for the first time. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication, connecting people and places across the globe. The telephone paved the way for modern telecommunications, including mobile phones and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to understand the language and history of ancient Egypt. The Stone is a symbol of breakthroughs in archaeology and linguistics.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows, and body temperature drops, allowing them to live off stored fat. Hibernation is a common adaptation in mammals like bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples at the moment he announces that one will betray him. “The Last Supper” is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and artistic innovation.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth. They also store food and interact with soil organisms to support plant health. A strong root system is essential for stability, resilience, and productivity in plants.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her courageous flight demonstrated the possibilities of aviation for women and inspired generations. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and perseverance.
What is the importance of renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete Earth's resources. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and pollution. Investing in renewables supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who composed the opera “The Marriage of Figaro”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Marriage of Figaro,” which premiered in 1786. The opera is a comedic masterpiece that explores themes of love, class, and mistaken identity. Mozart’s music and the witty libretto have made it one of the most beloved operas in history.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, or ice. This natural process shapes valleys, coastlines, and mountains over time. Erosion influences soil fertility, ecosystem health, and the formation of geological features.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It helps regulate temperature and maintain homeostasis. This system is essential for survival, supporting organs and tissues by ensuring they receive the resources they need.
Who invented the telephone and how did it impact society? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. The telephone revolutionized how people connected, transforming business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Its invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and the global networks we rely on today.
What is the significance of the Declaration of Independence? The Declaration of Independence, adopted in 1776, marked the American colonies’ formal separation from British rule. It articulated the principles of liberty, equality, and self-government, inspiring movements for democracy worldwide. The document remains a cornerstone of American identity and political philosophy.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These sudden movements often happen along faults or plate boundaries. Earthquakes can cause significant damage to structures and landscapes and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring journey helped break gender barriers in aviation and encouraged women to pursue careers in science and exploration. Earhart remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is essential for powering cell functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 on the wall of a monastery in Milan. The masterpiece depicts Jesus with his disciples and is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and innovative techniques. "The Last Supper" is one of the most recognized and studied artworks in history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to propose heliocentrism? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His revolutionary theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the role of the digestive system in humans? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet” in 1935, based on Shakespeare’s tragic play. The music is known for its dramatic intensity and memorable melodies, and the ballet is performed by companies worldwide. Prokofiev’s work is celebrated for capturing the emotion and conflict of the story.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The story follows the orphan Pip as he navigates ambition, love, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’ novel is renowned for its memorable characters and social commentary.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates bodily functions by transmitting electrical signals between the brain, spinal cord, and the rest of the body. It enables us to perceive the environment, move muscles, and respond to stimuli. The nervous system is essential for memory, learning, and maintaining homeostasis.
Who discovered the structure of DNA and why was it important? James Watson and Francis Crick, with crucial contributions from Rosalind Franklin, discovered the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough explained how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA’s structure revolutionized genetics, medicine, and biotechnology.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, limited the powers of the king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional government and the rule of law. The Magna Carta has influenced legal systems around the world and remains a symbol of liberty and justice.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and prevent overheating. When the body becomes too warm, sweat glands release moisture that evaporates and cools the skin. Sweating also helps remove some waste products from the body.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. He achieved this feat through careful planning, use of sled dogs, and efficient travel techniques. Amundsen’s success marked a major milestone in polar exploration.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest on Earth, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to a vast diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous people, and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the planet’s climate. Protecting the Amazon is vital for global biodiversity and environmental health.
Who wrote the play "Othello"? William Shakespeare wrote "Othello" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of a Moorish general in Venice. "Othello" remains a powerful work, frequently performed and studied for its complex characters and dramatic impact.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the loss of water vapor from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps transport nutrients from roots to leaves and cools the plant. Transpiration also drives the movement of water through ecosystems and influences local climate.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created protocols for sharing information via linked documents, revolutionizing communication, commerce, and education. The Web is now an essential part of modern life, connecting billions of people worldwide.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function and homeostasis.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are celebrated for their artistic mastery and dramatic storytelling. The Sistine Chapel remains a major attraction for visitors and art lovers worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for a stable and healthy environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and remains a landmark in space exploration.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microorganisms to promote healthy growth. Strong roots are essential for plant stability and productivity.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and choreography have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies each winter.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skeletal system in humans? The skeletal system provides structure and support for the human body, protecting vital organs and enabling movement through joints and muscles. Bones also produce blood cells in the marrow and store minerals such as calcium and phosphorus. A healthy skeletal system is essential for overall mobility and resilience.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria in the late 17th century using a homemade microscope. His discoveries opened up the world of microbiology, revealing tiny organisms previously unknown to science. Leeuwenhoek’s work laid the foundation for modern bacteriology and cell theory.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and maintain homeostasis, especially in hot conditions or during physical activity. Sweat evaporates from the skin, cooling the body and preventing overheating. Sweating also helps excrete certain waste products and maintain electrolyte balance.
Who composed the opera “The Barber of Seville”? Gioachino Rossini composed “The Barber of Seville,” which premiered in 1816. The opera is a comic masterpiece, known for its energetic arias and witty plot involving the clever barber Figaro. “The Barber of Seville” remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Who was the first woman to travel to the deepest part of the ocean? Kathy Sullivan became the first woman to travel to Challenger Deep, the deepest known point in the ocean, in 2020. She is also an astronaut, making her the first person to both walk in space and reach the ocean’s deepest spot. Sullivan’s achievements highlight the spirit of exploration across frontiers.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Why do migratory birds travel such long distances? Migratory birds travel long distances to find optimal conditions for feeding, breeding, and survival, often moving between continents. Changing seasons, food availability, and climate drive these remarkable journeys. Migration ensures species can avoid harsh environments and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the kidneys in humans? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the late 15th century, depicting the mythological goddess emerging from the sea on a shell. The artwork is celebrated for its graceful figures and vibrant colors. Botticelli’s painting remains a masterpiece of the Italian Renaissance.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Why do some animals use camouflage? Animals use camouflage to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” first performed around 1604. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his manipulative subordinate Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful work in the English literary canon.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases such as carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for a healthy planet.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, which involves dramatic changes in form and function. This process allows insects to occupy different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the first movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century in Germany. His invention revolutionized the production of books, making literature and scientific knowledge more accessible. The printing press played a crucial role in the spread of ideas during the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the role of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for laying eggs, incubating them, and raising their young. Nests protect eggs and chicks from predators and harsh weather. The materials and construction techniques vary widely depending on the species and environment.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army. “Othello” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and performed works.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry? Marie Curie was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her work on radium and polonium. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for scientists and women worldwide.
What is the process of erosion and how does it affect landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and impact ecosystems.
Why do some animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of transpiration in plants and why is it important? Transpiration is the process by which water travels from the roots of a plant, moves up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature, maintain nutrient flow, and influences local humidity and rainfall patterns. Transpiration also plays a crucial role in the global water cycle.
Who was the first person to climb all fourteen 8,000-meter peaks? Reinhold Messner, an Italian mountaineer, became the first person to climb all fourteen peaks over 8,000 meters without supplemental oxygen. He completed this feat in 1986, demonstrating extraordinary endurance and skill. Messner’s achievement is celebrated as one of the greatest accomplishments in modern mountaineering.
What is the importance of the International Date Line? The International Date Line is an imaginary line, mostly following the 180th meridian, that determines where the calendar date changes by one day. Crossing the line from west to east subtracts a day, while crossing from east to west adds a day. It helps standardize global timekeeping and coordinates activities across continents.
Why do some animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other species or natural objects for protection, hunting, or attracting mates. For example, some butterflies imitate toxic species to avoid predators, and certain insects mimic leaves or twigs for camouflage. Mimicry increases survival chances by confusing or deterring threats.
Who composed the opera "Don Giovanni"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "Don Giovanni," which premiered in 1787. The opera blends comedy, tragedy, and supernatural elements in the story of the notorious seducer Don Juan. "Don Giovanni" is considered one of Mozart’s greatest works and a masterpiece of operatic literature.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and attack pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. Different types of white blood cells have specialized roles, including producing antibodies and destroying infected cells.
Who invented the airplane and how did it change transportation? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903. Their invention revolutionized transportation, enabling rapid travel across continents and oceans. Aviation has since transformed commerce, tourism, and global connectivity.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China was built over centuries to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids by nomadic tribes. Stretching thousands of miles, it stands as a symbol of China’s engineering prowess and historical resilience. The Wall attracts millions of tourists and remains a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do we experience lunar eclipses? Lunar eclipses occur when the Earth passes between the Sun and the Moon, casting a shadow on the Moon’s surface. This can only happen during a full moon. Lunar eclipses are visible from anywhere on the nighttime side of Earth and have been observed and studied for centuries.
Who painted "Guernica" and what does it represent? Pablo Picasso painted "Guernica" in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of innocent civilians. "Guernica" is a powerful anti-war symbol and one of Picasso’s most famous works.
What is the process of photosynthesis in aquatic plants? Aquatic plants use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in submerged leaves and stems, providing oxygen for aquatic life and helping regulate carbon levels in the water. Photosynthesis in aquatic ecosystems supports fish, invertebrates, and other organisms.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her work advocating for disarmament and peaceful conflict resolution influenced global peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to inspire activists and leaders around the world.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do some countries use geothermal energy? Countries with abundant geothermal resources, such as Iceland and New Zealand, use geothermal energy to generate electricity and heat buildings. Geothermal energy is sustainable, produces minimal pollution, and provides reliable power. Harnessing geothermal energy helps reduce dependence on fossil fuels and supports environmental goals.
Who wrote the novel "The Grapes of Wrath"? John Steinbeck wrote "The Grapes of Wrath," published in 1939. The novel chronicles the struggles of a family during the Great Depression as they migrate from Oklahoma to California. Steinbeck’s work highlights themes of poverty, injustice, and resilience, and remains a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators such as bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling the production of fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail, impacting food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinators is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965 during the Voskhod 2 mission. He floated outside his spacecraft for twelve minutes, demonstrating the feasibility of extravehicular activity. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future space exploration.
What is the process of cloud seeding and why is it used? Cloud seeding involves dispersing substances such as silver iodide or salt into clouds to encourage precipitation. It is used to increase rainfall, reduce drought, and improve water supplies in dry regions. Cloud seeding is also employed to minimize hail and enhance snowpack in some areas.
Why are coral reefs important for marine life? Coral reefs provide habitat, food, and breeding grounds for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fisheries and tourism, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890. The ballet is based on the fairy tale of Princess Aurora and features lush music and elaborate choreography. "Sleeping Beauty" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process in which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients and minerals. Transpiration also contributes to the water cycle and affects local humidity.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His historic words, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," were broadcast to millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in human exploration and space science.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, significantly shortening travel time. The canal is a vital artery for international trade and has strategic economic and geopolitical significance.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Camouflage helps animals blend into their environment, making it harder for predators to spot them or easier for them to ambush prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, and even body shapes that mimic surroundings. Camouflage increases an animal’s chance of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who composed the symphony “Symphonie Fantastique”? Hector Berlioz composed “Symphonie Fantastique” in 1830, a groundbreaking work known for its vivid storytelling and innovative orchestration. The symphony follows the dreams and torments of an artist, using musical techniques to depict emotions and events. Berlioz’s composition is considered a masterpiece of the Romantic era.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates body activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, thought, and emotion. The nervous system enables rapid responses and adaptation to internal and external stimuli.
Who wrote the novel “Crime and Punishment”? Fyodor Dostoevsky wrote “Crime and Punishment,” published in 1866. The novel explores themes of morality, guilt, and redemption through the story of Raskolnikov, a young student who commits murder. Dostoevsky’s psychological insight and philosophical depth make it a classic of world literature.
What is the significance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has revolutionized astronomy by capturing detailed images of distant galaxies, nebulae, and stars. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study black holes, and discover new planets. Hubble’s work has greatly expanded our understanding of the cosmos.
Why do we need proteins in our diet? Proteins are essential nutrients that help build and repair tissues, produce enzymes and hormones, and support the immune system. They are made up of amino acids, some of which the body cannot produce and must be obtained from food. A lack of protein can lead to health problems such as muscle loss and weakened immunity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the "Iron Lady," she served for over a decade and implemented significant economic and social reforms. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in British and global politics.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes and sizes. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather and climate.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The painting depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell and is celebrated for its beauty and mythological symbolism. Botticelli’s work is a highlight of art history and is housed in Florence’s Uffizi Gallery.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953, with key contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time for reflection, renewal, and setting goals. Traditions vary around the world, often including fireworks, parties, and rituals to bring good luck. The holiday is observed globally and symbolizes hope for the future.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web has revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the significance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs support an incredible diversity of marine life, providing food, shelter, and breeding grounds for thousands of species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. Healthy coral reefs are vital for the balance and productivity of ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. “Macbeth” remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the role of mitochondria in living cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair by providing energy for all cellular processes. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
To whom did the Virgin Mary allegedly appear in 1858 in Lourdes France? Saint Bernadette Soubirous, a young peasant girl from Lourdes, reported a series of visions in which she encountered the Virgin Mary. These apparitions became widely known and led to Lourdes becoming a major site of Catholic pilgrimage. Bernadette’s experiences were later recognized by the Catholic Church as authentic.
What is in front of the Notre Dame Main Building? In front of the Notre Dame Main Building stands a prominent copper statue of Christ. This statue is a key landmark on campus, often serving as a meeting point for students and visitors. The statue symbolizes the university’s religious heritage and its connection to Catholic tradition.
The Basilica of the Sacred heart at Notre Dame is beside to which structure? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart is situated adjacent to the Main Building at Notre Dame. This proximity highlights the central role of faith and spirituality in campus life. Both structures are among the oldest and most iconic at the university.
What is the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame is a Marian shrine and a peaceful place for prayer and reflection. Modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France, it offers students, faculty, and visitors a quiet space to meditate. Many people light candles at the Grotto as a sign of hope or remembrance.
What sits on top of the Main Building at Notre Dame? Atop the Main Building at Notre Dame is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary. This gleaming figure is visible from various points on campus and serves as a symbol of the university’s dedication to Mary. The statue has become a celebrated part of Notre Dame’s visual identity.
When did the Scholastic Magazine of Notre dame begin publishing? The Scholastic Magazine began publishing in September 1876, making it one of the oldest student publications in the United States. It has chronicled campus life, events, and student opinions for generations. The magazine remains an important outlet for student journalism at Notre Dame.
How often is Notre Dame's the Juggler published? The Juggler, Notre Dame’s literary magazine, is published twice each academic year. It features creative writing, poetry, and visual art submitted by students. The magazine provides a platform for artistic expression and enriches the university’s cultural life.
What is the daily student paper at Notre Dame called? The daily student newspaper at Notre Dame is called The Observer. The paper covers university news, student activities, and issues affecting the campus community. It is widely read and respected as a primary source of information for students and faculty.
How many student news papers are found at Notre Dame? Notre Dame hosts three student newspapers, each serving different interests and segments of the campus. These publications offer diverse viewpoints and opportunities for students to engage in journalism. They are an integral part of campus communication and student life.
In what year did the student paper Common Sense begin publication at Notre Dame? The student newspaper Common Sense began publication at Notre Dame in 1987. It was founded to provide an independent voice for students and to discuss topics not always covered by other campus papers. Since its inception, Common Sense has contributed to campus discourse and debate.
Where is the headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The headquarters of the Congregation of the Holy Cross is located in Rome, Italy. This religious order has a global presence and oversees ministries, educational institutions, and parishes worldwide. Rome serves as its central administrative and spiritual hub.
What is the primary seminary of the Congregation of the Holy Cross? The primary seminary for the Congregation of the Holy Cross is Moreau Seminary, located on the campus of Notre Dame. This seminary is dedicated to the formation and education of priests and brothers. It plays a key role in preparing members for service in the church and society.
What is the oldest structure at Notre Dame? The oldest building on the Notre Dame campus is Old College. Constructed in the mid-19th century, Old College has served various functions over the years, including student housing and administrative offices. Its enduring presence is a testament to the university’s long history.
What individuals live at Fatima House at Notre Dame? Fatima House at Notre Dame provides residence for retired priests and brothers associated with the university. The facility offers a comfortable and supportive environment for these individuals in their later years. It also fosters a sense of community and ongoing connection to Notre Dame’s spiritual life.
Which prize did Frederick Buechner create? Frederick Buechner established the Buechner Prize for Preaching, which recognizes excellence in homiletics. The prize encourages thoughtful, inspiring preaching and promotes the role of faith in public discourse. Recipients of the prize are celebrated for their contributions to religious communication.
How many BS level degrees are offered in the College of Engineering at Notre Dame? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame offers eight distinct Bachelor of Science degree programs. These degrees span various fields such as civil, chemical, mechanical, and electrical engineering. The college provides rigorous training and prepares graduates for careers in industry and research.
In what year was the College of Engineering at Notre Dame formed? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame was officially established in 1920. Its creation marked a significant expansion in the university’s academic offerings and commitment to technological innovation. Since then, the college has become a leader in engineering education and research.
Before the creation of the College of Engineering similar studies were carried out at which Notre Dame college? Prior to the formation of the College of Engineering, engineering-related studies were conducted within the College of Science at Notre Dame. Students interested in engineering pursued coursework in mathematics and the natural sciences. This foundation paved the way for the dedicated engineering programs that followed.
How many departments are within the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering? The Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering houses five academic departments. These departments focus on different engineering disciplines and foster collaboration among faculty and students. The hall is known for its modern facilities and commitment to innovation.
The College of Science began to offer civil engineering courses beginning at what time at Notre Dame? The College of Science started offering civil engineering courses at Notre Dame in the 1870s. This early adoption reflected the university’s recognition of the importance of engineering in society. The courses laid the groundwork for the eventual establishment of the College of Engineering.
What entity provides help with the management of time for new students at Notre Dame? The Learning Resource Center at Notre Dame assists new students in managing their time and academic responsibilities. Staff at the center offer workshops, counseling, and resources to help students develop effective study habits. Their support contributes to student success and well-being.
How many colleges for undergraduates are at Notre Dame? There are five undergraduate colleges at Notre Dame, each specializing in different areas of study. These colleges provide a broad range of academic programs and foster a vibrant intellectual community. The diversity of offerings allows students to pursue their academic interests fully.
What was created at Notre Dame in 1962 to assist first year students? In 1962, Notre Dame established the First Year of Studies program to support incoming freshmen. This program helps students adjust to university life, choose courses, and plan their academic paths. It has been recognized nationally for its effectiveness and innovation.
Which organization declared the First Year of Studies program at Notre Dame "outstanding?" U.S. News & World Report recognized Notre Dame’s First Year of Studies program as “outstanding.” The program’s emphasis on mentorship and academic guidance earned it national praise. It remains a model for similar initiatives at other universities.
The granting of Doctorate degrees first occurred in what year at Notre Dame? Notre Dame awarded its first Doctorate degrees in 1924, marking a milestone in its academic history. This development expanded the university’s ability to prepare scholars and researchers. Doctoral programs now play an essential role in Notre Dame’s reputation as a research institution.
What type of degree is an M.Div.? An M.Div. is a Master of Divinity degree, a graduate-level credential for those entering ministry or religious leadership. The program covers theology, pastoral care, and scriptural studies. Graduates are prepared for service in churches, religious organizations, and academic settings.
Which program at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree? The Alliance for Catholic Education at Notre Dame offers a Master of Education degree. This program is designed to train teachers for service in Catholic schools across the country. It combines rigorous coursework with practical experience in educational settings.
In what year was a Master of Arts course first offered at Notre Dame? Notre Dame first offered a Master of Arts course in 1854, expanding its academic portfolio to include graduate education. This early commitment to advanced study set the stage for the university’s growth. Today, Notre Dame offers a wide range of master’s programs in the arts and sciences.
Which department at Notre Dame is the only one to not offer a PhD program? The Department of Pre-Professional Studies at Notre Dame is the only department that does not offer a PhD program. This department focuses on preparing students for medical, dental, and other professional schools. Its curriculum emphasizes foundational sciences and career readiness.
What institute at Notre Dame studies the reasons for violent conflict? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at Notre Dame investigates the causes of violent conflict and strategies for peacebuilding. The institute conducts research, hosts events, and educates students on global peace issues. Its work is recognized internationally.
What is the title of Notre Dame's Theodore Hesburgh? Theodore Hesburgh holds the title of President Emeritus of the University of Notre Dame. Hesburgh served as president for 35 years, transforming the university into a world-class institution. His legacy includes advancements in academics, diversity, and social justice.
In what year was the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies founded? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies was founded in 1986 at Notre Dame. Its establishment reflected the university’s commitment to peace and global justice. The institute has since become a leader in conflict resolution and peace research.
To whom was John B. Kroc married? John B. Kroc was married to Ray Kroc, the businessman who expanded McDonald's into a global franchise. Their partnership influenced philanthropy and business. The Kroc family’s legacy is visible in charitable and educational initiatives.
What company did Ray Kroc own? Ray Kroc was the owner and driving force behind McDonald's Corporation. He transformed the company from a local burger stand into a worldwide fast food empire. Kroc’s innovative business strategies changed the landscape of global dining.
How many stories tall is the main library at Notre Dame? The main library at Notre Dame, known as the Hesburgh Library, is fourteen stories tall. This iconic building is a hub for research, study, and collaboration. Its mural, “The Word of Life,” is visible from across campus and is a beloved symbol for students.
Who founded the University of Notre Dame? The University of Notre Dame was founded by Father Edward Sorin, a member of the Congregation of Holy Cross, in 1842. Sorin’s vision was to create a leading Catholic institution for higher learning in the United States. His legacy is still celebrated on campus through statues and annual commemorations.
What is the nickname of Notre Dame’s athletic teams? The athletic teams at Notre Dame are known as the Fighting Irish. This nickname reflects the university’s spirit of determination and resilience in sports and other endeavors. The Fighting Irish have a rich history, especially in football, and their mascot is the leprechaun.
Where is the Golden Dome located? The Golden Dome is located on the Main Building of the University of Notre Dame campus. This iconic landmark features a gold-leafed dome topped by a statue of the Virgin Mary. It is one of the most recognized symbols of Notre Dame and a popular spot for photos and campus tours.
What is the significance of the Hesburgh Library mural? The Hesburgh Library mural, also called "The Word of Life" or "Touchdown Jesus," is a massive artwork that faces the football stadium. The mural depicts Jesus with his arms raised, reminiscent of a referee signaling a touchdown. It is a beloved symbol of both academic excellence and the university’s athletic culture.
Who can ring the Victory Bell after a football win? The Victory Bell at Notre Dame is rung by members of the football team after a home victory. This tradition allows players to celebrate their success and share the moment with fans gathered nearby. The bell itself is located near the stadium and has become an important part of game day rituals.
Which building houses the Department of Physics at Notre Dame? The Department of Physics is housed in Nieuwland Science Hall at Notre Dame. This building contains classrooms, laboratories, and faculty offices dedicated to physics research and instruction. Nieuwland Hall is a hub for scientific activity and student learning on campus.
What is the name of Notre Dame's annual literary festival? Notre Dame’s annual literary festival is known as the Notre Dame Literary Festival. The event brings together authors, poets, and students for readings, workshops, and discussions. It fosters a vibrant literary culture and provides opportunities for creative engagement.
Which chapel is located in the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Crypt Chapel is located beneath the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at Notre Dame. It serves as a place for daily prayer, reflection, and special Masses. The chapel’s serene atmosphere and historic architecture make it a cherished site for students and visitors.
What is the Notre Dame Marching Band famous for? The Notre Dame Marching Band is famous for being one of the oldest university bands in the United States, established in 1846. The band performs at football games, pep rallies, and university ceremonies, energizing crowds with its music and precision. Its traditions are interwoven with the university’s history and spirit.
What does the Center for Social Concerns focus on? The Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame focuses on promoting social justice, community engagement, and service learning. It offers programs that connect students with opportunities to serve others locally and globally. Through research, teaching, and outreach, the center helps students address pressing social issues.
Who is the patron saint of Notre Dame? The patron saint of Notre Dame is the Virgin Mary, who is honored in many campus landmarks, including the Golden Dome and the Grotto. Her presence reflects the university’s Catholic identity and spiritual heritage. Many campus traditions and celebrations are dedicated to her.
What was the original purpose of the Grotto at Notre Dame? The Grotto at Notre Dame was built as a place for Marian devotion, modeled after the Grotto of Lourdes in France. It provides a quiet space for prayer, reflection, and candle lighting, serving as a spiritual oasis for students and visitors. Over the years, it has become one of the university’s most beloved sites.
Which sports facility is named after Knute Rockne? The Knute Rockne Memorial Gymnasium is named after the legendary Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne. The facility honors his contributions to the university’s athletic program and legacy as one of the greatest coaches in college football history. It is used for various athletic and recreational activities.
What student organization manages service projects at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team manages many service projects at Notre Dame. This organization coordinates volunteer efforts, community partnerships, and social justice initiatives. Students involved gain valuable experience in leadership and civic engagement.
Who is the current president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, the current president of Notre Dame is Reverend John I. Jenkins, C.S.C. He has served in this role since 2005, overseeing significant growth in academics and campus life. Father Jenkins is known for his commitment to the university’s mission and values.
Which building at Notre Dame contains the Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is Notre Dame’s motto? The official motto of Notre Dame is “God, Country, Notre Dame.” This phrase reflects the university’s commitment to faith, service, and patriotism. It is often cited at official events and is emblematic of the university’s guiding principles.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs at Notre Dame is known for its interdisciplinary approach to international studies and policy. The school offers degrees, research opportunities, and global internships. Its mission is to promote peace, development, and cross-cultural understanding worldwide.
Who designed the Main Building at Notre Dame? The Main Building at Notre Dame was designed by architect Willoughby J. Edbrooke in the late 19th century. The structure features the famous Golden Dome and has undergone several renovations to preserve its grandeur. Edbrooke’s design is celebrated for its elegance and historic significance.
Which athletic conference does Notre Dame football compete in? Notre Dame football competes as an independent team, not affiliated with any athletic conference for football. This independence allows for a flexible schedule and matchups with a variety of opponents. For other sports, Notre Dame participates in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
What is the Mendoza College of Business known for? The Mendoza College of Business at Notre Dame is renowned for its emphasis on ethical leadership and values-based education. The college offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in business disciplines. Mendoza graduates are recognized for their integrity and professional achievement.
Where is the Center for Ethics and Culture located? The Center for Ethics and Culture is located on the Notre Dame campus and serves as a hub for research, education, and dialogue on ethical issues. The center sponsors lectures, conferences, and publications that address moral questions in society. It plays a vital role in fostering intellectual engagement with ethics.
What was the first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame? The first women’s residence hall at Notre Dame was Farley Hall, which opened in 1973 following the university’s transition to coeducation. Farley Hall helped pave the way for greater gender diversity and inclusion on campus. Today, many residence halls support Notre Dame’s vibrant community of women students.
Which building houses Notre Dame’s chemistry labs? Notre Dame’s chemistry labs are housed in the Stepan Chemistry Hall. This building is equipped with state-of-the-art laboratories, research facilities, and teaching spaces. Stepan Hall supports cutting-edge research and training in chemistry and related fields.
Who was the first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame? The first African American to earn a degree from Notre Dame was Frazier Thompson, who graduated in 1947. Thompson’s achievement marked an important milestone in the university’s history of diversity and inclusion. His legacy continues to inspire students from all backgrounds.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development? The Notre Dame Initiative for Global Development aims to address global challenges such as poverty, health, and education through research and partnerships. The initiative connects faculty and students with organizations around the world. Its projects focus on sustainable development and positive social impact.
Which building is home to the Notre Dame School of Architecture? The Notre Dame School of Architecture is housed in Bond Hall, a beautifully renovated structure located near the heart of campus. Bond Hall features studios, classrooms, and exhibition spaces for architecture students. The building fosters creativity and collaboration in architectural education.
What is the name of the Notre Dame student radio station? The Notre Dame student radio station is called WSND-FM. The station broadcasts a variety of music, news, and student-produced programs. WSND-FM provides hands-on experience for students interested in broadcasting and media.
Who was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame? The first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame was Nathan O. Hatch, appointed in 1996. Hatch’s leadership brought new perspectives to university administration and academic planning. He later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the largest academic building at Notre Dame? The largest academic building at Notre Dame is the Hesburgh Library, which spans fourteen stories and contains millions of volumes. This facility is a central resource for research, study, and collaboration. Its size and resources make it a cornerstone of campus life.
How many acres does the Notre Dame campus cover? The University of Notre Dame campus covers approximately 1,250 acres in South Bend, Indiana. The grounds include academic buildings, residence halls, athletic facilities, and scenic lakes. The expansive campus supports a vibrant community and a wide range of activities.
How many residence halls are at Notre Dame? Notre Dame has thirty-two undergraduate residence halls, each with its own unique culture and traditions. These halls are central to student life, fostering friendships and community involvement. Residence halls host events, service projects, and support students throughout their university experience.
Who was the first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame? The first Nobel laureate associated with Notre Dame was Ernest Walton, who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951 for his work on atom splitting. Walton served as a visiting professor at Notre Dame, contributing to the university’s reputation for scientific excellence. His achievements are honored on campus.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is known for its unique blend of contemporary and traditional sacred music. The choir performs at liturgical services, concerts, and special events, enriching the spiritual life of the university. Its repertoire includes original compositions and arrangements.
What is the purpose of the Notre Dame Writing Center? The Notre Dame Writing Center provides support to students working on essays, research papers, and other writing projects. Tutors offer feedback, guidance, and resources to help students improve their writing skills. The center plays a key role in academic success and communication.
Which lake is located on the Notre Dame campus? Saint Joseph’s Lake is one of two lakes located on the Notre Dame campus. It offers scenic views, walking paths, and opportunities for reflection and recreation. The lake is a popular destination for students seeking relaxation or inspiration.
Who was the first female president of Notre Dame? As of 2025, Notre Dame has not yet had a female president. The university’s leadership has historically been male, drawn from the Congregation of Holy Cross. However, women have played significant roles in administration, faculty, and student life.
What is the Notre Dame Center for STEM Education focused on? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education is dedicated to improving teaching and learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It offers training, research, and outreach programs for educators and students. The center’s work enhances STEM education locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run business club? The student-run business club at Notre Dame is the Student International Business Council (SIBC). The club organizes consulting projects, networking events, and international trips for students interested in business careers. SIBC is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first president of the University of Notre Dame? The first president of the University of Notre Dame was Father Edward Sorin, who founded the university in 1842. Sorin’s leadership established a strong foundation for Catholic education in America. His vision and commitment continue to inspire the university today.
What is the name of Notre Dame's football stadium? Notre Dame Stadium is the iconic home of the Fighting Irish football team. It has hosted countless memorable games since its opening in 1930. The stadium is a centerpiece of campus life and tradition, drawing thousands of fans each season.
Where is the Snite Museum of Art located? The Snite Museum of Art is situated on the Notre Dame campus, near the O'Shaughnessy Hall. The museum houses a diverse collection of artworks ranging from ancient to contemporary pieces. It serves as an educational resource and cultural venue for students and visitors.
What is the purpose of the Center for Social Concerns at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns is dedicated to promoting social justice, service learning, and community engagement. It offers programs and resources that connect students with local and global service opportunities. Through its initiatives, the center fosters a commitment to ethical leadership and social responsibility.
Who was the first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame? The first woman to receive a degree from Notre Dame was Mary Ann Proctor, who graduated in 1972 after the university became coeducational. Her achievement marked a significant moment in Notre Dame’s history, opening doors for future generations of women. Since then, women have played an increasingly prominent role on campus.
Which building is home to Notre Dame’s College of Engineering? The College of Engineering at Notre Dame is primarily housed in the Stinson-Remick Hall of Engineering. This modern facility features state-of-the-art labs, classrooms, and collaborative spaces. It supports cutting-edge research and innovation across multiple engineering disciplines.
What is the main student center at Notre Dame called? The Duncan Student Center is the main student hub at Notre Dame. It offers facilities for recreation, dining, and student organizations, as well as study and meeting spaces. Duncan Center is a focal point for campus life and community activities.
What is the purpose of the First Year of Studies program? The First Year of Studies program is designed to help incoming freshmen transition to university life. It provides academic advising, support services, and introductory courses to guide students in selecting their majors. The program is nationally recognized for its effectiveness in supporting first-year students.
Who is the author of Notre Dame’s Alma Mater? The Alma Mater of Notre Dame was composed by Joseph Casasanta, a professor and director of bands at the university. His composition “Notre Dame, Our Mother” is sung at official ceremonies and athletic events. The song expresses the university’s spirit and devotion to the Virgin Mary.
What is the Keough School of Global Affairs known for? The Keough School of Global Affairs is renowned for its interdisciplinary approach to international relations and global development. It offers programs that prepare students for leadership roles in diplomacy, policy analysis, and humanitarian work. Students benefit from opportunities for study abroad, internships, and research.
Which Notre Dame building features a mural known as “The Word of Life”? The Hesburgh Library features the famous mural “The Word of Life,” commonly called “Touchdown Jesus.” The mural, visible from the football stadium, depicts Jesus with arms raised, overlooking campus. It is a beloved symbol of the university’s blend of faith and academics.
Who was the first African American football player at Notre Dame? Wayne Edmonds was the first African American football player at Notre Dame, joining the team in 1953. His presence marked a significant step toward integration and diversity in college athletics. Edmonds’ legacy paved the way for future athletes of all backgrounds at Notre Dame.
What is the function of Moreau Seminary? Moreau Seminary serves as the primary residence and training facility for men preparing to join the Congregation of Holy Cross. The seminary offers spiritual formation, theological study, and community life. It is an integral part of Notre Dame’s religious mission and campus community.
Which lake is a popular spot for reflection and recreation at Notre Dame? Saint Mary’s Lake is a scenic and tranquil spot on the Notre Dame campus, popular for walking, reflection, and outdoor activities. The lake is surrounded by trees and walking paths, providing a peaceful retreat for students and visitors. Many traditions, such as sunrise walks, are associated with the lake.
Who was the architect of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart? The Basilica of the Sacred Heart was designed by Fr. Sorin and French architect Albert C. Ménard in the late 19th century. The basilica features stunning stained glass windows and ornate decoration. It remains a center for worship and community gatherings at Notre Dame.
What is the Mendoza College of Business’s core value? The core value of the Mendoza College of Business is “Ask More of Business,” emphasizing ethical leadership and social responsibility. The college encourages students to consider the impact of their decisions on society. Graduates are recognized for their integrity and commitment to positive change.
Which campus organization coordinates student volunteer efforts? The Center for Social Concerns Student Leadership Team coordinates much of the student volunteer work at Notre Dame. Through partnerships and service projects, the organization fosters community engagement and leadership development. It helps students connect classroom learning with real-world service.
Who was the first lay provost at Notre Dame? Nathan O. Hatch was the first layperson to serve as provost at Notre Dame. He brought new perspectives to academic leadership and was instrumental in expanding research initiatives. Hatch later became president of Wake Forest University.
What is the nickname for Notre Dame’s marching band? The Notre Dame Marching Band is affectionately known as “The Band of the Fighting Irish.” Established in 1846, it is one of the oldest collegiate bands in the United States. The band plays a key role in campus traditions and athletic events.
What is the purpose of the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies? The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies is dedicated to research, education, and policy advocacy for peace and conflict resolution. The institute offers graduate and undergraduate programs in peace studies. Its faculty and students contribute to global efforts for justice and reconciliation.
Which building contains Notre Dame’s main chemistry laboratories? Stepan Chemistry Hall houses the main chemistry laboratories at Notre Dame. The building is equipped with advanced research facilities and teaching spaces. It supports both undergraduate education and innovative research in chemistry.
Who was the first Nobel laureate affiliated with Notre Dame? Ernest Walton, a physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1951, was a visiting professor at Notre Dame. His groundbreaking work in nuclear physics, specifically on the splitting of the atom, is celebrated on campus. Walton’s affiliation brought prestige to the university’s science programs.
What is the Notre Dame Folk Choir known for? The Notre Dame Folk Choir is renowned for its uplifting performances of sacred and contemporary music. The choir contributes to liturgical life and university ceremonies. Its members travel and record, sharing Notre Dame’s musical heritage with audiences around the world.
Which student organization promotes STEM outreach at Notre Dame? The Notre Dame Center for STEM Education promotes outreach, teacher training, and educational research in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. It connects students and educators with resources and community projects. The center’s work enhances STEM learning locally and nationally.
What is the name of Notre Dame’s student-run consulting group? The Student International Business Council (SIBC) is Notre Dame’s student-run consulting organization. SIBC coordinates projects and trips that give students real-world experience in international business. The group is one of the largest and most active student organizations on campus.
Who was the first director of the Snite Museum of Art? The first director of the Snite Museum of Art was David S. Findlay, who led the museum in its early years. Findlay helped build the museum’s reputation for excellence in art education and collection development. His leadership established the museum as a vital cultural resource for the university.
What is the Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture’s mission? The Notre Dame Center for Ethics and Culture works to promote human dignity through research, education, and public engagement. The center sponsors events, publications, and lectures on ethical issues in contemporary society. Its work fosters thoughtful dialogue and reflection on moral questions.
Which building houses the Notre Dame Law School? The Notre Dame Law School is located in Eck Hall of Law, a modern facility with classrooms, legal clinics, and student spaces. Eck Hall is known for its beautiful architecture and advanced resources for legal education. The Law School has a national reputation for excellence in scholarship and practice.
What is the function of the Hesburgh Library? The Hesburgh Library serves as the main academic library at Notre Dame, supporting research and study with extensive resources and services. It houses millions of volumes, special collections, and quiet study areas. The library is a cornerstone of intellectual life on campus.
Which organization manages service learning programs at Notre Dame? The Center for Social Concerns manages service learning programs that connect students with community partners. The center provides opportunities for experiential learning and civic engagement. It helps students integrate academic study with service to others.
Who is the current athletic director at Notre Dame? As of 2025, the athletic director at Notre Dame is Jack Swarbrick. Swarbrick has overseen major developments in university athletics, including facility upgrades and conference affiliations. His leadership supports the continued success and integrity of Notre Dame’s sports programs.
What is the name of the lake near the Grotto at Notre Dame? Saint Joseph’s Lake is located near the Grotto and offers scenic beauty and recreational opportunities. The lake is surrounded by walking paths and is a favorite spot for reflection and gatherings. Its presence adds to the natural charm of the campus.
What was the first residence hall built at Notre Dame? Sorin Hall was the first residence hall constructed at Notre Dame, opening in 1889. It has served generations of students and remains an active part of campus life. Sorin Hall is known for its traditions and close-knit community.
Who composed Notre Dame’s fight song? Notre Dame’s fight song, “The Notre Dame Victory March,” was composed by Michael and John Shea in 1908. The song is a staple at athletic events and rallies, inspiring students and fans. Its lyrics and melody are recognized by alumni and supporters around the world.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the lunar surface during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired generations.
What is the capital city of Japan? Tokyo is the capital city of Japan and is one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world. Known for its blend of modern skyscrapers, historic temples, and vibrant culture, Tokyo is a global center for business and technology. The city also hosts major international events and is a popular tourist destination.
What causes the seasons to change on Earth? The changing seasons are caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight and differences in daylight hours throughout the year. As a result, different parts of the planet experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter at different times.
What is photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for nearly all living organisms. Photosynthesis also helps regulate atmospheric carbon dioxide, playing a vital role in Earth’s ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play is a tragic love story that explores themes of family, fate, and youthful passion. Shakespeare’s work has been adapted countless times and remains a classic in literature and theater.
What is the largest animal on Earth? The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth, reaching lengths of over 30 meters and weighing up to 200 tons. Blue whales are found in oceans around the world and feed primarily on tiny shrimp-like creatures called krill. Despite their size, these gentle giants are endangered due to human activities.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords are used to protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They serve as a basic form of security, helping to keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong passwords are essential for safeguarding digital life and preventing cybercrime.
What is the process of making chocolate from cacao beans? Chocolate is made by harvesting cacao pods and extracting the beans, which are then fermented, dried, and roasted. The roasted beans are ground into cocoa mass, which can be processed into chocolate liquor and combined with sugar and milk to make different chocolate products. The process requires skill and craftsmanship to produce high-quality chocolate.
Who discovered penicillin and what impact did it have? Penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact that was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Discovered in 1799, it features the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. By comparing these languages, scholars were able to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops in the atmosphere, which act as tiny prisms by refracting and reflecting the light. This process separates the light into its component colors, creating a spectrum visible as a rainbow. The phenomenon is most commonly seen when the sun shines after a rain shower.
What is the Olympic Games and when did it originate? The Olympic Games are a major international sporting event featuring athletes from around the world competing in various disciplines. The modern Olympics began in Athens in 1896, inspired by the ancient Greek tradition of athletic competitions held in Olympia. Today, the Olympics promote global unity, sportsmanship, and excellence.
Who is considered the “Father of Computers”? Charles Babbage is often called the “Father of Computers” for his design of the first mechanical computer, the Analytical Engine, in the 19th century. Although his machines were never fully built in his lifetime, Babbage’s concepts laid the groundwork for modern computing. He also contributed to the development of mathematical tables and algorithms.
Why is recycling important for the environment? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower greenhouse gas emissions. By reusing materials like paper, plastic, and metal, recycling prevents pollution and saves energy compared to producing new products from raw materials. It is a key component of sustainable living and environmental protection.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis in plants involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll, which triggers chemical reactions that convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides energy for plant growth and releases oxygen into the atmosphere. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight specific pathogens, such as viruses or bacteria. They contain weakened or inactivated forms of the pathogen, which safely prompt the body to produce antibodies. As a result, vaccinated individuals are less likely to become ill if exposed to the real disease.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. The heart is vital for maintaining circulation and overall health.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed society by making real-time conversation possible across cities and continents. Bell’s work paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the significance of Mount Everest? Mount Everest is the tallest mountain in the world, rising 8,848 meters above sea level in the Himalayas. Climbing Everest represents a major challenge for mountaineers due to its extreme altitude and harsh conditions. The mountain is a symbol of human perseverance and adventure.
How does a solar panel generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity that can power homes and devices. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that reduces dependence on fossil fuels.
Who is the author of “Pride and Prejudice”? “Pride and Prejudice” was written by Jane Austen, an English novelist whose works are known for their wit and social commentary. The novel, published in 1813, explores themes of love, class, and marriage in early 19th-century England. Austen’s writing remains influential and widely read today.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. The process ensures that essential nutrients reach cells throughout the body.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, offering a chance to reflect on the past and set goals for the future. Celebrations often include parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is observed worldwide as a symbol of renewal and hope.
What is the Internet and how does it work? The Internet is a global network of computers that communicate through standardized protocols. It enables the sharing of information, access to websites, and online services such as email and social media. The Internet has transformed how people connect, learn, and do business.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci, a Renaissance artist and polymath, between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and realistic detail, attracting millions of visitors to the Louvre Museum in Paris. It is considered one of the greatest masterpieces in art history.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) contains the genetic instructions for the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color, blood type, and susceptibility to disease. DNA is passed from parents to offspring and is central to the study of genetics.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows predictable routes. This behavior helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
What is the process of making bread? Bread is made by mixing flour, water, yeast, and salt to form dough, which is then allowed to rise. The dough is baked until it becomes light and airy, with a golden crust. Baking bread is both a science and an art, practiced in cultures around the world.
Who discovered electricity? Electricity was not discovered by a single person, but Benjamin Franklin made key contributions by experimenting with lightning and inventing the lightning rod. Later scientists such as Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday advanced the understanding of electric current and electromagnetism. Their collective work led to the development of modern electrical technology.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching over 13,000 miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China’s cultural heritage. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings as air flows over and under them, thanks to their shape and speed. Engines provide thrust, while ailerons and rudders control direction. The principles of aerodynamics and engineering allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and atmospheric conditions, often caused by human activities such as burning fossil fuels. It affects ecosystems, sea levels, and global health, making it a critical issue for future generations. Addressing climate change requires coordinated action worldwide.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation also preserves food and enhances flavors, playing a key role in culinary traditions.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. She was known for her strong leadership style and economic reforms, which earned her the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British and global politics.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to recover and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor, a gas, due to heat energy. This process commonly occurs on the surface of lakes, oceans, and rivers as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle and helps regulate Earth's climate.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press allowed for the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. These organelles convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do trees shed their leaves in autumn? Trees shed their leaves in autumn to conserve water and energy during the colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, chlorophyll production slows, causing leaves to change color and fall. This adaptation helps trees survive winter and prepare for new growth in spring.
Who was the first president of the United States? George Washington was the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797. He played a key role in winning American independence and establishing the nation's government. Washington is often remembered for his leadership, integrity, and commitment to democracy.
What is the significance of the Taj Mahal in India? The Taj Mahal is a famous mausoleum located in Agra, India, built by Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal. Its stunning white marble architecture and intricate decorations attract millions of visitors each year. The Taj Mahal is considered a symbol of love and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
How do plants reproduce? Plants reproduce either sexually, through flowers and seeds, or asexually, through methods like runners and cuttings. Sexual reproduction involves pollination and fertilization, resulting in genetic diversity. Asexual reproduction produces identical offspring and allows plants to spread quickly in suitable environments.
What is the main purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote international cooperation, peace, and security. It provides a forum for countries to resolve conflicts, coordinate humanitarian aid, and address global challenges. The UN works on issues such as human rights, development, and environmental protection.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do people use renewable energy sources? People use renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power because they are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s natural resources. Renewable energy helps reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. It also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
What is a black hole in space? A black hole is a region in space where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light, can escape. Black holes form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycles. Scientists study black holes to learn about the limits of physics and the nature of the universe.
Who wrote the novel “1984”? George Orwell wrote the novel “1984,” published in 1949, which depicts a dystopian society under constant surveillance and authoritarian rule. The book explores themes of freedom, truth, and the power of propaganda. “1984” remains influential in discussions about privacy and government control.
How do vaccines work to protect health? Vaccines work by introducing a harmless part of a pathogen into the body, stimulating the immune system to recognize and fight the real disease. This process creates memory cells that respond quickly if exposed to the infection in the future. Vaccines have helped eradicate and control many dangerous diseases.
What is the significance of the Eiffel Tower? The Eiffel Tower is a global icon located in Paris, France, and was constructed for the 1889 World’s Fair. It was initially criticized but later became a symbol of French innovation and pride. Today, the Eiffel Tower attracts millions of tourists and represents the city’s unique character.
What is the water cycle and why is it important? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It ensures that water is continuously recycled, supporting life, agriculture, and weather patterns. The water cycle is vital for maintaining healthy ecosystems and freshwater supplies.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight and contributed to advances in space technology. Tereshkova is celebrated as a pioneer for women in science and exploration.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the process by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over time, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his groundbreaking work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
What is the importance of the internet in modern society? The internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through web browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share and access information, leading to the digital age. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern internet.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How is electricity generated in a hydroelectric power plant? Hydroelectric power plants use flowing water to turn turbines, which generate electricity. This renewable energy source is clean and efficient, making use of natural rivers and dams. Hydroelectricity helps power cities and reduces reliance on fossil fuels.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The piece celebrates human unity and brotherhood and is widely performed around the world. “Ode to Joy” has become a symbol of hope and is used in numerous cultural and political events.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and imagination.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities, such as burning fossil fuels, can increase greenhouse gases and contribute to global warming. Understanding the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent was a landmark achievement in mountaineering. The expedition inspired many future climbers to attempt the world’s tallest peak.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis to occur. It gives plants their green color and is essential for converting light energy into chemical energy. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food and oxygen.
How do magnets work? Magnets produce a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and can affect electric currents. This field is created by the alignment of electrons within the material. Magnets are used in many applications, from compasses and motors to data storage devices.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. The process involves significant changes in structure, function, and behavior.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, which revolutionized physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
Why do we have time zones? Time zones were established to standardize time across different regions of the world as Earth rotates. Each zone represents a specific offset from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), making travel and communication easier. Time zones help synchronize activities and schedules globally.
What is the importance of water for living organisms? Water is essential for all living organisms, serving as a solvent, temperature regulator, and medium for chemical reactions. It makes up a significant portion of cells and supports processes like digestion and circulation. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
What is the significance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Who invented the theory of evolution by natural selection? Charles Darwin proposed the theory of evolution by natural selection in his book "On the Origin of Species" published in 1859. His observations during the voyage of the HMS Beagle, especially in the Galapagos Islands, led him to develop the idea that species change over time due to environmental pressures. Darwin’s work revolutionized biology and our understanding of life.
What is the function of red blood cells in humans? Red blood cells are responsible for transporting oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carrying carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are essential for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth's surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be caused by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gas, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “To Kill a Mockingbird”? Harper Lee wrote “To Kill a Mockingbird,” which was published in 1960 and quickly became an American classic. The novel explores themes of racial injustice, moral growth, and empathy through the eyes of a young girl named Scout. Its impact on literature and social change continues to be felt today.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth's resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How does the human brain process information? The human brain processes information by receiving signals from the senses, interpreting them, and generating responses. Neurons communicate through electrical and chemical signals, forming complex networks that enable thinking, memory, and decision-making. The brain’s ability to adapt and learn is known as neuroplasticity.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her groundbreaking research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie remains a role model for women in science.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the role of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is gravity and how does it affect objects on Earth? Gravity is the force that attracts objects toward one another, most notably pulling everything toward Earth's center. It keeps us grounded, enables the formation of planets, and governs the motion of celestial bodies. Without gravity, daily activities and natural phenomena would be impossible as objects would float away.
Who was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes? Marie Curie was the first woman to win two Nobel Prizes—one in Physics in 1903 and another in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie’s legacy continues to inspire scientists around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This occurs primarily in the chloroplasts, thanks to the pigment chlorophyll. Photosynthesis is fundamental for life on Earth because it provides food and oxygen for most living organisms.
Why do we have different time zones? Time zones were created to standardize time across regions as Earth rotates and experiences daylight at different moments. Each zone is roughly one hour apart, helping synchronize activities such as transportation and communication. Without time zones, coordinating events or travel would be confusing and chaotic.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who invented the airplane? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903 at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Their success marked the beginning of modern aviation and revolutionized transportation. The Wright brothers’ ingenuity paved the way for the development of commercial and military aircraft.
What is DNA and why is it important? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that carries genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to breakthroughs in medicine, forensics, and biotechnology.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
How does a rainbow form in the sky? Rainbows form when sunlight passes through raindrops, which refract and reflect the light. This separates the light into different colors, creating a spectrum visible as a bow in the sky. Rainbows are most often seen after rain showers when the sun shines from a low angle.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet”? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The tragedy explores themes of revenge, madness, and morality through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It is one of Shakespeare’s most famous works and a cornerstone of English literature.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we can save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers worldwide. Reaching the top of the world remains a symbol of perseverance and courage.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by enabling voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and transformed the way people connect. Bell’s legacy is evident in today’s phones, internet, and global networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion ensures energy, growth, and repair for all bodily functions.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, allowing instant communication, access to information, and new forms of commerce and entertainment. It has transformed education, business, and social interactions, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons, generating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6 in 1963. Her mission proved that women could withstand the rigors of spaceflight and opened doors for future female astronauts. Tereshkova remains a celebrated pioneer in space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his lab. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the purpose of the International Space Station? The International Space Station (ISS) serves as a unique laboratory orbiting Earth, where astronauts conduct scientific research in microgravity. It fosters international cooperation among agencies like NASA, Roscosmos, ESA, JAXA, and CSA. The ISS also acts as a testbed for technologies that will be needed for future missions to the Moon and Mars.
Who was the first African American president of the United States? Barack Obama was elected the 44th President of the United States in 2008, becoming the first African American to hold the office. His presidency lasted two terms, during which he implemented significant healthcare reforms and promoted social justice. Obama’s leadership marked a historic moment in American politics.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Why do we experience tides along coastlines? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes the water to rise and fall in regular cycles, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Moby-Dick”? Herman Melville wrote “Moby-Dick,” which was published in 1851 and is considered a masterpiece of American literature. The novel follows the obsessive quest of Captain Ahab to hunt the white whale, Moby Dick. Its themes include nature, revenge, and the limits of human knowledge.
What is an ecosystem and why is it important? An ecosystem is a community of living organisms interacting with each other and their physical environment. It includes plants, animals, microbes, and non-living elements like soil and water. Healthy ecosystems provide services such as clean air, water, food, and climate regulation.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the significance of the Great Barrier Reef? The Great Barrier Reef, located off the coast of Australia, is the largest coral reef system in the world. It supports an incredible diversity of marine life and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The reef is also important for tourism, fisheries, and scientific research, but faces threats from climate change.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that help regulate bodily functions such as metabolism, immunity, and cell growth. They cannot be synthesized in sufficient quantities by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who was the first person to propose the heliocentric model of the solar system? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the water cycle and how does it work? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment via evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water from oceans, lakes, and rivers evaporates, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous movement is crucial for distributing water and supporting life on Earth.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in Renaissance art.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who discovered electricity? While many scientists contributed to the understanding of electricity, Benjamin Franklin’s experiments with lightning in the 18th century were pivotal. He proved that lightning was a form of electricity, invented the lightning rod, and helped lay the foundation for future research. Later, scientists like Alessandro Volta and Michael Faraday expanded on his work.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we celebrate Earth Day? Earth Day, celebrated on April 22, raises awareness about environmental protection and encourages actions to safeguard the planet. It began in 1970 and has become a global event with millions participating in cleanups, tree planting, and educational programs. Earth Day promotes sustainability and stewardship of natural resources.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion supports overall health and well-being.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring energy, repairing tissues, and consolidating memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems such as fatigue, poor concentration, and weakened immunity.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? “Romeo and Juliet” was written by William Shakespeare in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are designed to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are vital organs responsible for exchanging gases between the body and the environment. They take in oxygen during inhalation and release carbon dioxide during exhalation. Proper lung function is essential for delivering oxygen to tissues and maintaining overall health.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Bahamas during his voyage for Spain. However, indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years before his arrival. Columbus’s voyages opened the door for European exploration and colonization.
What is the capital city of Australia? Canberra is the capital city of Australia, chosen as a compromise between rivals Sydney and Melbourne. The city is home to the country’s government institutions, museums, and cultural sites. As a planned city, Canberra features wide boulevards, parks, and modern architecture.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall in autumn because trees prepare for winter by conserving water and energy. The reduction in sunlight and cooler temperatures trigger chemical changes that cause leaves to change color and eventually detach. This process helps trees survive harsh winter conditions and regrow new leaves in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the late 18th century. His innovations powered the Industrial Revolution by enabling machinery, locomotives, and ships to operate more efficiently. The steam engine transformed industries and transportation worldwide.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. Opened in 1869, it is one of the world’s most important waterways for global trade. The canal greatly reduces travel time and shipping costs for international commerce.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. The novel explores themes of love, morality, and social class in Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” remains a classic of English literature and is widely studied and adapted.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves transferring pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It can occur via wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, awarded in 1903 for her pioneering research on radioactivity. She shared the prize with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel. Marie Curie’s work laid the foundation for advances in nuclear science and medicine.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum, built nearly 2,000 years ago, was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles in ancient Rome. It is an architectural marvel and a testament to Roman engineering. Today, the Colosseum is a symbol of Rome’s history and attracts millions of tourists every year.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. During sleep, the brain processes experiences and prepares for the next day. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and long-term health problems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although some controversies remain about the accuracy of his expedition. His journey involved traveling over ice with sled dogs and enduring extreme conditions. The achievement was celebrated as a major milestone in exploration.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using bacteria or enzymes, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then pressed, salted, and aged to develop flavor and texture. Cheese-making is both a science and an art, with many varieties produced around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians. “Guernica” is one of Picasso’s most powerful and politically significant works.
What is the importance of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy consumption. By reusing plastic materials, we prevent them from ending up in landfills and oceans where they can harm wildlife. Recycling is a key part of efforts to build a more sustainable and environmentally friendly society.
Who discovered the law of buoyancy? Archimedes, a Greek mathematician and inventor, discovered the law of buoyancy in the 3rd century BCE. His principle explains why objects float or sink in fluids based on the displaced volume. Archimedes’ work is fundamental to physics and engineering.
What is the capital city of Brazil? Brasília is the capital of Brazil, designed and built in the late 1950s to promote development in the country’s interior. It is known for its modernist architecture and unique city planning. Brasília serves as the center of government and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was distributed. His invention enabled the mass production of books and contributed to the spread of literacy and knowledge. The printing press played a key role in the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their massive scale and precise construction have fascinated historians and engineers for centuries. The pyramids are a symbol of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain one of the world’s greatest architectural achievements.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy that explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. The play follows the rise and fall of Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” is renowned for its dramatic intensity and powerful language.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is vital for powering cellular activities. Cellular respiration is fundamental to the survival of all aerobic organisms.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight helped break barriers for women in aviation and inspired future generations. Earhart’s courage and achievements remain celebrated worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet enables instant communication, access to information, and online commerce, transforming the way people live and work. It has revolutionized education, entertainment, and social interaction. The Internet continues to drive innovation and connect people across the globe.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions can shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute," which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes of love and enlightenment. "The Magic Flute" remains one of Mozart’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity supports ecosystem health, provides resources such as food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. High biodiversity makes environments more resilient to change and supports a wide variety of life. Protecting biodiversity is critical for sustainability and the well-being of all species.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important for life on Earth? Photosynthesis is the process by which green plants and some other organisms use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process is essential because it produces oxygen for animals to breathe and forms the base of most food chains. Without photosynthesis, life as we know it could not exist on Earth.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how has it changed society? The World Wide Web was invented by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989, who developed a system for sharing information using hyperlinks and web pages. The invention revolutionized how people access information, communicate, and do business globally. Today, the web connects billions of people and supports countless applications in daily life.
What causes earthquakes and what impact do they have? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates beneath Earth's surface, which release energy as seismic waves. These natural events can result in widespread destruction, including collapsed buildings and infrastructure damage. Earthquakes also influence landscape formation and can trigger tsunamis or landslides.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in two different fields? Marie Curie was the first woman to win Nobel Prizes in two different fields—Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her work on radioactivity led to major advances in science and medicine. Curie’s achievements paved the way for future generations of women scientists.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is a massive fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is one of the world’s most iconic architectural achievements. The Wall also symbolizes China’s enduring strength and historical legacy.
Why do birds migrate and how do they navigate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, breeding grounds, or warmer climates, often traveling thousands of kilometers. They use environmental cues such as the sun, stars, and Earth’s magnetic field to navigate. Migration helps birds survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and what scenes are depicted? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the Creation of Adam and the Fall of Man. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements of Renaissance art.
What is DNA and why is it important for living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that stores genetic information in all living organisms. It determines traits, governs development, and controls cellular functions through coded instructions. Understanding DNA has led to breakthroughs in genetics, medicine, and forensic science.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously declared, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” Armstrong’s achievement marked a new era in space exploration and inspired future missions.
What is the function of the heart in humans? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues while removing waste products. It beats continuously, adjusting its rate to physical activity and emotional states. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and survival.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower are sustainable because they are replenished naturally and do not deplete resources. Using renewables reduces pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, helping combat climate change. Transitioning to renewable energy is key for a cleaner and more stable future.
Who wrote the play “Hamlet” and what is its main theme? “Hamlet” was written by William Shakespeare around 1600. The play explores themes of revenge, madness, and moral corruption through the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark. It remains one of the most influential works in Western literature.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach where acids and enzymes act, and finishes in the intestines. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized daily life by providing safe and reliable lighting. The light bulb paved the way for widespread electrification and modern convenience.
What causes the seasons to change throughout the year? The changing of seasons is caused by the tilt of Earth’s axis as it orbits the sun. This tilt results in varying angles and intensities of sunlight in different regions throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard Vostok 6. Her mission demonstrated that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova remains a pioneering figure in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems remain resilient to changes and provides resources such as food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is vital for environmental health and human survival.
Why do volcanoes erupt and what are their effects? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through vents. Eruptions can create new landforms, influence climate, and enrich soils, but also pose hazards to people and property. Studying volcanoes helps scientists predict eruptions and mitigate risks.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty narrative and timeless themes have made the book a classic.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it influence Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas emissions, leading to global warming. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is essential for addressing climate change.
Who composed the Ninth Symphony and what is its significance? Ludwig van Beethoven composed the Ninth Symphony, which is renowned for its final movement, “Ode to Joy.” The symphony celebrates human brotherhood and joy, and has been adopted as the anthem of the European Union. Beethoven’s Ninth remains one of the most celebrated works in classical music.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization. This process is often aided by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of many crops and wild plants.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary of New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic ascent was a milestone in mountaineering and inspired adventurers around the world. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human determination.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is essential for drinking, cooking, and sanitation. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which are caused by contaminated water. Access to clean water is fundamental for community health and development.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh winter conditions until resources are more plentiful. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears, bats, and some rodents.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, making voice communication over long distances possible. The telephone transformed business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for modern telecommunications.
How do solar panels produce electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, electrons are released, creating an electric current. Solar energy is renewable, clean, and increasingly used in homes and businesses.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce ATP, the energy currency. They convert nutrients into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for all cellular activities and overall organism health.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His team used sled dogs and careful planning to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement is recognized as a landmark in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are essential organs in the respiratory system that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. When we inhale, the lungs bring oxygen into the bloodstream, and when we exhale, they remove carbon dioxide produced by cells. Healthy lungs are vital for energy, metabolism, and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the journey from Dover to Calais in nearly 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s achievement inspired generations of long-distance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is a type of cell division in which a single cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and the maintenance of genetic stability in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures that each new cell receives a complete set of chromosomes.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The four distinct seasons—spring, summer, autumn, and winter—affect ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” which was published in 1847 and remains a classic of English literature. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and self-respect. Its themes of love, morality, and social class continue to resonate with readers around the world.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without having to sail around Africa, greatly reducing travel time and costs. The canal is a vital link in global trade and strategic geopolitics.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection, hunting, or raising young. Group living can help individuals avoid predators, find food more efficiently, and care for offspring. Examples include wolves hunting in packs, birds flocking together, and primates forming social communities.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” and her activism helped promote international peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy endures as a symbol of dedication to nonviolence.
What is the process of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation from oceans and lakes, condensation to form clouds, precipitation as rain or snow, and runoff back to bodies of water. This cycle is crucial for distributing freshwater, supporting life, and regulating climate. Without the water cycle, ecosystems and agriculture would suffer.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions cause lava to build up above the ocean surface. Over time, repeated eruptions and accumulation of volcanic rock create new land masses. Famous examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were formed by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who painted the "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch artist of the 17th century, painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring." The artwork is celebrated for its radiant light, subtle details, and enigmatic expression. Vermeer’s technique and use of color make this painting a masterpiece of Baroque art.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to sustain life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflect on achievements, and spend time with loved ones. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and special foods. Birthdays are a way to honor an individual’s life and create lasting memories.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim is disputed. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme cold and difficult terrain using dog sleds and Inuit knowledge. The journey expanded human understanding of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation helps ensure a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Saving water also reduces energy use and protects natural habitats. With growing populations and climate change, water conservation is increasingly vital for human and environmental health.
Why do leaves fall from trees in autumn? Leaves fall from trees in autumn as part of an adaptation to conserve water and energy during colder months. As temperatures drop and daylight decreases, trees reabsorb nutrients from their leaves and form a protective layer where the leaf meets the branch. This process prepares trees for winter and new growth in spring.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it practical for use in industry and transportation. His innovations drove the Industrial Revolution, transforming manufacturing, mining, and travel. Watt’s contributions helped shape the modern world.
What is the role of the immune system? The immune system protects the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that work together to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for recovery from illness and long-term well-being.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales traveling long distances to warmer waters.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, fate, and morality. The play explores the consequences of unchecked power through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks the throne. “Macbeth” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and political intrigue.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or wind. Pollination is vital for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of food crops.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help safeguard personal information, financial data, and communications. Strong passwords are essential for maintaining digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her pioneering flight demonstrated courage, skill, and determination, inspiring women in aviation and beyond. Earhart’s legacy continues to encourage exploration and breaking barriers.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise strengthens muscles and bones, improves cardiovascular health, and boosts mental well-being. Physical activity helps maintain a healthy weight, reduces the risk of chronic diseases, and increases energy levels. Exercise is an essential component of a healthy lifestyle.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking some or all of the sunlight for a short period. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses cover only part of it. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the refrigerator? Carl von Linde, a German engineer, developed the first practical mechanical refrigerator in 1876. His invention made it possible to preserve food safely and revolutionized food storage and transportation. Refrigerators are now an indispensable part of modern kitchens.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their larval stage to adulthood, involving significant changes in form and function. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do people vote in elections? Voting allows citizens to participate in the democratic process, influence government decisions, and hold leaders accountable. Elections give people a voice in shaping laws and policies that affect their lives. Voting is a fundamental right and responsibility in democratic societies.
Who painted the ceiling of the Palace of Versailles’ Hall of Mirrors? Charles Le Brun, a renowned French painter and decorator, designed and painted the magnificent ceiling of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles. His work celebrated the power and achievements of King Louis XIV. The Hall of Mirrors remains an iconic example of Baroque art and architecture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the method by which green plants use sunlight to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place mainly in the leaves, where chlorophyll absorbs sunlight and initiates the chemical reactions. Photosynthesis not only sustains the plant but also provides oxygen for other living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan started the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe in 1519, although he died before the journey was completed. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and that the world's oceans are connected. This achievement was a milestone in global exploration and trade.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It helps regulate climate, replenish freshwater supplies, and sustain plant and animal life. Without the water cycle, ecosystems would collapse and water would become scarce.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, which gives leaves their green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, resulting in yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps the plant conserve energy for winter.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing people to talk over long distances. His invention paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication systems. Bell's work continues to influence how we connect with each other today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It has four chambers and beats continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is vital for overall well-being and energy.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or scarcity of food by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, bodily functions decrease dramatically, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available. Hibernation is common among mammals like bears and bats.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? The Mona Lisa was painted by Leonardo da Vinci between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is known for its mysterious smile and realistic detail, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The painting is displayed at the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her pioneering work on radioactivity. Curie's discoveries have had a profound impact on science and medicine.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, carries the genetic instructions for the growth, development, and functioning of all living organisms. It determines traits such as eye color and blood type, and is passed from parents to offspring. DNA research has led to advances in medicine, genetics, and biotechnology.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza in Egypt are ancient tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. They are architectural marvels and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences worldwide.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy. When sunlight strikes the cells, it releases electrons, creating a flow of electricity. Solar energy is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. He famously said, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," upon stepping onto the lunar surface. Armstrong's achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the function of kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons on Earth? Seasons occur because Earth's axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems and human activities.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized indoor lighting and made electric illumination widely accessible. Edison's work paved the way for modern electrical infrastructure.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for overall health and vitality.
Why do people recycle? People recycle to reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution. Recycling helps save energy, decreases the need for new raw materials, and supports environmental sustainability. It is an important practice for protecting ecosystems and combating climate change.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it significant? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 after observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is an architectural marvel and a symbol of China's rich history. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who wrote the novel "Pride and Prejudice"? Jane Austen wrote "Pride and Prejudice," published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen's work is celebrated for its wit, insight, and enduring popularity.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the importance of pollinators in nature? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds play a crucial role in the reproduction of many plants by transferring pollen from one flower to another. This process enables fruit and seed production, supporting food webs and agriculture. Without pollinators, many ecosystems and crops would struggle to survive.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited the Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it vital? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process not only provides food for plants but also releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is essential for most living organisms. Photosynthesis forms the foundation of most food chains on Earth.
Why do earthquakes happen? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in the Earth’s crust shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement can cause the ground to shake and sometimes leads to significant damage to buildings and infrastructure. Earthquakes are most common near plate boundaries and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the novel “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The book follows the adventures of Bilbo Baggins as he embarks on a quest with a group of dwarves to reclaim their treasure from a dragon. “The Hobbit” is a classic of fantasy literature and a precursor to Tolkien’s “The Lord of the Rings.”
What is the water cycle and how does it affect weather? The water cycle describes the movement of water through evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. Water evaporates from oceans and lakes, forms clouds, and returns to the ground as rain or snow. This continuous cycle influences weather patterns and ensures the availability of fresh water.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Physics, sharing the award with her husband Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel in 1903. Her research on radioactivity paved the way for advances in medicine and nuclear science. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that contains the same text in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egypt. The Rosetta Stone remains one of the most important archaeological finds in history.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and laid the groundwork for modern telecommunications. Bell’s contributions extend to education and technology, making him a key figure in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. Visitors from around the world marvel at Michelangelo’s skill and creativity.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion begins in the mouth, where food is broken down by chewing and saliva, and continues in the stomach and intestines with the help of enzymes and acids. Nutrients are absorbed into the bloodstream, and waste is expelled from the body. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and health.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time of renewal and hope. People reflect on the past year, set goals, and participate in traditions like fireworks, parties, and making resolutions. The holiday is observed worldwide and brings communities together.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in mountaineering and inspired adventurers globally. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the significance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects people, businesses, and governments across the globe, enabling instant communication, information sharing, and commerce. It has transformed education, entertainment, and social interaction, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and economic growth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, serving from 1979 to 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she implemented major economic and political reforms and played a prominent role in international affairs. Thatcher’s legacy continues to influence British and global politics.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of four chambers and operates through rhythmic contractions. Healthy heart function is vital for overall well-being and survival.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment that makes leaves green, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This change helps plants prepare for winter by conserving energy and nutrients.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. His creation allowed documents and information to be linked and accessed via browsers, transforming communication and access to knowledge. The World Wide Web is now a fundamental part of daily life for billions.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to produce bread, beer, wine, yogurt, and other foods. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and is important in culinary traditions and industry.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressures remain relevant and widely studied.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power generate electricity without depleting natural resources or producing greenhouse gases. They help combat climate change and reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Investing in renewables supports a sustainable future and economic growth.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs can vary by species and even by individual, serving as identifiers and social signals. Birdsong is also important for maintaining ecological balance and biodiversity.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His achievement inspired swimmers worldwide and established the Channel as a major challenge in open water swimming. Webb’s endurance and determination are celebrated in sports history.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When you inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when you exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to discover America? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492 when he landed in the Caribbean, although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years prior. His voyages opened the way for widespread European exploration and colonization. Columbus’s journeys had profound effects on history, culture, and global trade.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in specialized structures called chloroplasts and helps supply much of the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are organic compounds that the body requires in small amounts for normal growth, metabolism, and health. They help regulate vital processes such as immunity, cell repair, and energy production. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to various health problems, so a balanced diet is important.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? “Jane Eyre” was written by Charlotte Brontë and published in 1847. The novel follows the life of an orphaned girl who overcomes hardship and finds love with Mr. Rochester. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong heroine and exploration of themes like independence and morality.
What is the importance of exercise for health? Regular exercise improves cardiovascular health, strengthens muscles and bones, and helps maintain a healthy weight. It also boosts mood, reduces stress, and lowers the risk of chronic diseases. Incorporating physical activity into daily routines is key to long-term well-being.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a driving force behind the Industrial Revolution. His innovations enabled more efficient transportation and manufacturing. The steam engine changed society by powering trains, ships, and factories.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799, inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Hieroglyphic. It played a crucial role in deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or breeding grounds, often traveling vast distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environmental conditions. Famous migrations include the journey of monarch butterflies and the wildebeest of Africa.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. The artwork is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is climate change and why is it important? Climate change refers to long-term shifts in temperature, weather patterns, and environmental conditions, often driven by human activities. It affects ecosystems, food security, and global health. Addressing climate change is critical for protecting the planet and future generations.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Her leadership, known as the “Thatcher era,” was marked by significant economic reforms and a strong stance in international affairs. She remains a controversial and influential figure in British history.
What is the process of sedimentation in rivers? Sedimentation is the accumulation of particles like sand, silt, and clay in riverbeds, lakes, or reservoirs. This process shapes landscapes, creates fertile soils, and can influence water quality. Human activities such as dam construction can accelerate sedimentation and affect aquatic habitats.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with mates, defend territory, and warn of danger. Songs and calls vary among species and can even help identify individuals. Birdsong plays a role in social bonding and the maintenance of healthy ecosystems.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing an apple fall from a tree. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law of gravity transformed our understanding of how the universe operates.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system for sharing and accessing information online. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an integral part of daily life for billions of people.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” one of his most famous tragedies, around 1606. The play explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of the Scottish general Macbeth. “Macbeth” remains a staple of theater and literature worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is often credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though later research has questioned his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme conditions and helped expand geographic knowledge of the polar region. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for explorers today.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated worldwide with festivities, fireworks, and traditions. It offers a chance to reflect on the past, set goals for the future, and spend time with loved ones. The holiday is observed in diverse ways across cultures.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm that work together to facilitate breathing. This system is vital for delivering oxygen to the bloodstream and removing metabolic waste.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medal in the modern era was awarded to James Connolly in 1896 for the triple jump event in Athens. His victory marked the beginning of the tradition of awarding gold medals for first place. Connolly's achievement is remembered as a milestone in Olympic history.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period in Europe? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, leading to a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced influential figures such as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for the modern age through its emphasis on humanism and innovation.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants require sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process in which they convert light energy into chemical energy for growth and survival. Sunlight enables the production of glucose, which fuels cellular activities and development. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to thrive or reproduce.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, discovered the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His three laws describe how planets orbit the sun in elliptical paths and how their speed varies depending on their distance from the sun. Kepler’s findings were foundational for later astronomical research.
What is the process of making cheese? Cheese is made by curdling milk using enzymes and bacteria, which separate the solid curds from the liquid whey. The curds are then shaped, pressed, and aged to develop flavor and texture. The process varies depending on the type of cheese, resulting in a wide variety of tastes and appearances.
Why is the Pacific Ocean important? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than one-third of the planet’s surface. It plays a critical role in regulating global climate, supporting biodiversity, and enabling international trade. Its vast resources and strategic location make it essential for economic and environmental stability.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it more efficient and practical for industrial use. His innovations powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society worldwide.
What is the importance of sleep for children? Sleep is crucial for children’s physical and mental development, supporting growth, learning, and emotional well-being. It helps regulate hormones, strengthens the immune system, and consolidates memories. Lack of sleep can lead to behavioral issues, poor academic performance, and health problems.
What is global warming and why is it a concern? Global warming refers to the long-term rise in Earth's average temperature due to increased greenhouse gas emissions from human activities. It leads to melting glaciers, rising sea levels, and more extreme weather events. Addressing global warming is critical to protecting ecosystems and human societies.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which became a classic of American literature. The novel explores themes of adolescence, alienation, and identity through the character Holden Caulfield. Its impact has endured, influencing generations of readers and writers.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone was key to understanding the language and culture of ancient Egypt.
Why do animals form herds or flocks? Animals form herds or flocks for protection, efficient foraging, and social interaction. Group living helps reduce the risk of predation, increases chances of finding food, and facilitates mating. These behaviors are common in many species, including birds, mammals, and fish.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her feat demonstrated courage and skill, inspiring women to pursue careers in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and gender equality.
What is the importance of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, oxygen, and nutrients throughout the body and removes waste products. Composed of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, it supports organ function and overall health. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, healing, and survival.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used mechanical relays to perform calculations and laid the foundation for modern computing. Zuse’s work influenced subsequent developments in computer technology.
What is the process of digestion in animals? Digestion in animals involves breaking down food into smaller molecules that can be absorbed and used for energy, growth, and repair. It starts with ingestion, followed by mechanical and chemical processing in the digestive tract. Enzymes and acids facilitate the conversion of food into nutrients.
Why do we use renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like wind, solar, and hydro power are sustainable and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. They help lower pollution, mitigate climate change, and provide long-term energy security. Transitioning to renewables is essential for protecting the environment and supporting future generations.
Who painted the masterpiece “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the Spanish town during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of civilians with powerful imagery. “Guernica” is considered one of the most important anti-war artworks of the 20th century.
What is the role of chlorophyll in photosynthesis? Chlorophyll is a green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling the process of photosynthesis. It captures light energy and helps convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced extreme cold, ice hazards, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 that reshaped nations, societies, and international relations. It involved major powers, resulted in millions of deaths, and led to the creation of the United Nations. The war’s consequences continue to influence global politics and culture.
Why do we need water to survive? Water is essential for all living organisms as it supports cellular processes, regulates body temperature, and aids digestion. It acts as a solvent, transports nutrients, and removes waste from the body. Without water, life would not be possible on Earth.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The play centers on the character Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army, and his downfall due to manipulation. “Othello” is recognized for its psychological depth and enduring relevance.
What is the process of cell division in living organisms? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a parent cell splits to create two identical daughter cells. This process is fundamental for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Proper cell division ensures genetic material is accurately distributed to new cells.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space on April 12, 1961. He orbited Earth aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin’s journey opened the door for future human spaceflight missions.
What is the importance of education for society? Education empowers individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking, enabling them to contribute to their communities and economies. It promotes equality, innovation, and democratic values. A well-educated society is better equipped to solve problems and adapt to change.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate traditions, beliefs, and heritage, bringing communities together in joy and reflection. They foster understanding, preserve customs, and strengthen social bonds. Festivals often include music, dance, food, and rituals that highlight the diversity of human experience.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing communication and the spread of knowledge. His invention made books and written materials more accessible, promoting literacy and learning. The printing press is considered one of the most important innovations in history.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and neutralize pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the role of the atmosphere on Earth? The atmosphere acts as a protective shield around Earth, absorbing harmful solar radiation and maintaining the planet’s temperature. It contains the air we breathe—mainly nitrogen and oxygen—and supports weather systems. Without the atmosphere, life as we know it would not be possible.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in the human body? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered and described the circulation of blood in 1628. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed system, revolutionizing medical science. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
Why do we use currency in trade? Currency provides a standardized medium of exchange that makes buying and selling goods and services easier and more efficient. It replaced the barter system, allowing societies to grow and economies to expand. Modern currencies can be coins, paper money, or digital forms.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle ensures the continuous movement of water between Earth’s surface and the atmosphere through evaporation, condensation, and precipitation. It is vital for replenishing freshwater sources, supporting agriculture, and regulating climate. The water cycle sustains all life on the planet.
Who invented the steam engine and why was it important? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. The steam engine powered factories, ships, and trains, fueling the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed society, leading to rapid technological and economic progress.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Like plants, algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process takes place in specialized cell structures called chloroplasts. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates beneath Earth’s surface shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can cause the ground to shake, sometimes resulting in significant destruction. Monitoring earthquakes helps scientists understand Earth’s structure and prepare for natural disasters.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. This iconic surrealist artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting remains a powerful example of creativity and imagination in modern art.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against harmful invaders such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It consists of organs, cells, and proteins that identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable habitats, or to reproduce, often traveling hundreds or thousands of miles. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include monarch butterflies, whales, and many bird species.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving that the Earth is round and connected by oceans. The expedition expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact the planet? The greenhouse effect is caused by gases like carbon dioxide and methane trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excessive greenhouse gases lead to global warming. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for fighting climate change.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein” in 1818, creating the tale of Victor Frankenstein and his monstrous creation. The novel explores themes of science, ambition, and ethical responsibility. Shelley’s work is considered a cornerstone of both science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water, which are naturally replenished and do not run out. It helps reduce pollution, mitigates climate change, and provides sustainable power for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and healthier planet.
Why do we experience seasons? Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the cyclical changes of temperature and daylight known as seasons. The pattern influences ecosystems, agriculture, and daily life.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, transforming how people communicate and access information. His creation allowed for the easy sharing of documents and data across the globe. The World Wide Web is now a crucial part of modern life, from education to commerce.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian monuments built over 4,500 years ago as tombs for pharaohs. Their massive size and precise construction have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the ingenuity and ambition of ancient civilizations.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova of the Soviet Union became the first woman in space in 1963, orbiting Earth aboard the Vostok 6 spacecraft. Her mission proved that women could endure the challenges of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It operates continuously and adapts to the animal’s activity level and environment. A healthy heart is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do people recycle and what are the benefits? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve resources, and minimize environmental pollution. By processing materials like paper, glass, and metal for reuse, recycling saves energy and lowers greenhouse gas emissions. It contributes to sustainable living and a healthier planet.
Who discovered penicillin and what was its impact? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical advances in history.
What is the importance of education in society? Education provides individuals with the knowledge and skills needed to solve problems, innovate, and contribute to their communities. It promotes equality, reduces poverty, and drives economic growth. A well-educated population strengthens democratic institutions and fosters social progress.
Who wrote “The Odyssey”? Homer, an ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Odyssey,” an epic poem recounting Odysseus’s journey home after the Trojan War. The story explores themes of heroism, loyalty, and the human struggle against adversity. “The Odyssey” has influenced literature and storytelling for millennia.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, specifically mitosis, is the process by which a cell splits to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, development, and tissue repair in multicellular organisms. Accurate cell division ensures genetic material is properly passed on.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, or magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and escapes through openings. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy exists over his claim. Peary’s expedition faced extreme cold and dangerous conditions. His achievement expanded our understanding of polar geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that captures sunlight for photosynthesis, converting light energy into chemical energy. It gives plants their green color and is vital for producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not sustain life on Earth.
What is the importance of the Sun for life on Earth? The Sun is the primary source of energy for all life on Earth, providing light and warmth that sustains ecosystems. Its energy drives photosynthesis in plants, which forms the basis of most food chains. Without the Sun, Earth would be cold, dark, and incapable of supporting life.
Who discovered the law of gravity and how did it change science? Sir Isaac Newton discovered the law of gravity in the 17th century, explaining how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights unified the motion of celestial bodies and objects on Earth, laying the foundation for classical physics. Newton’s work transformed scientific understanding and influenced countless discoveries.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the air we breathe. Oxygen enters the bloodstream in the lungs, while carbon dioxide is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Why do plants need water to grow? Water is critical for plants because it transports nutrients, maintains cell structure, and enables photosynthesis. It also helps regulate temperature and keeps tissues turgid. Without water, plants wilt, cannot make food, and eventually die.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, a scientist who creates a living being from dead body parts. Shelley’s work explores themes of ambition, ethics, and the consequences of unchecked scientific progress.
What is the process of metamorphosis in butterflies? Metamorphosis in butterflies involves four stages: egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa (chrysalis), and adult. During the pupal stage, the caterpillar undergoes dramatic changes to become a butterfly. This process allows butterflies to adapt to different environments and life cycles.
Why do seasons change throughout the year? Seasons change because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the Sun. This tilt causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. As a result, we experience spring, summer, autumn, and winter in a predictable cycle.
Who was the first human to travel into space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to travel into space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1 and returned safely, marking a historic achievement in space exploration. Gagarin’s flight paved the way for future missions and inspired generations.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, enabling photosynthesis. It converts solar energy into chemical energy, providing food and oxygen for nearly all living organisms. Without chlorophyll, plants could not survive or sustain life on Earth.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, or magma, beneath Earth’s surface. When the pressure becomes too great, magma escapes through cracks, causing an eruption. Volcanic eruptions can shape landscapes, create new land, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized how people connect and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work is foundational to today’s global communication networks.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is essential for health and vitality.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year, symbolizing renewal and hope. People celebrate with parties, fireworks, and traditions that vary by culture. The holiday is a time for reflection, resolutions, and welcoming fresh opportunities.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Bible, including the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The chapel attracts millions of visitors annually who marvel at Michelangelo’s genius.
What is the importance of biodiversity in nature? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity helps ecosystems stay healthy and resilient to changes, providing food, medicine, and clean water. Protecting biodiversity is essential for environmental stability and human well-being.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold weather or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who discovered penicillin and why is it important? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in a petri dish. Penicillin became the first widely used antibiotic, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Its discovery marked a turning point in the fight against bacterial infections.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids symbolize Egypt’s rich cultural heritage and achievements in architecture.
How do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift suddenly, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements are most common near plate boundaries and faults. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are studied to improve safety and preparedness.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the tragedy “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and frequently performed works.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for our planet’s future.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” Thatcher led significant economic and political reforms. Her leadership reshaped British society and influenced global politics.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewables is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
How do magnets work and what are their uses? Magnets create a magnetic field that attracts certain metals and influences electric currents. They are used in compasses, motors, generators, and data storage devices. Magnets play a vital role in everyday technology and scientific research.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share and access information online through websites and browsers. His invention transformed communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an essential part of daily life worldwide.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This is crucial for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle affects sleep, animal behavior, and daily activities.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy remains. His expedition overcame extreme cold and treacherous ice to achieve this goal. The journey expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the significance of Stonehenge? Stonehenge is a prehistoric monument in England consisting of a ring of massive standing stones. Archaeologists believe it was constructed as a ceremonial or astronomical site over 4,000 years ago. Its mysterious origins and impressive engineering continue to fascinate researchers and visitors alike.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which drastically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work helped save millions of lives and paved the way for further advances in immunology. Salk chose not to patent the vaccine, prioritizing public health over personal profit.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important primary producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity also contributes significantly to Earth’s oxygen supply.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun combined with their own inertia. The balance between gravity and forward motion keeps planets in stable paths called orbits. This principle, explained by Isaac Newton, governs the motion of all objects in our solar system.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational work in Western literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the importance of wetlands? Wetlands are ecosystems where land is saturated with water, providing habitat for many species of plants and animals. They act as natural filters, purifying water and controlling floods. Wetlands also store carbon, helping to mitigate climate change, and support biodiversity.
How does a tornado form? Tornadoes form when warm, moist air meets cold, dry air, creating instability in the atmosphere. If wind speeds at different altitudes vary, a rotating column of air called a mesocyclone can develop. When this column touches the ground, it becomes a tornado, capable of causing significant damage.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works, including “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” are known for their imaginative storytelling and vivid descriptions of Swedish life. Lagerlöf’s achievement paved the way for future female writers.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. The type and appearance of clouds depend on atmospheric conditions and altitude.
Why do whales migrate? Whales migrate to find food and suitable breeding grounds, often traveling thousands of kilometers each year. They move between cold, nutrient-rich waters for feeding and warmer regions for mating and giving birth. Migration helps whales survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible via browsers. His invention revolutionized how people communicate, share information, and conduct business globally. Berners-Lee’s work laid the foundation for the modern digital age.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are organs that facilitate the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is removed. Healthy lungs are essential for respiration and overall health.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetized needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward magnetic north. This allows travelers and navigators to determine directions and find their way. Compasses have been vital tools for exploration and navigation throughout history.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The work features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time. Dalí’s painting is considered an iconic masterpiece of surrealism.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It works to address global challenges such as poverty, human rights, and climate change. The UN provides a forum for dialogue and collective action on important issues.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe, sheltered place for their eggs and young. Nests protect offspring from predators and harsh weather, and their construction varies widely among species. Building and maintaining nests is a key part of many birds’ reproductive strategies.
Who discovered the circulation of blood in humans? William Harvey, an English physician, discovered the circulation of blood in the early 17th century. He demonstrated that the heart pumps blood throughout the body in a closed circuit. Harvey’s findings laid the foundation for modern cardiovascular medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? Mark Twain wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,” published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood adventures along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work is celebrated for its humor, social commentary, and vivid depiction of American life.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is crucial for global trade and international relations.
How do plants absorb nutrients from the soil? Plants absorb nutrients through their roots, which take in water and dissolved minerals. The nutrients are transported up to the leaves, where they support growth and photosynthesis. Healthy soil and root systems are essential for robust plant development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though there is some controversy about his claim. His expedition marked a milestone in polar exploration and inspired future adventurers. The journey required overcoming extreme conditions and logistical challenges.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria and provides the energy needed for cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for life in animals, plants, and many microorganisms.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes are caused by the movement of tectonic plates that make up Earth's crust. When plates shift or collide, energy is released in the form of seismic waves, which we feel as shaking. Earthquakes can cause destruction but also help shape landscapes over time.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends elements of fantasy, comedy, and symbolism, and is celebrated for its innovative music and storytelling. “The Magic Flute” remains one of Mozart’s most popular and influential works.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that was key to deciphering hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. The stone enabled scholars to unlock the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. His invention used electromechanical relays and could perform complex calculations automatically. Zuse’s work laid the groundwork for modern computing technology.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin is the body’s largest organ, providing a protective barrier against pathogens, injury, and dehydration. It regulates temperature, produces vitamin D, and contains sensory receptors. Healthy skin is vital for overall well-being and disease prevention.
Why do dolphins communicate with clicks and whistles? Dolphins use clicks and whistles to communicate with each other, navigate, and hunt for food. These sounds can convey information about identity, location, and emotional state. Dolphin communication is highly sophisticated and reflects their intelligence and social nature.
Who wrote “The Hobbit”? J.R.R. Tolkien wrote “The Hobbit,” first published in 1937. The fantasy novel follows Bilbo Baggins on a quest to win a share of a dragon’s treasure. Tolkien’s imaginative world laid the foundation for his later work, “The Lord of the Rings,” and inspired countless adaptations.
What is the importance of the Pacific Ocean? The Pacific Ocean is the largest and deepest ocean on Earth, covering more than 60 million square miles. It serves as a major route for global trade and influences weather patterns around the world. The Pacific is home to countless marine species and supports important ecosystems from coral reefs to coastal rainforests.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it change society? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a practical source of power for factories, trains, and ships. The steam engine fueled the Industrial Revolution, transforming transportation and manufacturing. Watt’s innovation led to rapid economic growth and urbanization.
What is the function of white blood cells in humans? White blood cells are an essential part of the immune system, defending the body against infections and diseases. They patrol the bloodstream and tissues, identifying and destroying harmful bacteria, viruses, and other invaders. A healthy count of white blood cells is vital for fighting illness and maintaining health.
Why do deserts form? Deserts form in areas where rainfall is very low, often due to geographic factors such as mountains blocking moist air or high pressure zones that prevent cloud formation. The lack of water leads to sparse vegetation and extreme temperature variations. Deserts can be hot or cold and are found on every continent.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating the challenges of adolescence and identity in New York City. The novel’s themes of alienation and rebellion have made it a lasting classic in American literature.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement that began in Italy in the 14th century and spread across Europe, marking a rebirth of art, science, and learning. Figures like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo made lasting contributions. The period laid the foundation for the modern world by encouraging creativity and critical thinking.
How does the circulatory system work? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, and oxygen throughout the body using the heart, arteries, veins, and capillaries. It also helps remove waste products like carbon dioxide. Proper circulation is necessary for organ function, temperature regulation, and overall health.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring flight from Newfoundland to Ireland broke records and inspired millions around the world. Earhart’s achievements advanced women’s roles in aviation and remain legendary today.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from a flower’s male part to its female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, or the wind and is essential for the reproduction of many plants. Pollination supports food production, biodiversity, and healthy ecosystems.
Why do we experience eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, such as when the Moon passes between the Earth and Sun (solar eclipse) or the Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). Eclipses provide valuable opportunities for scientific study and have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who invented the computer mouse? Douglas Engelbart invented the computer mouse in the 1960s while working at Stanford Research Institute. His invention allowed users to interact with computers through a simple point-and-click interface. The mouse revolutionized computing and remains an essential tool for navigating digital environments.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. The stone’s discovery unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian writing and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which anchor them in the soil and draw up resources via specialized cells. Water and minerals travel through the stem to the leaves, where they support processes like photosynthesis. Healthy roots are essential for plant growth and resilience.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in just under 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated the limits of human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in open-water swimming.
What is the importance of the printing press? The printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century, allowed for the mass production of books and the spread of information. It made knowledge more accessible, contributed to rising literacy rates, and helped fuel the Renaissance and Reformation. The printing press is considered one of the most influential inventions in history.
Why do animals form packs or herds? Animals form packs or herds to improve their chances of survival by finding food, defending against predators, and protecting their young. Social groups also enable cooperation for tasks like hunting and migration. Herd behavior can be seen in species ranging from wolves to elephants.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The play explores the destructive power of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” is one of Shakespeare’s darkest and most frequently performed tragedies.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when organic remains are buried by sediment and slowly replaced by minerals over millions of years. This process preserves the shapes of ancient plants and animals, providing clues to Earth’s history. Fossils help scientists study evolution, extinction, and past environments.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed the existence of a negatively charged particle smaller than an atom, transforming our understanding of atomic structure. The discovery of the electron laid the groundwork for modern physics and electronics.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, greatly shortening the route for ships traveling between Europe and Asia. Opened in 1869, it is a critical artery for global trade and has played a strategic role in international affairs. The canal continues to be vital for commerce and navigation.
How do bees produce honey? Bees produce honey by collecting nectar from flowers and storing it in their hives. They use enzymes to break down the nectar and then evaporate excess water to create the thick, sweet substance. Honey serves as food for the bee colony and has been harvested by humans for thousands of years.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering and inspired countless adventurers. Climbing Everest remains a symbol of human perseverance and exploration.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among nations. It addresses global challenges like poverty, human rights, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a platform for diplomacy and international collaboration.
Why do we need a balanced diet? A balanced diet provides the body with essential nutrients like carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals. Proper nutrition supports growth, energy, immune function, and overall health. Eating a variety of foods helps prevent deficiency diseases and supports long-term well-being.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the body and the environment. When we inhale, oxygen enters the bloodstream, and when we exhale, carbon dioxide is expelled. Healthy lungs are essential for breathing and energy production.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, wrote “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War and the hero Achilles. The poem explores themes of honor, fate, and the consequences of conflict. “The Iliad” remains a foundational text in Western literature.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation ensures that clean, fresh water is available for drinking, agriculture, industry, and natural ecosystems. Conserving water helps prevent shortages, reduces energy use, and protects the environment. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using water wisely make a big difference.
What is the purpose of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on international public health. It coordinates efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and promote health education worldwide. WHO also responds to global emergencies and sets international health standards.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the geographic North Pole in 1909, though the claim has been debated. His expedition faced extreme cold, dangerous ice, and logistical challenges. Peary’s journey inspired further Arctic exploration and scientific study.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a critical role in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of the food web. They also contribute significantly to global oxygen production.
Why do we experience wind on Earth? Wind is caused by the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun, which creates differences in air pressure. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, resulting in wind. Winds help distribute heat, influence weather patterns, and are used as a renewable energy source.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? “Macbeth” was written by William Shakespeare in the early 17th century and is one of his most famous tragedies. The play explores ambition, guilt, and the supernatural through the story of a Scottish nobleman’s rise and fall. “Macbeth” continues to be studied and performed worldwide.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern society? The Internet connects billions of people, enabling instant communication, access to information, and online commerce. It has transformed education, business, and social relationships, making the world more interconnected than ever. The Internet drives innovation and economic growth in nearly every sector.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to control and nearly eradicate the disease. His work saved countless lives and demonstrated the power of scientific research. The vaccine’s success led to widespread immunization campaigns around the world.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that provided the key to understanding hieroglyphic writing. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Its decipherment unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
Why do animals adapt to their environment? Animals adapt to their environment to survive and reproduce under changing conditions. Adaptations may involve physical traits, behaviors, or physiological changes that offer advantages in food gathering, predator avoidance, or climate tolerance. Over time, adaptation leads to evolution and biodiversity.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, completing the journey in just under 15 hours. Her achievement broke records and inspired generations of female aviators. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of courage and progress in aviation.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources that are replenished, such as sunlight, wind, and water. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps fight climate change. Investing in renewable energy supports a sustainable future for people and the planet.
Who painted the “Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus Christ’s final meal with his disciples before his crucifixion. It is renowned for its composition, emotional impact, and artistic innovation.
What is the process of natural selection? Natural selection is the mechanism by which organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. Over generations, these traits become more common in the population, leading to evolution. Charles Darwin first described natural selection in his influential work “On the Origin of Species.”
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Earth’s tilt relative to its orbit around the sun causes different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in the changes in temperature and weather known as seasons. The cycle of seasons affects ecosystems, agriculture, and human activities.
Who was the first person to successfully swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, covering the distance between England and France in just under 22 hours. His feat was considered extraordinary at the time and sparked interest in long-distance swimming. Today, crossing the channel remains a prestigious challenge for swimmers.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall vitality in mammals.
Who discovered the structure of the atom? Ernest Rutherford conducted experiments in the early 20th century that led to the discovery of the atom’s structure, including its nucleus. His work revealed that atoms consist of a dense central nucleus surrounded by electrons. Rutherford’s findings laid the foundation for modern atomic theory.
What is the significance of World War II? World War II was a global conflict from 1939 to 1945 involving most of the world’s nations. It led to significant changes in political boundaries, technological advancements, and the establishment of the United Nations. The war’s impact continues to shape international relations and historical understanding.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again. Hibernation is common among mammals such as bears, bats, and ground squirrels.
Who invented the microscope? Zacharias Janssen, a Dutch spectacle-maker, is credited with inventing the first compound microscope in the late 16th century. The microscope revolutionized science by allowing observation of tiny organisms and cells. Later improvements by scientists like Antonie van Leeuwenhoek expanded its use in research and medicine.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet and making life possible. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Iliad”? Homer, the ancient Greek poet, is credited with composing “The Iliad,” which recounts the events of the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of heroism, fate, and conflict and has influenced Western literature for centuries. “The Iliad” is still studied and admired for its storytelling and cultural impact.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process in which microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to produce foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer. Fermentation enhances flavors, preserves food, and has played a role in human diets for thousands of years.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with each other, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Their songs and calls vary between species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is important for social bonding, reproduction, and maintaining ecological balance.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the voyage, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do solar panels work to generate electricity? Solar panels contain photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into electrical energy through a process called the photovoltaic effect. When sunlight strikes the cells, electrons are released and generate a flow of electricity. Solar power is a clean, renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that features the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its discovery allowed scholars to finally decipher hieroglyphics, unlocking the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture. The Rosetta Stone is now housed in the British Museum and remains an iconic symbol of linguistic discovery.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement broke barriers for women in aviation and inspired generations to pursue their dreams. Earhart’s courage and adventurous spirit continue to captivate people worldwide.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, water, and carbon dioxide. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides the ATP needed for all cellular functions. Cellular respiration is essential for the survival of most living organisms.
Why do we have eclipses? Eclipses occur when one celestial body moves into the shadow of another, most commonly when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun (solar eclipse) or when Earth blocks sunlight from reaching the Moon (lunar eclipse). These events happen due to the alignment of the Sun, Earth, and Moon. Eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are important for scientific study.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847 under the pen name Currer Bell. The novel explores themes of independence, morality, and romance through the life of its strong-willed heroine. “Jane Eyre” is considered a classic of English literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy pathogens such as bacteria and viruses, and also play a role in inflammation and healing. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for overall immunity.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, to hunt more efficiently, or to care for young. Social living can also help individuals find mates and share resources. Group behavior is seen in many species, from mammals like wolves to insects like bees.
What is the importance of the Industrial Revolution? The Industrial Revolution, which began in the late 18th century, marked a major turning point in history with the rise of factories, urbanization, and new technologies. It transformed economies from agrarian to industrial and improved transportation and communication. The Industrial Revolution greatly increased productivity but also brought social and environmental challenges.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments using cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms were made up of smaller particles, changing our understanding of matter. The discovery of the electron paved the way for advancements in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur via wind, water, or animals like bees and butterflies. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Why do we need exercise? Regular exercise helps maintain physical and mental health, strengthen muscles and bones, and boost the immune system. It also reduces the risk of chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity. Exercise improves mood and energy levels, contributing to overall well-being.
Who was the first person to discover America? Although indigenous peoples had lived in the Americas for thousands of years, Christopher Columbus is often credited in Western history for “discovering” America in 1492. He landed in the Caribbean while searching for a route to Asia. His voyages led to lasting contact between Europe and the Americas, changing the course of history.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat from the Sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for protecting the environment.
Why do plants need sunlight? Plants need sunlight for photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy for growth. Sunlight allows plants to produce food, oxygen, and other vital compounds. Without sufficient light, plants cannot thrive and ecosystems suffer.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian composer, wrote “The Four Seasons” in 1723. This set of violin concertos vividly depicts the changing seasons through music, with lively melodies and dramatic contrasts. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular works in classical music.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Proper circulation is essential for energy, temperature regulation, and health.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work laid the foundation for the widespread use of electricity.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It coordinates humanitarian aid, supports development, and works to resolve conflicts through diplomacy. The UN also upholds human rights and addresses global challenges like climate change.
Why do turtles lay eggs on beaches? Female turtles lay eggs on beaches because the sand provides a safe and warm environment for incubation. After hatching, the young turtles make their way to the ocean, facing many dangers along the way. This reproductive strategy helps turtles maintain their populations, despite high mortality rates.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though some controversy surrounds this claim. Peary’s expedition endured extreme cold and hardship to accomplish the feat. Reaching the North Pole was a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the process of fermentation in food production? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and beer, enhancing flavor and shelf life. Fermentation has been practiced for thousands of years and is vital in culinary traditions.
Why do people learn foreign languages? Learning foreign languages improves communication, expands cultural understanding, and opens up opportunities for travel and work. It also enhances cognitive abilities and can make learning other subjects easier. Multilingualism is increasingly valuable in our interconnected world.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus tells his disciples that one of them will betray him. “The Last Supper” is renowned for its composition, emotion, and technical innovation.
What is the importance of clean air? Clean air is necessary for health, as polluted air can cause respiratory problems, heart disease, and other illnesses. It also supports ecosystems and agriculture by providing oxygen and reducing toxins. Efforts to reduce air pollution benefit both people and the environment.
Who was the first person to swim the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875, completing the journey in less than 22 hours. His feat was celebrated as a triumph of endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge in the world of sports.
What is the process of mitosis? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It involves phases such as prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Proper mitosis ensures genetic material is accurately passed to new cells.
Why do we celebrate birthdays? Birthdays mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and are celebrated to honor their life and achievements. Traditions often include parties, gifts, and well wishes from family and friends. Celebrating birthdays strengthens social bonds and provides an opportunity for reflection and joy.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979, serving until 1990. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she led significant economic and political reforms and played a major role on the international stage. Thatcher’s leadership continues to influence British politics.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Common methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination or UV exposure. Clean water is essential for public health and daily life.
Why do bees make honey? Bees make honey by collecting nectar from flowers and converting it into a sweet, viscous substance through enzymatic processes. Honey serves as a food source for bees during winter and poor weather. It is also harvested by humans and valued for its nutrition and medicinal properties.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to access and share information online through interconnected documents. His invention revolutionized communication, commerce, and education. The World Wide Web is now an indispensable part of modern life.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When we inhale, oxygen passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism, is expelled when we exhale. Healthy lungs are essential for energy, cellular function, and overall vitality.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to successfully circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519 and completed by his crew in 1522 after Magellan’s death. This journey proved that the Earth is round and that the world’s oceans are interconnected. The voyage marked a milestone in global exploration and navigation.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a developmental transformation that insects undergo from one stage of life to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar changes into a butterfly through several stages including pupa and adult. This process allows insects to adapt to different environments and roles during their life cycle.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that regulate metabolism, support immunity, and aid in growth and repair. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained through food. A deficiency in vitamins can lead to health problems such as fatigue, weakened immune function, and disease.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved upon earlier designs and is credited with inventing the modern steam engine in the 18th century. His innovations greatly increased efficiency and paved the way for the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 and was key to deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs. Featuring the same text in three scripts—hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek—the stone allowed scholars to understand ancient Egyptian writing and history. Its discovery opened new doors to Egyptology and the study of ancient civilizations.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, temporarily blocking the Sun’s light. This alignment can result in a partial or total eclipse, depending on the observer’s location. Solar eclipses are rare and dramatic events that have fascinated humans for centuries.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818, which is widely considered the first science fiction novel. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the limits of scientific ambition. Shelley’s work has inspired countless adaptations and remains relevant in discussions about ethics and technology.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer sits in the Earth’s stratosphere and absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. Without this protective layer, living organisms would be at greater risk of cancer, cataracts, and other health issues. International efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have helped restore and protect this vital shield.
Why do rivers meander? Rivers meander because flowing water erodes the outer banks and deposits sediment on the inner banks of bends, causing the river’s path to curve over time. This natural process creates winding channels and floodplains. Meandering helps distribute sediment and nutrients, supporting diverse ecosystems along the river.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, becoming the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s achievements broke barriers for women in science.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is widely used in baking, brewing, and preserving foods such as bread, beer, and yogurt. Fermentation not only enhances flavors but also increases food safety and nutritional value.
How do magnets work? Magnets have a magnetic field created by the movement and alignment of electrons within the material. This field attracts certain metals, such as iron, and allows magnets to interact with other objects. Magnets are used in many everyday devices, including motors, compasses, and data storage tools.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The artwork, known for its swirling skies and vibrant colors, is considered a masterpiece of post-impressionist art. “The Starry Night” has inspired countless artists and is admired worldwide.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by lowering their metabolic rate and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature drops and physiological activity slows down, allowing animals to endure harsh conditions. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and certain rodents.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing how information is accessed and shared online. His invention enabled the creation of web browsers and websites, leading to the digital age. Today, the World Wide Web is an integral part of daily life and commerce.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for our planet’s future.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. His historic step marked a major milestone in space exploration and inspired millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement demonstrated human ingenuity and the possibilities of science and technology.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by natural forces such as water, wind, or ice. It shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Human activities like deforestation can accelerate erosion and lead to environmental challenges.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, guilt, and fate through the story of a Scottish nobleman who seeks power at any cost. “Macbeth” remains one of Shakespeare’s most performed and studied plays.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
How do airplanes stay in the air? Airplanes stay in the air by generating lift through their wings, which have a shape that causes air to move faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey faced extreme cold, difficult terrain, and logistical challenges. Peary’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future exploration.
What is the function of the heart in animals and humans? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to cells while removing waste products. It adapts to activity levels and environmental changes, working continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is crucial for survival and overall well-being.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries around the world. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, coordinating humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like poverty and climate change. The UN also helps uphold human rights and supports development initiatives worldwide.
Who discovered the law of planetary motion? Johannes Kepler, a German astronomer, formulated the laws of planetary motion in the early 17th century. His work described how planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun, which improved upon previous models. Kepler’s laws played a crucial role in the development of modern astronomy and physics.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Proper digestion is essential for maintaining good health and supporting all bodily functions.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure builds up from molten rock, called magma, beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence, love, and self-respect. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong, complex heroine and its exploration of social class, morality, and gender roles.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydro power are vital because they do not deplete Earth’s resources and produce less pollution. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and can provide sustainable energy for future generations. Investing in renewables supports a cleaner and more resilient energy system.
How do bees contribute to the environment? Bees play a critical role in pollinating plants, which helps produce fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Their pollination supports biodiversity and stable food supplies for both humans and wildlife. Without bees, many crops and wild plants would struggle to survive, making them essential for healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, earning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Her pioneering research on radioactivity transformed science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields worldwide.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can shape coastlines, create valleys, and move soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals use camouflage to blend in with their surroundings and avoid predators or to sneak up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region of the atmosphere that absorbs and blocks most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
How does photosynthesis benefit living things? Photosynthesis allows plants to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into food and oxygen. This process supplies energy to nearly all life on Earth, either directly or through food chains. Photosynthesis also helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels, making life possible.
Who was the first emperor of China? Qin Shi Huang was the first emperor of China, uniting the country under the Qin Dynasty in 221 BCE. He standardized laws, currency, and writing, and began construction of the Great Wall. His reign laid the foundation for Chinese civilization, though it was marked by strict rule.
What is the importance of biodiversity? Biodiversity is the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years add an extra day to the calendar every four years to keep it synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun. Without leap years, seasons would slowly drift over time. The system helps maintain alignment between the calendar and astronomical cycles.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth's atmosphere trap heat and warm the planet. While it is necessary for life, excess greenhouse gases from human activities can lead to global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for addressing climate change.
Who painted the Starry Night? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. "Starry Night" is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Methods include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is vital for health, agriculture, and industry.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan died during the journey, his crew completed the voyage in 1522, proving the world was round and connected by oceans. The expedition greatly expanded global navigation and trade.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night result from Earth’s rotation on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This cycle influences sleep, animal behavior, and energy use.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae is similar to that in plants, using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
Why do people form governments? People form governments to organize societies, create laws, maintain order, and provide public services such as defense and infrastructure. Governments help resolve disputes, protect rights, and promote the common good. Different forms of government reflect cultural and historical values.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is a vital link for global trade and has influenced international relations.
Who wrote the epic poem “The Odyssey”? The ancient Greek poet Homer is credited with writing "The Odyssey," a foundational work of Western literature. The poem tells the story of Odysseus’s adventures as he tries to return home after the Trojan War. "The Odyssey" explores themes of heroism, perseverance, and the human condition.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
What is the importance of education? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His successful expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout an animal’s body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall health in animals.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system enables humans to breathe in oxygen and expel carbon dioxide. It consists of organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, working together to support cellular respiration. Proper functioning of this system is vital for maintaining energy levels and overall health.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo by boat? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail solo around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the Spray was chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” which became a classic of maritime literature. Slocum’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo navigation and inspired generations of sailors.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its inscription in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—enabled scholars to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs for the first time. Understanding the Rosetta Stone opened the door to learning about Egypt’s ancient history and culture.
How do plants adapt to dry environments? Plants in dry environments often develop adaptations such as deep roots, thick waxy cuticles, or the ability to store water in stems and leaves. Some also use strategies like closing their stomata during the day to reduce water loss. These adaptations improve survival in arid climates and allow plants to thrive where water is scarce.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s. His work helped eradicate polio in many parts of the world, saving countless lives and preventing paralysis. Salk famously chose not to patent the vaccine, making it widely accessible to those in need.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are driven by wind, water temperature differences, salinity, and the rotation of Earth. These currents help distribute heat and nutrients across the globe, influencing weather patterns and marine ecosystems. Understanding ocean currents is vital for navigation, climate science, and preserving ocean health.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic material is copied accurately and passed on to new cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection against predators, increased hunting efficiency, and social interaction. Group living can also help with raising young and defending territory. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds flocking together during migration.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847. The novel tells the story of an orphaned girl’s struggle for independence and love, set against the harsh realities of Victorian England. “Jane Eyre” is celebrated for its strong protagonist and exploration of themes like morality, class, and gender.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a platform for resolving international conflicts, coordinating humanitarian aid, and supporting human rights. The UN’s agencies also address global challenges such as health, education, and environmental protection.
How do vaccines help prevent disease? Vaccines introduce a weakened or inactive form of a pathogen to stimulate the immune system. This prepares the body to recognize and fight the real disease if exposed in the future. Vaccines have been instrumental in controlling and eradicating diseases like smallpox, polio, and measles.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team, which included Matthew Henson and several Inuit guides, endured extreme cold and treacherous conditions. Peary’s accomplishment remains a milestone in the history of polar exploration.
What is the function of the heart in mammals? The heart pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It consists of chambers and valves that ensure blood flows in the correct direction. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and supports activity, growth, and development.
Why do we experience weather changes? Weather changes occur due to interactions between the sun’s energy, the atmosphere, oceans, and land surfaces. Factors like air pressure, temperature, humidity, and wind shape daily weather patterns. These changes affect agriculture, transportation, and daily life around the world.
Who painted the mural “Guernica”? Pablo Picasso painted “Guernica” in 1937 as a powerful protest against the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The mural uses dramatic black, white, and gray tones to depict the horrors of war and human suffering. “Guernica” remains a symbol of anti-war sentiment and artistic expression.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It facilitated the exchange of goods, cultures, religions, and ideas, shaping world history. The Silk Road’s legacy continues to influence global commerce and cultural diversity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966. She was known for her strong leadership, economic reforms, and controversial emergency rule. Gandhi’s tenure left a lasting impact on Indian politics and society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves capturing sunlight using chlorophyll and converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in producing oxygen and supporting aquatic food webs. Their ability to photosynthesize is essential for marine ecosystems and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. Eruptions can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Volcanic eruptions create new landforms and affect climate and ecosystems.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most significant breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the environment? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, was the first person to walk in space in 1965. He spent over 12 minutes outside his spacecraft, connected by a tether and facing unexpected challenges. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future spacewalks and advancements in space exploration.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is vital for maintaining the balance of nature.
How do airplanes generate lift to fly? Airplanes generate lift by moving air over their wings, which are shaped to create a pressure difference. Faster airflow above the wing and slower airflow below causes the aircraft to rise. Engines provide thrust, while control surfaces help steer and stabilize the plane.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experimentation, only to face tragic consequences. “Frankenstein” explores themes of ambition, isolation, and the dangers of unchecked scientific pursuit.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell, generating energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Healthy mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Why do we have seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing varying angles of sunlight throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in temperature, daylight, and weather patterns. The cycle of spring, summer, autumn, and winter shapes ecosystems, agriculture, and cultural traditions.
Who was the first person to successfully swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling strong currents and cold water. Webb’s accomplishment became a symbol of human endurance and inspired future swimmers.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process can be carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was instrumental in deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three languages: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. By comparing these, scholars were able to unlock the meaning of hieroglyphs and better understand Egypt’s history.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, helping to combat a disease that caused paralysis and death worldwide. His vaccine was administered to millions of children and led to a dramatic decline in polio cases. Salk’s work paved the way for global vaccination campaigns and public health improvements.
What is the function of the atmosphere on Earth? Earth’s atmosphere protects living organisms by blocking harmful solar radiation and regulating temperature. It provides the oxygen necessary for respiration and enables weather systems that distribute water and heat. The atmosphere is crucial for sustaining life and maintaining environmental balance.
Why do leaves appear green in spring and summer? Leaves appear green due to the presence of chlorophyll, a pigment that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. During spring and summer, chlorophyll is abundant as plants actively produce food. In autumn, chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments and causing leaves to change color.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works often draw on folklore and regional history, with “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils” being especially well known. Lagerlöf’s storytelling and vivid imagination influenced generations of writers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It involves the replication and separation of chromosomes, ensuring each new cell receives the correct genetic material. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when energy stored in Earth’s crust is suddenly released, usually due to movement along faults or tectonic plate boundaries. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Scientists monitor earthquakes to better understand and prepare for these natural events.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey took him through dangerous waters and required remarkable navigation skills. Slocum’s adventures were chronicled in his book “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspiring future explorers.
What is the importance of the Sumerians in history? The Sumerians are credited with creating one of the world’s first civilizations in ancient Mesopotamia. They developed writing (cuneiform), established cities, and advanced mathematics, law, and astronomy. Their legacy influenced later cultures and laid the foundations for modern society.
Why do animals form groups or herds? Animals form groups or herds for protection, increased foraging success, and social interaction. Group living can help defend against predators, find food more efficiently, and care for young. Examples include schools of fish, flocks of birds, and herds of mammals.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online using browsers and hyperlinks. The Web transformed communication, education, commerce, and entertainment, connecting billions of people globally. It remains a cornerstone of the digital age.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is a natural process where gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, with “The Creation of Adam” being especially famous. Michelangelo’s work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification removes contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, chlorination, distillation, and reverse osmosis. Clean water is essential for public health, agriculture, and industrial processes.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to synchronize the calendar year with the solar year, which is about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, leap years prevent seasonal drift over time. This adjustment keeps our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His team endured extreme cold and hardship to achieve this milestone. The journey helped expand knowledge of polar regions and inspired further exploration.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and neutralizing pathogens like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It includes organs, cells, and proteins that work together to defend against illness. A healthy immune system is vital for survival and well-being.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with others, attract mates, establish territory, and warn of danger. Each species has unique songs and calls that can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding and ecological balance.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream in the 1920s. Fitzgerald’s lyrical prose and vivid characters have made it a classic of American literature.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination involves the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. This can occur through wind, water, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of fruits and seeds.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in just under 22 hours, battling cold water and strong currents. Webb’s achievement inspired countless endurance swimmers and remains a celebrated milestone.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. Their size, precision, and enduring presence have fascinated historians and tourists alike. The pyramids are symbols of ancient ingenuity and remain among the world’s most iconic monuments.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Common hibernators include bears, bats, and some rodents. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting and made electric power widely accessible. Edison’s work led to further advances in technology and changed daily life for people around the world.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division is called mitosis when a cell splits to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. Mitosis is essential for growth, tissue repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms. It ensures that genetic material is accurately distributed during cell replication.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s accomplishment inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of education? Education provides knowledge, skills, and opportunities for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democracy and social progress.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to allow air to move faster over the top than underneath. This difference in air pressure creates an upward force, while engines provide thrust. Proper control surfaces allow pilots to steer and stabilize the aircraft.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact discovered in 1799 that helped scholars decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing linguists to understand a language that had been lost for centuries. Its discovery revolutionized the study of ancient Egypt and opened the door to understanding more of its history.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan’s expedition was the first to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew continued the journey and returned to Spain in 1522. Their voyage proved the Earth could be circled by sea and greatly expanded global exploration.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two genetically identical daughter cells. It is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis involves several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, followed by cytokinesis.
Why do we have seasons on Earth? Seasons on Earth are caused by the tilt of our planet’s axis as it orbits the Sun. This tilt results in varying angles of sunlight at different times of the year, making days longer or shorter and temperatures warmer or colder. This cycle shapes the climate, agriculture, and natural rhythms of life worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? “Frankenstein” was written by Mary Shelley and published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being through scientific experiments. Shelley’s work is considered one of the earliest examples of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, ethics, and humanity.
What is the function of the respiratory system? The respiratory system enables the exchange of gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—between our bodies and the environment. It includes organs such as the lungs, trachea, and diaphragm, which work together to facilitate breathing. Proper respiratory function is essential for delivering oxygen to cells and removing waste gases.
Why do some animals have camouflage? Camouflage helps animals blend in with their surroundings to avoid predators or sneak up on prey. Patterns, colors, and even body shapes can help an animal become nearly invisible in its environment. This adaptation increases an animal’s chances of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, making it a key driver of the Industrial Revolution. Earlier versions were developed by Thomas Newcomen and Thomas Savery, but Watt’s design made steam power more efficient. Steam engines transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society.
What is the greenhouse effect? The greenhouse effect is a natural process in which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the Sun. This keeps the planet warm enough to support life, but excess greenhouse gases from human activities can cause global warming. Managing greenhouse emissions is critical for addressing climate change.
Who was the first female Nobel Prize winner? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 for her work on radioactivity. She later won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911, making her the only person to win Nobel Prizes in two different sciences. Curie’s research changed the field of chemistry and medicine.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe over thousands of years. It enabled the exchange of goods, ideas, cultures, and technologies between distant civilizations. The Silk Road helped shape global history and the development of many societies.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when pressure from molten rock, called magma, builds up beneath Earth’s surface and forces its way out. Eruptions can result from tectonic plate movement, accumulation of gases, or changes in magma composition. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes and affects climate and ecosystems.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Creation of Adam is one of the most famous images in Western culture.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial producers in aquatic ecosystems, supporting food webs and generating much of the world’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity is vital for life in oceans and lakes.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary is generally credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although there is some controversy over the exact details of his expedition. He traveled with a team of assistants and Inuit guides, enduring extreme conditions. The achievement represented a milestone in the history of exploration.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell.
Why do we experience day and night? Day and night occur because Earth rotates on its axis, causing different parts of the planet to face the Sun or be in shadow. Each rotation takes about 24 hours, creating the cycle of daylight and darkness. This rhythm influences sleep patterns and behavior in humans and animals.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication across long distances for the first time. His invention transformed society and paved the way for modern telecommunications. Bell’s work continues to influence technology and how people connect.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, fungi, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, provides food and medicine, and helps systems recover from disturbances. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a stable and resilient environment.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Macbeth,” which explores themes of ambition, power, and guilt. Set in medieval Scotland, the tragedy follows the rise and fall of a nobleman who seeks the throne through murder. “Macbeth” is a staple of English literature and has been adapted countless times.
What is the importance of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) is an international organization founded in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It addresses issues such as human rights, development, health, and environmental protection. The UN provides a forum for resolving conflicts and coordinating humanitarian efforts.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person in space? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person in space in 1961. He orbited Earth aboard Vostok 1, marking a major milestone in the history of space exploration. Gagarin’s achievement opened the door for future human spaceflight.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydropower provide clean, sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Investing in renewables creates jobs and supports a resilient energy future.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of cell respiration and why is it important? Cell respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored as ATP and powers essential cellular functions like growth, repair, and movement. Without cell respiration, living organisms could not survive, as they would lack the energy needed for life.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe starting in 1519, though he died before completing the journey. His crew finished the voyage in 1522, proving that the world could be sailed around and that the oceans were interconnected. This historic journey greatly expanded global understanding and trade routes.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. It housed hundreds of thousands of texts and attracted scholars from across the Mediterranean. Its destruction remains a symbol of the loss of cultural and scientific knowledge.
Why do we have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns on the skin of our fingers formed before birth. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have the same fingerprints. Fingerprints are widely used in forensic science and security systems because of their uniqueness.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat from the sun in the atmosphere, keeping Earth warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas levels, leading to global warming and climate changes. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental stability.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, just months before his death. The opera is celebrated for its enchanting music and allegorical story, blending fantasy with Enlightenment ideals. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients absorbed from food, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces important proteins for blood clotting. It also stores glucose and helps regulate metabolism. A healthy liver is vital for digestion and overall well-being.
Why do some animals migrate seasonally? Many animals migrate seasonally to find food, mate, or escape harsh weather conditions. Migration can involve journeys of thousands of kilometers, such as birds flying south for winter or wildebeest crossing Africa’s plains. These migrations help species survive and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the first mechanical clock? The first mechanical clocks were invented in medieval Europe during the 13th century, with Richard of Wallingford and Henry De Vick among early pioneers. These clocks used gears and weights to measure time more accurately than earlier sundials or water clocks. Mechanical clocks revolutionized timekeeping and daily life.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plant cells. It absorbs sunlight and uses its energy to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose during photosynthesis. Chlorophyll is essential for plant growth and for producing the oxygen we breathe.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905 for her lifelong efforts to promote peace and disarmament. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" inspired the peace movement across Europe. Von Suttner’s legacy lives on in international peace advocacy.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? Volcanic eruptions occur when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises through cracks, building pressure until it bursts through the surface. Eruptions can release lava, ash, and gases, reshaping landscapes and affecting climate. Volcanic activity is closely monitored to protect communities living near volcanoes.
Why do leaves change color in fall? Leaves change color in fall because shorter days and cooler temperatures cause chlorophyll to break down, revealing pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. These pigments produce vibrant yellow, orange, and red hues. The process is part of the plant’s preparation for winter dormancy.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan navigating society and personal ambition in Victorian England. Dickens’ exploration of themes like social class, redemption, and identity has made the book a literary classic.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in history? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for centuries. It allowed the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and technologies across vast distances. The Silk Road played a crucial role in shaping global history and cultural development.
How do solar eclipses occur? Solar eclipses occur when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on parts of Earth’s surface. Depending on the alignment, eclipses can be total, partial, or annular. Solar eclipses are rare and attract observers and scientists worldwide.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he noticed that mold killed bacteria in his laboratory. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics that revolutionized healthcare, saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and harmful microorganisms from water through methods such as filtration, boiling, chlorination, and distillation. Purified water is essential for safe drinking, cooking, and hygiene. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, though the claim remains debated. His expedition braved extreme cold and treacherous ice to reach the northernmost point on Earth. Peary’s journey expanded scientific knowledge and inspired further polar exploration.
What is the significance of the Parthenon in Greece? The Parthenon is an ancient temple on the Acropolis of Athens, built in the 5th century BCE to honor the goddess Athena. It exemplifies classical Greek architecture and artistic achievement. The Parthenon remains a symbol of democracy, culture, and Western civilization.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. During sleep, the brain processes information and the immune system strengthens. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems, mood disturbances, and impaired cognitive function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious, reflecting Dalí’s interest in psychoanalysis. It is one of the most recognizable pieces of Surrealist art.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen, much like plants. This process supports aquatic food chains and helps regulate oxygen levels in water bodies. Algae are important producers in marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Who was the first person to run a marathon? The marathon commemorates the legendary run of Pheidippides, a Greek messenger who ran from Marathon to Athens in 490 BCE to announce victory over the Persians. The modern marathon was introduced at the first Olympic Games in 1896. Today, marathons are held worldwide and attract runners of all ages.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time. The canal is a vital link for global trade and international relations.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Bears, bats, and some rodents are well-known hibernators, spending months in a dormant state. Hibernation helps these animals endure harsh conditions until resources become available.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system protects the body from infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It consists of cells, tissues, and organs that identify and attack pathogens like viruses and bacteria. A strong immune system is crucial for maintaining health and recovering from illness.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” around 1603, exploring themes of jealousy, betrayal, and race. The tragedy centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his downfall orchestrated by the villain Iago. "Othello" remains a powerful work in the study of human emotion and prejudice.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, from plants and animals to microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy environments, provides food and medicine, and helps ecosystems recover from disturbances. Preserving biodiversity is essential for the planet’s resilience and sustainability.
What is the process of cellular respiration in living organisms? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This energy is stored in the form of ATP, which powers cellular functions. The process takes place in the mitochondria and is essential for growth, movement, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan is credited with leading the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, beginning in 1519. Although Magellan himself died during the journey, his crew completed the trip in 1522, proving the world could be circled by sea. This achievement expanded European knowledge of global geography.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert solar energy into chemical energy, producing food and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants would not be able to sustain themselves or support life on Earth.
Why do we experience lightning during storms? Lightning occurs when electrical charges build up in clouds and discharge, creating a sudden flash of light. This happens because different parts of a cloud carry positive and negative charges, and when the difference becomes large enough, electricity jumps between them or to the ground. Lightning helps balance electrical energy in the atmosphere.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel between 1508 and 1512 in Vatican City. The frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the iconic Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s work is considered one of the greatest achievements in art history.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes the continuous movement of water on, above, and below the surface of the Earth. It includes processes like evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. This cycle is vital for distributing fresh water, supporting life, and influencing climate patterns.
Who invented the light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His work made electric lighting accessible to homes and businesses, transforming daily life. Edison’s invention paved the way for the widespread use of electricity.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms within a particular habitat or ecosystem. High biodiversity ensures ecosystem resilience, provides food, medicine, and supports natural processes. Protecting biodiversity is essential for a healthy and sustainable environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, often traveling great distances. Migration helps species survive changing seasons and environmental challenges. Examples include birds flying south in winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding grounds.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of creation, responsibility, and the consequences of scientific discovery. Shelley’s work is considered a pioneering text in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, warming the planet. While this effect is necessary for life, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming. Managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize? Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1903 and Chemistry in 1911. Her research on radioactivity changed science and medicine forever. Curie remains a role model for women in STEM fields.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It involves mechanical and chemical processes starting in the mouth and continuing through the stomach and intestines. Proper digestion supports overall health and vitality.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down, revealing other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins. Cooler temperatures and shorter days trigger this process, resulting in vibrant reds, oranges, and yellows. The color change is part of the plant’s preparation for winter.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates unity and brotherhood and has become an anthem for peace. “Ode to Joy” is performed worldwide and holds deep cultural significance.
What is the function of red blood cells? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs. They contain hemoglobin, which binds to oxygen and gives blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are critical for energy and overall well-being.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, revolutionizing communication by allowing voice transmission over long distances. His invention paved the way for modern telecommunication. Bell’s work transformed how people connect with each other.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions. Stretching over thousands of miles, it is a symbol of Chinese ingenuity and perseverance. Today, the wall is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a major tourist attraction.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for restoring physical and mental energy, consolidating memories, and repairing tissues. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to health problems and impaired cognitive performance.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon in 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in space exploration.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. Algae play a crucial role in aquatic ecosystems and contribute significantly to global oxygen production. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and helps regulate the Earth’s atmosphere.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic tale of two young lovers whose families are locked in a bitter feud. It explores timeless themes of love, fate, and conflict.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and help reduce pollution. They provide a cleaner alternative to fossil fuels and combat climate change. Investing in renewables is key to a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath the Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, impact climate, and create fertile soils.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited with being the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909. His expedition faced harsh conditions and controversy, but Peary’s accomplishment is recognized in polar exploration history. The North Pole remains a challenging destination for adventurers.
What is the function of the heart? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste. It works continuously, adapting to activity levels and environmental changes. A healthy heart is essential for survival and overall wellbeing.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air more quickly over the top than the bottom. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics enable airplanes to travel efficiently across great distances.
What is the process of photosynthesis in plants? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants use sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water to produce glucose and oxygen. This occurs in the chloroplasts, where the pigment chlorophyll captures light energy. Photosynthesis is essential for life on Earth, as it forms the basis of most food chains and replenishes atmospheric oxygen.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe? Ferdinand Magellan led the first expedition to circumnavigate the globe, starting in 1519. Although Magellan himself died in the Philippines, his crew completed the journey in 1522, proving that the world could be circumnavigated by sea. The voyage greatly expanded European knowledge of world geography.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through Earth's atmosphere, surface, and underground. Processes such as evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff continuously recycle water, maintaining ecosystems and supporting life. The water cycle is crucial for weather patterns, agriculture, and freshwater resources.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, body temperature, heart rate, and breathing decrease significantly. This adaptation allows animals like bears and bats to endure harsh winters until conditions improve.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication and paved the way for the telecommunications industry. Bell's work led to further innovations such as the mobile phone and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone is an ancient Egyptian artifact inscribed with the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic. Discovered in 1799, it allowed scholars to decipher Egyptian hieroglyphs for the first time. The Rosetta Stone unlocked the secrets of ancient Egyptian language and culture.
How do solar panels generate electricity? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight directly into electrical energy. When sunlight hits the cells, it excites electrons, creating an electric current that can power homes, businesses, and devices. Solar energy is a renewable resource that helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectation in early 19th-century England. Austen’s witty style and keen observations have made the book a classic, still widely read and adapted today.
What is the function of the heart in the human body? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, supplying oxygen and nutrients while removing waste products. It has four chambers and works continuously to maintain circulation. A healthy heart is essential for overall wellbeing and vitality.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years are added every four years to keep the calendar year synchronized with Earth's orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.25 days. By adding an extra day to February, we prevent the calendar from drifting out of alignment with the seasons. Without leap years, seasonal dates would gradually shift over time.
Who discovered penicillin? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold called Penicillium notatum killed bacteria in a petri dish. This led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving countless lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical discoveries in history.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing greenhouse emissions is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Who painted the Mona Lisa? Leonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, and is considered a masterpiece of Renaissance art. The Mona Lisa is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient Egyptian tombs built for pharaohs thousands of years ago. The largest, the Great Pyramid, was constructed for Khufu and showcases remarkable engineering skills. The pyramids remain symbols of Egypt's history and are major tourist attractions.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement paved the way for future generations of female astronauts.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It starts in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and acids. Proper digestion is vital for maintaining health and supporting bodily functions.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers whose families are feuding, leading to heartbreak and loss. Shakespeare’s exploration of love, fate, and conflict has made the play a timeless classic.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from natural sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are constantly replenished. It helps reduce reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and combats climate change. Investing in renewable energy is essential for a sustainable future.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic movements or accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create fertile soils, and can impact climate and ecosystems.
What is biodiversity and why is it important? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources for food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining the balance of nature.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition beat the British team led by Robert Falcon Scott, thanks to careful planning and use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling helps reduce waste, conserve natural resources, and lower pollution levels. By reprocessing materials like paper, glass, and plastic, we save energy and decrease the demand for new raw materials. Recycling is essential for sustainable living and protecting the environment.
How do airplanes fly? Airplanes fly by generating lift through their wings, which are shaped to move air faster over the top than underneath. Engines provide thrust, and control surfaces help steer the plane. The principles of aerodynamics allow airplanes to travel efficiently over long distances.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. Proper circulation is essential for health, healing, and energy.
Who invented the steam engine and what was its impact? James Watt greatly improved the steam engine in the late 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use. This invention powered factories, trains, and ships, fueling the Industrial Revolution. The steam engine transformed transportation, manufacturing, and society as a whole.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae uses chlorophyll and sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are crucial for aquatic ecosystems, producing much of the world’s oxygen and serving as the foundation of many food chains. Their efficient photosynthesis supports life in oceans and lakes.
Why do people use sunscreen? Sunscreen helps protect the skin from harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun, reducing the risk of sunburn, premature aging, and skin cancer. It contains ingredients that absorb or reflect UV rays, forming a barrier against damage. Regular use of sunscreen is important for maintaining healthy skin, especially during outdoor activities.
Who wrote the “Harry Potter” series? J.K. Rowling wrote the “Harry Potter” series, which consists of seven books published between 1997 and 2007. Her stories follow the journey of a young wizard, Harry Potter, as he battles dark forces at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. The series has captivated millions worldwide and inspired movies, plays, and theme parks.
What is the significance of the Colosseum in Rome? The Colosseum is an ancient amphitheater in Rome, Italy, completed in 80 AD under Emperor Titus. It hosted gladiatorial games, public spectacles, and dramatic performances, symbolizing the power of the Roman Empire. Today, the Colosseum stands as a major tourist attraction and a testament to Roman engineering and culture.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients from the soil through their roots, which branch out to maximize contact with the ground. Tiny root hairs increase surface area, allowing minerals and moisture to enter the plant’s vascular system. The absorbed substances travel upward to the leaves, supporting growth and photosynthesis.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Peace? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize, receiving the honor in 1905 for her efforts in promoting international peace and advocating against war. Her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired many to pursue nonviolent solutions to conflict. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to shape peace movements worldwide.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations dedicated to public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, respond to emergencies, and improve healthcare systems. The WHO provides guidance, sets standards, and supports countries in safeguarding the health of their populations.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe environment for their eggs and young chicks. Nests protect offspring from predators, harsh weather, and other dangers, offering warmth and security. The materials and design of nests vary among species, reflecting adaptation to different habitats.
Who discovered the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, dramatically reducing cases of the disease worldwide. His work was a breakthrough in medical science, leading to widespread immunization campaigns. Polio vaccines have saved millions of lives and helped nearly eradicate the disease.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. This creates visible droplets or ice crystals that cluster together, forming clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns around the globe.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, a surrealist masterpiece featuring melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape. The painting explores themes of time, memory, and the subconscious mind. Dalí’s work is celebrated for its imaginative imagery and technical skill.
What is the role of the nervous system? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily functions, processing sensory information and sending signals to muscles and organs. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and a network of nerves throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, sensation, and response to the environment.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5th, raises awareness about environmental issues and promotes action to protect our planet. The day encourages individuals, communities, and governments to address problems such as pollution, deforestation, and climate change. Activities include tree planting, cleanups, and educational campaigns.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist of the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Games. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic tradition after centuries of inactivity. Gold medals have since become a symbol of excellence and achievement in sports.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, opened in 1869. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, saving time and fuel. The canal is a vital link in global trade and has strategic significance for international shipping.
How do bees communicate within the hive? Bees communicate using a “waggle dance,” a series of movements that convey the direction and distance to food sources. They also use pheromones and vibrations to share information about threats, health, and colony activities. This complex communication system ensures the survival and efficiency of the hive.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote the play “Othello,” a tragedy about jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story centers on Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona, whose love is destroyed by the manipulations of Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful exploration of human emotions and social issues.
What is the process of volcanic eruption? A volcanic eruption occurs when magma rises from beneath Earth’s surface, driven by pressure and gas accumulation. The magma escapes through vents, forming lava flows, ash clouds, and sometimes explosive blasts. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and can affect climate and ecosystems.
Why do athletes train regularly? Athletes train regularly to improve strength, stamina, technique, and mental focus. Consistent training helps prevent injuries, enhances performance, and prepares athletes for competition. Training routines are tailored to specific sports and individual needs, supporting long-term success.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with reaching the North Pole in 1909, though his achievement remains subject to debate. Peary’s expedition overcame extreme conditions using sled dogs, specialized gear, and careful planning. His journey expanded knowledge of the Arctic and inspired future exploration.
What is the importance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient monuments in Egypt built as tombs for pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the geographic North Pole. This simple device helps with navigation and orientation, especially before the advent of GPS technology. Compasses have been essential tools for explorers, sailors, and hikers for centuries.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, revolutionizing the way information is accessed and shared. His creation introduced websites, hyperlinks, and browsers, making the internet user-friendly and interactive. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education globally.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each containing the same genetic material. It occurs in several stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Mitosis is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in multicellular organisms.
Why do people study history? People study history to understand the events, cultures, and decisions that shaped the world we live in today. History provides lessons about successes and failures, helps explain current issues, and fosters empathy for others. Studying history encourages critical thinking and informed citizenship.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed the opera “The Magic Flute” in 1791. The work blends fantasy, comedy, and profound themes, featuring memorable arias and symbolic characters. “The Magic Flute” is celebrated for its musical brilliance and enduring popularity.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight for photosynthesis. It enables plants to convert light energy into glucose, providing food and oxygen for life on Earth. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce the energy needed to grow and survive.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, casting a shadow on Earth and temporarily blocking sunlight. Total solar eclipses happen when the Moon completely covers the Sun, while partial eclipses occur when only part of the Sun is obscured. Eclipses are rare and spectacular astronomical events.
What is the significance of the moon landing in 1969? The moon landing in 1969 marked the first time humans set foot on another celestial body, with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walking on the lunar surface as part of NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. This achievement represented a major milestone in space exploration and demonstrated the possibilities of human ingenuity. The event inspired generations and advanced scientific research about the moon and space travel.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century, describing how every mass attracts every other mass with a force proportional to their masses and distance. His insights explained the motion of planets and objects on Earth. Newton’s work laid the foundation for classical physics and remains central to our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of pollination in flowering plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part (anther) to the female part (stigma) of a flower, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often assisted by wind, insects, or animals. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of most plants and for the production of many fruits and vegetables.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts by ensuring only authorized users can access sensitive information and services. Strong passwords prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and identity theft. They are a fundamental aspect of digital security, especially as more personal and financial activities move online.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She was recognized for her advocacy against war and for international peace. Her influential book "Lay Down Your Arms" and her activism helped shape the early peace movement in Europe.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the warming of Earth’s atmosphere caused by certain gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, trapping heat from the sun. It keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if intensified by human activities. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century, revolutionizing the production of books and written materials. The press made information more accessible and accelerated the spread of education and scientific ideas. Gutenberg’s invention played a key role in the Renaissance and the modernization of society.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae involves the absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are key producers in aquatic ecosystems and generate a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Their photosynthetic activity supports marine food chains and global carbon cycles.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better environmental conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often occurs seasonally. This behavior increases survival and reproductive success for many species, including birds, whales, and butterflies.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth,” a tragedy about ambition, power, and fate. First performed in the early 17th century, the play explores the psychological effects of guilt and the consequences of unchecked ambition. "Macbeth" remains one of Shakespeare’s most studied and performed works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It helps prevent diseases such as cholera and dysentery and supports overall health and well-being. Access to clean water is a key factor in public health and community development.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is widely credited as the first person to reach the North Pole in 1909, although the claim has been debated. His expedition overcame extreme cold and challenging terrain, setting a precedent for polar exploration. The achievement expanded geographic knowledge of the Arctic region.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used to make foods such as bread, yogurt, cheese, and alcoholic beverages. Fermentation preserves food, enhances flavors, and provides important nutrients.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn as chlorophyll breaks down due to cooler temperatures and shorter daylight hours. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps trees conserve energy and prepare for winter.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. The frescoes depict biblical stories from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. Michelangelo’s masterpiece is considered one of the greatest achievements in the history of art.
What is the significance of biodiversity? Biodiversity refers to the variety of life in an ecosystem, from genes to species to entire communities. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources like food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is essential for the stability and sustainability of the planet.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling voice communication over long distances. His invention transformed personal and business communication and paved the way for the development of modern telecommunications. Bell’s work remains influential in technology and society.
What is the importance of recycling? Recycling conserves natural resources, reduces waste, and lowers pollution by reusing materials like paper, plastic, glass, and metal. It saves energy and helps protect the environment from landfill overflow and resource depletion. Recycling is a key component of sustainable living and responsible consumption.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted as it orbits the sun, causing different parts of the planet to receive varying amounts of sunlight throughout the year. This results in changes in temperature, weather patterns, and daylight hours. The cycle of seasons influences agriculture, wildlife, and human activities.
Who wrote the novel “Frankenstein”? Mary Shelley wrote the novel “Frankenstein,” published in 1818. The story explores themes of scientific ambition, ethics, and isolation, following Victor Frankenstein’s creation of a sentient creature. "Frankenstein" is considered a foundational work in science fiction and Gothic literature.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the powerhouses of the cell because they produce energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They help convert nutrients from food into usable energy and play roles in cell signaling and apoptosis. Healthy mitochondria are essential for growth, movement, and all cellular activities.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their historic expedition showed the world that the highest peak could be conquered. Their achievement inspired future generations of climbers and adventurers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs over 4,500 years ago. They showcase extraordinary engineering and have fascinated historians and archaeologists for centuries. The pyramids serve as a symbol of Egypt’s rich history and cultural achievements.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to rest, repair tissues, and consolidate memories. It helps regulate mood, immune function, and metabolism. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and health problems.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth for nearly three days aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired women around the world to pursue careers in science and technology.
What is the importance of the Internet in modern life? The Internet connects billions of people globally, providing access to information, communication, commerce, and entertainment. It has transformed how we work, learn, and interact, making the world more interconnected. The Internet continues to drive innovation and social change in countless fields.
How do solar panels work? Solar panels use photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electricity. When sunlight hits the cells, it releases electrons that generate a flow of electrical current. Solar energy is renewable, reduces dependence on fossil fuels, and helps combat climate change.
What is the function of the respiratory system in humans? The respiratory system is responsible for bringing oxygen into the body and removing carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism. It includes the lungs, airways, and muscles that facilitate breathing. Healthy respiration is essential for energy production and overall well-being.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum, a Canadian-American sailor, was the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. His journey in the sloop “Spray” was a remarkable feat of navigation and endurance. Slocum’s account, “Sailing Alone Around the World,” inspired generations of adventurers.
What is the process of mitosis in cells? Mitosis is a process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the original cell. It’s essential for growth, tissue repair, and asexual reproduction in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic consistency across cells.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, improved hunting, and social interaction. Group living can help deter predators and increase success in finding food. Social bonds also aid in raising offspring and passing on survival skills.
Who invented the steam engine? James Watt improved and popularized the steam engine in the 18th century, leading to its widespread use during the Industrial Revolution. His innovations made steam engines more efficient and practical for factories and transportation. Watt’s work transformed industry and society.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, contains the same text in Greek, Demotic, and Egyptian hieroglyphs. Its decoding by Jean-François Champollion allowed scholars to finally understand ancient hieroglyphic writing. The stone is now housed in the British Museum and is a symbol of linguistic discovery.
How does the human body regulate temperature? The human body maintains a stable internal temperature through processes like sweating, shivering, and adjusting blood flow. The hypothalamus in the brain acts as a thermostat, triggering responses to heat or cold. Proper temperature regulation is vital for cellular function and health.
Who wrote “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer”? “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” was written by Mark Twain and published in 1876. The novel follows the mischievous Tom as he navigates childhood in a small town along the Mississippi River. Twain’s work captures the spirit of American youth and the complexities of growing up.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, allowing ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circling Africa. Opened in 1869, the canal greatly reduced travel time and boosted international trade. Today, it remains a critical passage for global shipping.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? People celebrate birthdays to mark the anniversary of their birth, reflecting on past experiences and looking forward to the future. Birthday celebrations often include gatherings, gifts, and special traditions. They serve as opportunities for social connection and gratitude.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 while experimenting with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller, negatively charged particles, challenging the idea that atoms were indivisible. Thomson’s findings were foundational to the development of modern physics and chemistry.
What is the significance of Mount Kilimanjaro? Mount Kilimanjaro is Africa’s highest peak, rising 5,895 meters above sea level in Tanzania. Its snow-capped summit and diverse ecosystems attract climbers and scientists from around the world. Kilimanjaro is a symbol of natural beauty and environmental change, as its glaciers have been shrinking.
How does a compass work? A compass works by aligning its magnetic needle with Earth’s magnetic field, pointing toward the magnetic north pole. This device helps travelers and explorers determine direction, especially before the advent of GPS. Compasses have been vital for navigation for centuries.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. She advocated for disarmament and international cooperation, influencing Alfred Nobel himself to create the peace prize. Her book “Lay Down Your Arms” was instrumental in promoting peace movements.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment that gives plants their green color and is essential for photosynthesis. It captures sunlight, allowing plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into energy and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or sustain life on Earth.
Why do we need vitamins and minerals? Vitamins and minerals are vital nutrients that support growth, immune function, and overall health. They help regulate hundreds of bodily processes, from bone strength to nerve signaling. Deficiencies can lead to disease, so a balanced diet is important for well-being.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in 1791 in Vienna. The opera blends fairy tale elements, symbolism, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its themes of enlightenment and triumph over adversity resonate with audiences worldwide.
What is the importance of pollination? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower to the female part, enabling fertilization and seed production. It is essential for the reproduction of most plants and the production of fruits and vegetables. Pollinators like bees, birds, and bats play a vital role in sustaining ecosystems.
How do vaccines protect against disease? Vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and fight pathogens such as viruses or bacteria. They introduce a harmless part of the pathogen, training the body to respond quickly if exposed to the real disease. Vaccination has helped control and eradicate many serious illnesses.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis, including the famous Creation of Adam. The work is regarded as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of earth’s surface by wind, water, ice, or gravity. It shapes landscapes, forms valleys, and can affect agriculture and infrastructure. Preventing excess erosion is important for environmental conservation.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, breed, or avoid harsh weather, often traveling long distances. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and maintain healthy populations. Examples include birds flying south in winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity, revolutionizing physics in the early 20th century. His special and general theories explained the relationship between space, time, and gravity. Einstein’s work has had profound impacts on science and technology.
What is the importance of education? Education provides people with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking for personal and societal growth. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population contributes to stronger economies and more just societies.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, making it possible to access and share information online. His creation transformed communication, commerce, and learning. The Web is now a cornerstone of modern life for billions of people.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood, delivering oxygen and nutrients throughout an animal’s body. It maintains circulation and helps remove waste products. Healthy heart function is essential for survival and activity in all animals.
How does a solar eclipse occur? A solar eclipse happens when the Moon passes between the Earth and the Sun, blocking sunlight and casting a shadow on Earth. Depending on alignment, eclipses can be partial, total, or annular. Solar eclipses have fascinated people for centuries and are studied for their effects on nature.
What is the process of mitosis in living cells? Mitosis is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells, each with the same number of chromosomes as the parent. This is essential for growth, repair, and maintenance in multicellular organisms. Mitosis ensures genetic stability across generations of cells.
Who invented the steam engine and how did it impact society? James Watt improved the steam engine in the 18th century, making it efficient enough for widespread use in industry and transportation. The steam engine powered factories, trains, and ships, driving the Industrial Revolution. Watt’s invention transformed economies and the way people lived and worked.
What is the function of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the green pigment found in the chloroplasts of plants and is essential for photosynthesis. It absorbs light energy, which is then used to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Without chlorophyll, plants could not produce food or release oxygen for other living things.
Why do stars twinkle in the night sky? Stars appear to twinkle because their light passes through different layers of Earth's atmosphere, which are constantly shifting due to temperature and air movement. This causes the light to bend and change intensity in a process called atmospheric refraction. Twinkling is more noticeable for stars closer to the horizon.
Who was the first emperor of Rome? Augustus, originally known as Octavian, became the first emperor of Rome in 27 BCE. He established the Roman Empire after defeating Mark Antony and Cleopatra and ending the period of civil wars. Augustus’ reign brought stability, reforms, and the Pax Romana, a long era of relative peace.
What is the importance of the water cycle? The water cycle describes how water moves through the environment, including evaporation, condensation, precipitation, and runoff. It is vital for replenishing freshwater supplies, supporting ecosystems, and regulating climate. The cycle ensures that water is continuously recycled and available for living organisms.
Who wrote the novel "Frankenstein"? Mary Shelley wrote "Frankenstein," first published in 1818. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, who creates a living being from dead tissue, only to be haunted by his creation. "Frankenstein" is considered one of the earliest works of science fiction and explores themes of ambition, responsibility, and isolation.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do we experience earthquakes? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth's crust suddenly shift along faults or boundaries, releasing energy as seismic waves. These movements can be triggered by volcanic activity, human actions, or natural plate movements. Earthquakes can cause significant damage and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry. Bell’s work led to the development of the telephone network and later technologies like the internet.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on Earth? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth's atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is vital for protecting the environment.
Who was the first person to reach the North Pole? Robert Peary, an American explorer, is credited with leading the first successful expedition to the North Pole in 1909. His journey involved months of travel over ice and harsh conditions, with the help of Inuit guides and sled dogs. Peary’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Animals camouflage themselves to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play "Macbeth"? William Shakespeare wrote "Macbeth" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. "Macbeth" remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
What is the function of the lungs in the human body? The lungs are responsible for exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air and the bloodstream. When you inhale, oxygen enters the lungs and passes into the blood, while carbon dioxide, a waste product, moves from the blood into the lungs to be exhaled. This process is vital for energy production and overall health.
Who discovered the law of gravity? Sir Isaac Newton formulated the law of universal gravitation in the 17th century after observing the fall of an apple. His work explained how all objects attract each other with a force proportional to their masses and distance. Newton’s law laid the foundation for classical physics and transformed our understanding of the universe.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Photosynthesis is essential for sustaining life on Earth.
Why do we have leap years? Leap years occur every four years to keep our calendar aligned with Earth’s orbit around the sun, which takes about 365.24 days. By adding an extra day to February, we compensate for the fractional difference and ensure that seasons stay in sync with the calendar. Without leap years, seasonal drift would gradually occur over centuries.
Who invented the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to communicate by transmitting voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication and paved the way for the global telecommunications industry. Bell’s legacy is evident in the phones and networks we use today.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Jane Eyre”? Charlotte Brontë wrote “Jane Eyre,” published in 1847, which tells the story of an orphaned girl’s journey to independence and love. The novel explores themes of social class, gender, and morality, and is regarded as a classic of English literature. Brontë’s work remains influential and widely read today.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Pyramids of Giza? The Pyramids of Giza are ancient tombs built for Egyptian pharaohs more than 4,500 years ago. They showcase remarkable engineering skills and have fascinated historians and tourists for centuries. The pyramids are a testament to the achievements of ancient Egyptian civilization and remain iconic world landmarks.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary, a New Zealand mountaineer, and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa guide from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their achievement was a landmark in the history of exploration and mountaineering. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest challenges for adventurers.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body for energy, growth, and repair. The process begins in the mouth, continues in the stomach and intestines, and involves enzymes and digestive juices. Proper digestion is essential for health and well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of the heart in animals? The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the body, delivering oxygen and nutrients to tissues and removing waste products. It works continuously, adapting to changes in activity and environment. A healthy heart is critical for survival and overall health in animals.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for their green color, breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict biblical stories, most famously the Creation of Adam, and are considered masterpieces of Renaissance art. The Sistine Chapel attracts millions of visitors every year.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, creating a system of linked documents accessible through browsers. His invention revolutionized how people share information and communicate globally. The Web is now a fundamental part of daily life and technology.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who wrote the play “A Midsummer Night’s Dream”? William Shakespeare wrote “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” in the late 16th century. The play combines elements of fantasy, romance, and comedy as it explores the adventures of lovers and fairies in an enchanted forest. It remains one of Shakespeare’s most popular and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, and works continuously to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, growth, and survival.
Who discovered the electron and what was its significance? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His discovery revealed that atoms were not indivisible, as previously thought, but contained smaller charged particles. This breakthrough transformed our understanding of atomic structure and led to major advances in physics and chemistry.
What is the purpose of the United Nations? The United Nations (UN) was established in 1945 to promote peace, security, and cooperation among countries. It provides a forum for resolving international disputes, delivering humanitarian aid, and addressing global challenges like climate change. The UN plays a crucial role in fostering diplomacy and protecting human rights worldwide.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process by which they convert light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy that powers this transformation, allowing plants to grow and produce oxygen. Without sunlight, most plants would be unable to survive or reproduce.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861, which follows the life of an orphan named Pip as he navigates Victorian society. The novel explores themes of ambition, social class, and personal growth, and is considered one of Dickens’s greatest works. Its memorable characters and insights into human nature have made it a classic.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a barrier erected by East Germany in 1961 to separate East and West Berlin during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 symbolized the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and the reunification of Germany. The Berlin Wall remains an important historical reminder of political division and the power of freedom.
How does a compass work? A compass is a navigational instrument that uses a magnetized needle to indicate direction relative to Earth’s magnetic poles. The needle aligns itself with the planet’s magnetic field, pointing towards magnetic north. Compasses are essential for navigation, especially before the advent of GPS technology.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” which premiered in Vienna in 1791. The opera blends whimsical fantasy with serious themes of love, wisdom, and justice. Its memorable arias and characters have made it a beloved part of the classical repertoire.
What is the importance of recycling plastics? Recycling plastics helps reduce pollution, conserve resources, and lower energy usage compared to producing new plastic. By reprocessing used plastics, we prevent them from accumulating in landfills and oceans, where they can harm wildlife and ecosystems. Recycling also supports sustainable industry and environmental protection.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, efficient hunting, and social interaction. Living together can help deter predators, increase chances of finding food, and facilitate learning and cooperation. Group living is common in species ranging from insects to mammals and is essential for survival in some environments.
Who was the first person to discover Antarctica? While many explorers sighted parts of Antarctica, Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, a Russian explorer, is credited with the first recorded sighting of the continent in 1820. His expedition provided valuable maps and observations of the southern polar region. The discovery paved the way for future scientific research and exploration.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells break down glucose and oxygen to produce energy in the form of ATP. This process occurs in the mitochondria and releases carbon dioxide and water as byproducts. Cellular respiration is essential for powering all cellular activities in living organisms.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism and explores themes of time, dreams, and reality. Dalí’s imaginative vision continues to intrigue viewers and inspire artists.
What is the importance of the World Health Organization? The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations focused on global public health. It coordinates international efforts to combat diseases, improve healthcare systems, and respond to health emergencies. The WHO’s guidance and research help save lives and improve well-being worldwide.
Why do we use passwords for online security? Passwords protect online accounts and systems from unauthorized access by serving as a form of identity verification. A strong password helps guard against hacking, identity theft, and data breaches. Regularly updating and safeguarding passwords is essential for personal and organizational cybersecurity.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for peace and disarmament influenced the creation of the Nobel Peace Prize itself. Von Suttner’s legacy endures in the modern peace movement.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon is a vast geological formation in Arizona, carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. It is renowned for its dramatic landscapes, colorful rock layers, and rich fossil record. The Grand Canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and attracts millions of visitors annually.
How does solar energy benefit the environment? Solar energy generates electricity from sunlight, reducing reliance on fossil fuels and lowering greenhouse gas emissions. It is renewable, abundant, and produces minimal pollution compared to traditional energy sources. Solar power supports sustainability and helps fight climate change.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” a tragedy that explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism. The story follows Othello, a Moorish general, as he falls victim to manipulation and suspicion. "Othello" remains a powerful examination of human emotion and social dynamics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from egg to larva, pupa, and adult. This process allows for dramatic changes in structure, function, and behavior. Metamorphosis is common in butterflies, beetles, and many other insect species.
Who invented the lightbulb? Thomas Edison is often credited with inventing the first practical incandescent lightbulb in 1879. His development of a durable filament and electrical system revolutionized lighting and made it accessible to homes and businesses. Edison’s invention transformed daily life and spurred further technological progress.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients necessary for growth and development. They also store food and help stabilize the plant against wind and erosion. Healthy roots are essential for plant survival and productivity.
Why do we celebrate World Environment Day? World Environment Day, observed on June 5, raises awareness about environmental issues and encourages global action for sustainability. Activities include cleanups, tree planting, and educational campaigns. The day inspires individuals and communities to protect the planet for future generations.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae utilize photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into energy, producing glucose and releasing oxygen as a byproduct. This process is similar to that found in land plants but occurs in aquatic environments, making algae essential for oxygen production in oceans and lakes. Algae are a primary food source for many aquatic organisms and play a major role in global carbon cycling.
Who was the first human to orbit the Earth? Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first human to orbit the Earth on April 12, 1961 aboard the spacecraft Vostok 1. His flight lasted 108 minutes and marked a major milestone in space exploration. Gagarin's achievement opened the door to human spaceflight and inspired generations of astronauts.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria in history? The Library of Alexandria was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world, located in Egypt. It was a center of learning and scholarship, attracting scholars from many cultures and preserving vast collections of manuscripts. The library’s destruction is often regarded as a great loss for human knowledge and history.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes are commonly found along tectonic plate boundaries because this is where plates either collide or move apart, allowing magma from beneath the Earth’s crust to escape. Subduction zones and rift valleys provide pathways for molten rock to rise and erupt at the surface. These geological processes shape landscapes and create fertile soils but can also pose hazards to nearby populations.
Who developed the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, which dramatically reduced the incidence of the disease worldwide. Before the vaccine, polio caused paralysis and death in thousands of people, mostly children. Salk’s invention is considered one of the greatest medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the function of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer prevents excessive UV radiation from reaching the Earth’s surface, reducing the risk of skin cancer and protecting ecosystems. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its vital function.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892 in St. Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and has become a classic holiday tradition, featuring memorable music and enchanting dances. “The Nutcracker” is performed by ballet companies around the world each winter.
What causes ocean currents and why are they important? Ocean currents are primarily driven by wind, the Earth’s rotation, temperature differences, and variations in salinity. These currents help distribute heat, regulate climate, and transport nutrients and marine life across vast distances. Ocean currents play a key role in global weather patterns and the health of marine ecosystems.
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her imaginative storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Her most famous work, “The Wonderful Adventures of Nils,” remains popular in Sweden and abroad.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria of cells and provides the energy needed for growth, movement, and maintenance. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and supports all bodily functions.
Why do we use decimal and metric systems in science? The decimal and metric systems are used in science because they provide a standardized, easy-to-use framework for measurement based on powers of ten. This allows for precise calculations and consistent communication across different countries and scientific fields. The metric system simplifies conversion between units and supports global collaboration.
Who built the Taj Mahal and what was its purpose? The Taj Mahal was built by Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan in the 17th century in memory of his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal. The white marble mausoleum is renowned for its stunning architecture and intricate details. It stands as a symbol of love and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
What is the importance of groundwater? Groundwater is water stored beneath the Earth’s surface in soil and rock formations, providing drinking water for billions of people. It supports agriculture and industry and helps maintain river flows during dry periods. Protecting groundwater from pollution is critical for long-term environmental and human health.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. The light bulb led to widespread electrification and transformed daily life and industry.
What causes tides in the oceans? Tides are caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun on Earth’s oceans. This pull causes periodic rising and falling of sea levels, known as high and low tides. Tides influence marine life, navigation, and coastal ecosystems and are predictable based on celestial mechanics.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with the crucial contributions of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. Understanding DNA has revolutionized medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe for over two thousand years. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road greatly influenced world history, commerce, and cultural development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His expedition was meticulously planned, using sled dogs and survival expertise to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months, lowering body temperature and heart rate. Hibernation allows animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” which explores themes of jealousy, trust, and betrayal through the tragic story of a Moorish general and his wife Desdemona. The play delves into complex human emotions and the destructive power of manipulation. “Othello” remains a powerful work frequently performed and studied.
What is the process of water purification? Water purification involves removing contaminants and impurities from water to make it safe for drinking and use. Techniques include filtration, sedimentation, and chemical treatment such as chlorination. Clean water is essential for health, agriculture, and industry around the world.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The printing press allowed for mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. It played a crucial role in the Renaissance, Reformation, and the rise of modern science.
What is the role of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and overall well-being.
What is the role of the skeleton in the human body? The skeleton provides structural support, protects internal organs, and enables movement by serving as an attachment point for muscles. It is made up of 206 bones in adults, including the skull, spine, and limbs. The skeleton also produces blood cells and stores essential minerals such as calcium and phosphorus.
Who was the first person to discover America according to historical evidence? Christopher Columbus is often credited with discovering America in 1492, although Norse explorer Leif Erikson reached North America centuries earlier. Columbus’s voyages marked the beginning of sustained European exploration and colonization of the Americas. His arrival had profound and lasting effects on history, culture, and indigenous peoples.
What is the process of respiration in living organisms? Respiration is the process by which organisms exchange gases with their environment, taking in oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide. In humans and animals, this occurs mainly in the lungs, while plants use structures called stomata. Cellular respiration then converts oxygen and glucose into energy, vital for survival.
Why do earthquakes occur and what are their effects? Earthquakes occur due to the sudden release of energy along faults or tectonic plate boundaries in Earth’s crust. This energy travels as seismic waves, shaking the ground and sometimes causing destruction. Earthquakes can lead to property damage, loss of life, and changes in landscapes such as landslides or tsunamis.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland lasted nearly 15 hours and made her a global icon of courage and aviation. Earhart’s achievements inspired generations of women to pursue careers in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. This protective layer helps prevent skin cancer, cataracts, and damage to plants and animals. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its function.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork is famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape, symbolizing the fluidity of time and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is celebrated as a masterpiece of surrealism and modern art.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth and survival. They also store food and help stabilize the plant during storms or drought. Some roots, such as those in carrots or beets, are specialized for storage and nutrition.
Why do we need sleep and what happens during sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and mind to rest and repair. During sleep, the brain processes memories, hormones are regulated, and immune function is strengthened. Lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal? John Baxter Taylor Jr. became the first African American to win an Olympic gold medal as part of the U.S. medley relay team in 1908. His achievement marked a significant milestone in sports history and paved the way for greater inclusion in athletics. Taylor’s legacy continues to inspire athletes today.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from egg to adult, passing through distinct stages such as larva, pupa, and imago. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis. This process allows for specialization and adaptation to different environments during an insect’s life cycle.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows Holden Caulfield, a disaffected teenager navigating the challenges of growing up in post-war America. Salinger’s work is celebrated for its authentic voice and exploration of themes like alienation and identity.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce for centuries.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. His swim from Dover to Calais took nearly 22 hours and demonstrated extraordinary endurance. Webb’s accomplishment inspired future generations of swimmers and set a benchmark for open water challenges.
What is the importance of water conservation? Water conservation is vital for ensuring a sustainable supply of freshwater for drinking, agriculture, and industry. Conserving water helps protect ecosystems, reduce energy use, and prevent shortages during droughts. Simple actions like fixing leaks and using efficient appliances can make a significant difference.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and was capable of performing complex calculations. Zuse’s innovation paved the way for the development of modern computers and information technology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965. His extravehicular activity lasted just over 12 minutes and presented numerous challenges, including a suit that inflated unexpectedly. Leonov’s achievement marked a significant milestone in human space exploration.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century. The play blends elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue as it explores themes of forgiveness, power, and transformation. “The Tempest” remains a favorite among audiences and scholars for its imaginative storytelling.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor due to heat, typically from the sun. This process is a crucial part of the water cycle, helping to regulate temperature and move water from bodies like lakes and oceans into the atmosphere. Evaporation supports cloud formation and ultimately precipitation, sustaining ecosystems around the world.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo? Joshua Slocum was the first person to sail alone around the world, completing his journey in 1898. His voyage aboard the sloop Spray took more than three years and covered over 46,000 miles. Slocum’s adventure inspired generations of sailors and is considered a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are vital components of the immune system, protecting the body against infections and diseases. They identify and destroy harmful bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens through various mechanisms. A healthy count of white blood cells is essential for fighting off illnesses and maintaining overall health.
Why do we have continents and how did they form? Continents exist because of Earth's tectonic plates, which float atop the semi-fluid mantle and have shifted over millions of years. The movement of these plates caused the landmasses to break apart and drift, forming the seven continents we know today. This process, called plate tectonics, continues to shape Earth's surface and geography.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The novel follows the struggles of teenager Holden Caulfield as he deals with alienation and the challenges of growing up. Salinger’s work became a classic of American literature, resonating with young readers for its candid exploration of adolescence.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without navigating around Africa, greatly reducing shipping time and costs. The canal is a vital link in world commerce and has strategic importance for many nations.
How do plants reproduce asexually? Plants can reproduce asexually through methods such as runners, tubers, bulbs, and cuttings. In asexual reproduction, new plants grow from parts of the parent plant, resulting in genetically identical offspring. This strategy allows plants to rapidly colonize areas and survive in stable environments.
Who was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal? Charlotte Cooper, a British tennis player, was the first woman to win an Olympic gold medal in 1900 at the Paris Games. Her victory marked a significant milestone in sports history, paving the way for women’s participation in future Olympics. Cooper’s achievement inspired countless female athletes worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it work? The greenhouse effect occurs when certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide and methane, trap heat from the sun. This process keeps the planet warm enough to support life but can lead to global warming if greenhouse gases increase excessively. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for addressing climate change.
Why do animals undergo metamorphosis? Metamorphosis is a biological process where animals, such as insects and amphibians, undergo dramatic changes in form during their life cycle. This transformation allows them to exploit different habitats and resources at various stages of life. Metamorphosis increases survival chances and supports species diversity.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí, a Spanish surrealist artist, painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931. The artwork features melting clocks in a dreamlike landscape and is considered one of Dalí’s most famous pieces. The painting explores themes of time, reality, and the subconscious mind.
What is the process of filtration and where is it used? Filtration is the separation of solid particles from fluids (liquids or gases) using a porous barrier or filter. It is widely used in water purification, air cleaning, and laboratory procedures. Filtration helps remove contaminants and improve the quality of substances in daily life and industry.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897 during experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms contain smaller negatively charged particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern electronics and our understanding of atomic structure.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the second longest river in the world and flows through South America, mainly Brazil and Peru. It supports the largest tropical rainforest and is home to thousands of plant and animal species. The river is crucial for transportation, biodiversity, and the climate of the region.
Why do we need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body and brain to rest, repair, and consolidate memories. During sleep, various processes occur, such as hormone regulation and immune system strengthening. Insufficient sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of illness.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His carefully planned expedition used sled dogs and precise navigation to succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded our understanding of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the process of fermentation and why is it important? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation also plays a role in biofuel production and medicine.
Who wrote “The Divine Comedy”? Dante Alighieri, an Italian poet, wrote “The Divine Comedy” in the early 14th century. The epic poem describes a journey through Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, exploring themes of morality, redemption, and human nature. Dante’s work is considered a masterpiece of world literature and has influenced countless writers.
What is the role of mitochondria in animal cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the “powerhouses” of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy through cellular respiration. Mitochondria are vital for growth, movement, and all cellular activities in animals.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find better food sources, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable weather conditions. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows established routes. This behavior increases survival rates and helps maintain healthy populations across regions.
What is the importance of clean water for communities? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. She was known for her strong leadership and economic reforms, earning the nickname “The Iron Lady.” Thatcher’s tenure significantly influenced British politics and global affairs.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Photosynthesis in algae, like in plants, uses chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. Algae are important producers in aquatic ecosystems, forming the base of many food chains. Their photosynthetic activity helps generate much of the world’s oxygen supply.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall in history? The Berlin Wall was built in 1961, dividing East and West Berlin and symbolizing the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. Its fall in 1989 marked the end of communist rule in Eastern Europe and paved the way for German reunification. The wall remains a powerful symbol of division and freedom.
Who was the first person to propose the concept of the atom? The ancient Greek philosopher Democritus first proposed the idea of the atom around 400 BCE, suggesting that all matter is made up of tiny, indivisible particles. His theory laid the groundwork for modern atomic science, though it took centuries for experimental evidence to support it. Today, the atom is a central concept in physics and chemistry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological processes. It occurs through factors such as wind, water, temperature changes, and plant roots. Weathering shapes landscapes and provides soil for plant growth.
Why do humans have fingerprints? Fingerprints are unique patterns formed by ridges on the skin of our fingers and thumbs. They help us grip objects and provide a means of identification, as no two people have exactly the same fingerprints. Forensic science relies on fingerprints for solving crimes and confirming identities.
What is the importance of the Silk Road in world history? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It enabled the exchange of goods like silk, spices, and precious metals, as well as ideas, religions, and technologies. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping civilizations and fostering cultural diversity.
Who invented the process of vaccination? Edward Jenner developed the first successful vaccine in 1796 by using cowpox to protect people from smallpox. His work laid the foundation for immunology and modern vaccination practices. Vaccines have since saved millions of lives by preventing infectious diseases.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and acts as a protective barrier against injury, infection, and harmful UV radiation. It helps regulate temperature, produces vitamin D, and allows for sensations such as touch and pain. Healthy skin is essential for overall health and well-being.
Why do planets orbit the sun? Planets orbit the sun due to the gravitational pull of the sun and their own inertia, which keeps them moving in a curved path. This balance between gravity and motion creates the stable orbits seen in our solar system. The laws of planetary motion were first described by Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered a foundational document for democracy and the rule of law. It limited the powers of the king and established basic rights for certain subjects. Over time, the Magna Carta influenced constitutions and legal systems worldwide.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters a variety of characters and faces moral challenges as he seeks success and love. The novel is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the process of urbanization and its effects? Urbanization is the movement of people from rural areas to cities, resulting in the growth of urban centers. It often leads to economic development, increased job opportunities, and improved infrastructure. However, urbanization can also cause challenges such as overcrowding, pollution, and loss of green spaces.
Why do humans experience emotions? Emotions are complex responses to stimuli that help us communicate, make decisions, and adapt to our environment. They are regulated by the brain and hormones and are influenced by genetics and experiences. Emotions play a vital role in mental health and social interactions.
What is the importance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has provided breathtaking images and valuable data about the universe. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study distant galaxies, and discover exoplanets. Hubble’s findings have transformed our understanding of space.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female Prime Minister of India in 1966 and served until 1984. She was known for her bold leadership and significant political reforms, as well as for declaring a controversial state of emergency in the 1970s. Gandhi remains a prominent figure in Indian history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by using chlorophyll to capture sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process is vital in aquatic ecosystems, where algae produce much of the world’s oxygen and serve as the basis of many food chains. Algae also contribute to carbon cycling and climate regulation.
Why do volcanoes form along tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes often form along tectonic plate boundaries because magma from the mantle rises through cracks created by plate movement. Subduction zones and rifts are especially prone to volcanic activity. These eruptions can create new landforms and impact global climate.
What is the significance of the Renaissance? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to 17th centuries that marked a renewed interest in art, science, and humanism. It began in Italy and spread throughout Europe, producing masterpieces in painting, literature, and architecture. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western thought and creativity.
Who invented the World Wide Web and why is it important? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989, allowing people to share information through linked documents and websites. This innovation revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, making the internet accessible to billions. The World Wide Web is now central to daily life and global connectivity.
What is the function of the digestive system? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in France. The artwork’s swirling skies and vivid colors reflect Van Gogh’s emotional turmoil and creative genius. “The Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic paintings in art history.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future explorers.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skin in the human body? The skin is the body’s largest organ and serves as a protective barrier against pathogens, physical injuries, and harmful environmental factors. It also helps regulate body temperature through sweating and maintains hydration by preventing excessive water loss. Additionally, the skin contains nerve endings that allow us to sense touch, pain, and temperature.
Who was the first person to reach the moon and what did he say? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969. Upon stepping onto the lunar surface, he famously said, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” His achievement marked a pivotal moment in space exploration and inspired people worldwide.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world and the second longest. It flows through the heart of the Amazon rainforest, supporting diverse ecosystems and countless species of plants and animals. The river is vital for transportation, local economies, and global climate regulation.
Why do people celebrate birthdays? Birthdays are celebrated to mark the anniversary of a person’s birth and acknowledge the passage of time. They offer an opportunity for friends and family to gather, express appreciation, and share joy. Birthday traditions vary across cultures but often include ceremonies, gifts, and special foods.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, love, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his wife Desdemona. “Othello” remains a powerful commentary on human nature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the process of evaporation and where is it seen in nature? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat energy. It commonly occurs in lakes, rivers, oceans, and even puddles after rainfall as sunlight warms the water. Evaporation is a crucial part of the water cycle and helps regulate climate and weather patterns.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling, imagination, and depiction of Swedish folklore and rural life. Lagerlöf’s works continue to be celebrated for their literary merit and cultural significance.
What is the significance of the Statue of Liberty? The Statue of Liberty, located in New York Harbor, was a gift from France to the United States in 1886. It stands as a symbol of freedom, democracy, and hope for immigrants arriving in America. The statue is an iconic landmark and a testament to the enduring friendship between the two nations.
Why do volcanoes form and erupt? Volcanoes form when magma from beneath Earth’s crust rises through weak spots or openings in the surface. Eruptions occur when pressure builds up and forces magma, gas, and ash outward, sometimes violently. Volcanic activity shapes landscapes, creates new landforms, and impacts climate and ecosystems.
Who was the founder of Buddhism? Siddhartha Gautama, known as the Buddha, founded Buddhism in the 5th century BCE in ancient India. After attaining enlightenment, he taught principles of compassion, mindfulness, and the path to overcoming suffering. Buddhism has since spread across the world and influenced countless cultures and philosophies.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process, carried out by chlorophyll, supports aquatic food webs and generates a significant portion of Earth’s oxygen. Algae are critical for maintaining healthy aquatic ecosystems.
What is the importance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China is an ancient fortification built to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids. Stretching thousands of miles, it is a marvel of engineering and a symbol of China’s historical strength and unity. Today, the wall attracts millions of tourists and stands as a testament to human ingenuity.
Who invented the first practical light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first commercially practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than previous methods like candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work contributed to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach is a muscular organ that receives food from the esophagus and breaks it down using acids and enzymes. It churns the food into a semi-liquid mixture called chyme, which is then sent to the small intestine for further digestion and nutrient absorption. The stomach plays a key role in the digestive process.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and later attempted to circumnavigate the globe in 1937. Although she disappeared during her final journey, Earhart’s pioneering spirit and achievements inspired generations of aviators and adventurers. Her legacy remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the significance of the periodic table? The periodic table organizes all known chemical elements by their atomic number, electron configuration, and recurring chemical properties. Invented by Dmitri Mendeleev, it allows scientists to predict the behavior of elements and discover new ones. The periodic table is an essential tool in chemistry, physics, and many other sciences.
Who composed “The Four Seasons”? Antonio Vivaldi, an Italian Baroque composer, wrote “The Four Seasons,” a set of four violin concertos, in 1723. Each concerto represents a different season and is celebrated for its vivid musical imagery and technical brilliance. “The Four Seasons” remains one of the most popular and frequently performed pieces of classical music.
Why do some animals live in groups? Many animals live in groups for protection, cooperation in hunting or foraging, and social interaction. Living in groups can increase survival chances by deterring predators, sharing resources, and caring for young. Examples include packs of wolves, flocks of birds, and schools of fish.
Who discovered the electron? J.J. Thomson, a British physicist, discovered the electron in 1897 through experiments with cathode rays. His work revealed that atoms are composed of smaller subatomic particles, revolutionizing the field of physics. Thomson’s discovery paved the way for modern atomic theory and technology.
What is the importance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was a network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe, beginning over 2,000 years ago. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures between distant civilizations. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and commerce.
Who wrote the play “The Tempest”? William Shakespeare wrote “The Tempest” in the early 17th century, blending elements of magic, romance, and political intrigue. The play explores themes of forgiveness, power, and the human condition through the story of Prospero and his daughter Miranda. “The Tempest” is widely regarded as one of Shakespeare’s greatest works.
What is the process of cell division in bacteria? Bacteria reproduce through a process called binary fission, in which a single cell divides into two identical daughter cells. This rapid form of cell division allows bacteria to multiply quickly under favorable conditions. Binary fission is essential for bacterial growth, adaptation, and survival.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate Africa by sea? Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias was the first to round the southern tip of Africa, the Cape of Good Hope, in 1488. His voyage opened up the sea route from Europe to Asia, leading to the age of global exploration and trade. Dias’s achievement helped establish Portugal as a leading maritime power.
Why do we need education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities, fostering personal growth and societal progress. It promotes innovation, reduces poverty, and encourages equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies, supports democratic governance, and helps solve global challenges.
What is artificial intelligence and how is it used today? Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to computer systems capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving, and decision-making. Today, AI is used in fields like healthcare for diagnosing diseases, in finance for detecting fraud, and in everyday life with virtual assistants and recommendation systems. As AI continues to evolve, it is transforming industries and raising important ethical questions.
Who mapped the human genome and why was it significant? The Human Genome Project, completed in 2003 by an international team of scientists, successfully mapped all the genes in human DNA. This achievement provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and personalized medicine. Knowing the complete sequence of the human genome has accelerated advances in biotechnology and medical research.
What is the importance of coral reefs for marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital habitats that support a vast diversity of marine life, offering shelter, food, and breeding grounds for countless species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. However, coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation critical.
Why do humans need sleep and what happens without it? Sleep is essential for physical and mental health, allowing the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to impaired cognitive function, weakened immunity, and increased risk of diseases. Maintaining healthy sleep habits is crucial for overall well-being and productivity.
Who was the first person to win an Olympic gold medal? The first Olympic gold medalist in the modern era was James Connolly, who won the triple jump at the 1896 Athens Olympics. His victory marked the revival of the Olympic Games, which had been dormant for centuries. Since then, gold medals have symbolized athletic excellence and international competition.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. This usually happens when warm air meets cooler temperatures at higher altitudes or when air is forced to rise over mountains. Cloud formation plays a key role in Earth's water cycle and weather patterns.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals celebrate shared traditions, beliefs, and histories, bringing communities together for music, food, dance, and rituals. They help preserve cultural heritage, foster social bonds, and promote understanding among different groups. Festivals also serve as opportunities for education and tourism.
Who discovered radio waves and their significance? Heinrich Hertz discovered radio waves in the late 19th century, demonstrating that they could be produced and detected with electrical equipment. His work laid the foundation for wireless communication, including radio, television, and cell phones. Today, radio waves are essential for global information exchange and technology.
What is the role of bees in pollination? Bees are crucial pollinators that transfer pollen between flowers as they collect nectar, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process supports the growth of many fruits, vegetables, and nuts, and helps maintain healthy ecosystems. The decline of bee populations poses a serious threat to food security and biodiversity.
Why do countries have national symbols? National symbols, such as flags, anthems, and emblems, represent a country’s identity, history, and values. They foster unity and pride among citizens and are used during official ceremonies and international events. National symbols can also serve as powerful reminders of a nation's struggles and achievements.
Who invented the vaccine for polio? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s, leading to widespread immunization and a dramatic decline in polio cases worldwide. His discovery helped prevent a disease that once caused paralysis and death in thousands of children. Salk’s work is celebrated as a major achievement in public health.
What is the significance of the Renaissance in European history? The Renaissance was a cultural movement from the 14th to the 17th century that originated in Italy and spread across Europe. It marked a renewed interest in art, science, and literature, leading to remarkable advancements and the rise of figures like Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. The Renaissance laid the groundwork for modern Western civilization.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups for protection from predators, easier hunting or foraging, and better chances of raising offspring. Group living, such as in packs, herds, or colonies, can also provide social interactions and aid in learning behaviors. Examples include wolves, dolphins, and bees, all of which benefit from cooperation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her achievement challenged gender roles and inspired women in aviation and other fields. Earhart’s disappearance during a later flight remains one of history’s great mysteries.
What is the process of recycling plastic? Recycling plastic involves collecting used items, sorting them by type, cleaning them, and melting them down to form new products. This reduces waste in landfills and conserves resources, but not all plastics are easily recyclable. Advances in technology and consumer awareness are helping to improve plastic recycling rates.
Why is the Amazon River important? The Amazon River is the largest river by volume in the world and supports the Amazon rainforest, one of the most biodiverse places on Earth. It provides water, transportation, and sustenance to millions of people and countless species. The river also influences global weather and climate patterns.
Who developed the theory of relativity and its impact? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His work led to advances in physics, such as nuclear energy and GPS technology. Einstein’s theories continue to shape scientific research and technological innovation.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in Earth’s atmosphere absorbs harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun, protecting living organisms from damage. Efforts to reduce ozone-depleting chemicals have led to recovery of the ozone layer in recent decades. Maintaining its health is vital for life on Earth and for preventing skin cancer and other issues.
Why do people write poetry? Poetry allows people to express emotions, ideas, and experiences in creative and evocative ways. It can capture beauty, challenge norms, and communicate complex feelings that may be hard to convey in ordinary language. Poetry has been an important part of human culture for thousands of years, inspiring and connecting people across generations.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb was the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in less than 22 hours. His accomplishment demonstrated human endurance and inspired future generations of swimmers. The English Channel swim remains a prestigious challenge for athletes worldwide.
What is the purpose of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. This system is vital for sustaining life and supporting the function of all organs.
Who discovered the polio vaccine and what was its impact? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the 1950s. His discovery led to widespread immunization programs that drastically reduced polio cases worldwide. The vaccine’s success helped prevent paralysis and death, changing public health history.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, which returns water to Earth’s surface. Condensation helps regulate temperature and humidity in the atmosphere.
Why do we need minerals in our diet? Minerals such as calcium, iron, and potassium are essential for building bones, carrying oxygen, and regulating nerve function. They act as cofactors for enzymes and help maintain fluid balance. A balanced intake of minerals supports growth, energy, and overall health.
Who was the first person to reach the moon? Neil Armstrong was the first human to set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast around the world. Armstrong’s achievement marked a turning point in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Renaissance period? The Renaissance was a cultural movement in Europe from the 14th to the 17th century, characterized by a revival of art, science, and literature. It produced great thinkers and artists like Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, and Galileo. The Renaissance laid the foundation for modern Western civilization.
How do plants absorb water and nutrients? Plants absorb water and nutrients through their roots, which have tiny hairs that increase surface area for uptake. These substances travel up the stem to the leaves where photosynthesis occurs. The process enables growth, development, and the production of food for other organisms.
Who wrote the novel “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951. The story follows Holden Caulfield, a teenager navigating issues of identity, alienation, and loss in postwar America. The novel is considered a classic of American literature and resonates with readers worldwide.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones such as insulin to regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a critical role in both the digestive and endocrine systems. Proper pancreatic function is essential for metabolism and energy balance.
Why do volcanoes form on Earth? Volcanoes form when magma from Earth’s mantle rises through cracks in the crust, often at tectonic plate boundaries. The magma erupts as lava, ash, and gases, creating volcanic landforms over time. Volcanoes can shape landscapes, influence climate, and create fertile soils for agriculture.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her advocacy for disarmament and her influential book “Lay Down Your Arms” inspired the peace movement in Europe. Von Suttner’s honor helped elevate women’s voices in international affairs.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and provides ATP, the energy currency for cellular functions. Cellular respiration powers growth, movement, and repair in all living things.
Why do deserts receive so little rainfall? Deserts are located in regions with high-pressure systems, dry winds, and few clouds, preventing moisture from accumulating. Mountain ranges can also block rain-bearing winds, creating rain shadows. Low precipitation and evaporation rates result in arid conditions and sparse vegetation.
Who invented the printing press and how did it change history? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century. The press enabled the mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to more people. Gutenberg’s invention sparked the spread of literacy and ideas, fueling the Reformation and the Renaissance.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer in the stratosphere absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, reducing the risk of skin cancer and eye disorders. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as reducing CFC emissions, have helped restore its protective role.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute,” first performed in 1791. The opera blends magical elements, philosophical themes, and memorable music, making it one of Mozart’s most beloved works. Its story combines adventure, romance, and the triumph of good over evil.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the evaporation of water from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps cool the plant, move nutrients, and maintain the flow of water from the roots. Transpiration also influences weather patterns and the water cycle.
Why do people celebrate cultural festivals? Cultural festivals provide opportunities for communities to express traditions, honor history, and strengthen social bonds. They often feature music, dance, food, and religious or historical rituals. Festivals promote diversity, understanding, and a sense of belonging.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the feat in nearly 22 hours. His achievement inspired future generations of open-water swimmers and remains a benchmark in endurance sports. Webb’s legacy is celebrated in swimming history.
What is the function of white blood cells? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections, viruses, and harmful substances. They identify and destroy pathogens, and some remember past infections to respond faster next time. Maintaining healthy white blood cell levels is crucial for immune protection.
Who discovered the structure of benzene? Friedrich August Kekulé proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865, revolutionizing organic chemistry. His discovery explained benzene’s stability and paved the way for understanding aromatic compounds. Kekulé’s insights remain foundational in modern chemistry.
What is the process of weathering and why is it important? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals by wind, water, ice, and biological activity. It produces soil and shapes landscapes, influencing ecosystems and agriculture. Weathering is essential for the formation of fertile ground and the cycling of nutrients.
Who wrote the play “Death of a Salesman”? Arthur Miller wrote “Death of a Salesman,” first performed in 1949. The play explores the struggles of Willy Loman, a salesman facing disillusionment and family conflict. Miller’s work is a cornerstone of American theater, examining themes of identity, ambition, and societal expectations.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions, allowing organisms to sense and respond to their environment. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, transmitting signals throughout the body. The nervous system enables thought, movement, emotion, and reflexes.
What is the function of the skeleton in animals? The skeleton provides structural support, protects vital organs, and enables movement through muscles attached to bones. It also plays a role in producing blood cells and storing minerals such as calcium. Healthy bones are essential for growth, strength, and overall well-being.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart made history in 1932 as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean, piloting her plane from Newfoundland to Ireland. Her achievement inspired women in aviation and showed that perseverance and courage could break barriers. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s rights.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense around tiny particles in the atmosphere. These droplets gather together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes depending on atmospheric conditions. Clouds play a crucial role in regulating temperature and distributing precipitation.
Why do we use decimal numbers in mathematics? Decimal numbers are based on the base-10 system, which is easy to use because humans have ten fingers. This system allows for efficient arithmetic operations, clear representation of fractions, and standardized measurement. Decimals are essential in science, engineering, and everyday calculations.
Who painted “The Persistence of Memory”? Salvador Dalí painted “The Persistence of Memory” in 1931, famous for its melting clocks and dreamlike landscape. The artwork is a key example of surrealism, challenging viewers’ perceptions of time and reality. Dalí’s innovative style influenced many artists and changed the course of modern art.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage and skin cancer. Without the ozone layer, life on Earth would be at greater risk from intense solar radiation. Efforts to repair the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped restore its protective function.
Who was the founder of the Mongol Empire? Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire in the early 13th century, uniting various nomadic tribes under his leadership. His military campaigns created one of the largest empires in history, stretching across Asia and Europe. Genghis Khan’s legacy includes innovations in governance, trade, and culture.
What is the process of water filtration? Water filtration removes impurities and contaminants from water by passing it through layers of sand, gravel, charcoal, or specialized membranes. This process produces clean, safe water for drinking, cooking, and industrial use. Filtration is critical for public health and environmental protection.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when underwater eruptions build up layers of lava and ash that eventually break the ocean surface. Over time, these volcanic islands can grow larger as more eruptions occur and materials accumulate. Examples include Hawaii and Iceland, both formed by volcanic activity.
Who wrote “The Catcher in the Rye”? J.D. Salinger wrote “The Catcher in the Rye,” published in 1951, which follows the story of Holden Caulfield as he struggles with adolescence and alienation. The novel’s themes of identity, rebellion, and authenticity have resonated with generations of readers. Salinger’s work remains a classic in American literature.
What is the function of the nervous system? The nervous system coordinates and controls bodily functions by transmitting signals between the brain, spinal cord, and other parts of the body. It enables sensation, movement, thought, and emotional responses. A healthy nervous system is essential for survival and adaptation to environmental changes.
Why do camels have humps? Camels have humps to store fat, which can be converted into energy and water when food and water are scarce. This adaptation enables camels to survive long journeys across deserts and harsh climates. Their unique physiology makes them invaluable for transportation and agriculture in arid regions.
Who invented the polio vaccine? Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in 1955, dramatically reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. His work saved countless lives and helped eradicate polio in many countries. Salk’s contribution is celebrated as a major milestone in medical science.
What is the importance of the Amazon River? The Amazon River is the largest river by discharge volume in the world and runs through the heart of the Amazon rainforest in South America. It supports a vast diversity of plant and animal life and provides water, transportation, and livelihoods for millions of people. The river is vital for regional climate regulation and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875, completing the 21-mile journey in less than 22 hours. His feat demonstrated the possibilities of human endurance and inspired future long-distance swimmers. Webb’s accomplishment is still celebrated in the world of sports.
What is the process of photosynthesis in algae? Algae perform photosynthesis by absorbing sunlight through chlorophyll, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. This process supports aquatic food chains and produces much of the world’s oxygen supply. Algae are important for maintaining healthy ecosystems in oceans, lakes, and rivers.
Why do people celebrate festivals? Festivals are celebrated to mark important cultural, religious, or historical events, fostering community spirit and shared traditions. They provide opportunities for socialization, entertainment, and reflection on values and beliefs. Festivals contribute to cultural identity and help preserve heritage across generations.
Who composed the opera “The Magic Flute”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Magic Flute” in 1791, blending elements of fantasy, comedy, and enlightenment philosophy. The opera’s music and symbolism have made it a beloved work, performed worldwide. Mozart’s creativity and genius are evident in its enduring popularity.
What is the function of the skin in humans? The skin acts as a protective barrier against physical injury, pathogens, and harmful substances. It regulates body temperature, enables sensation, and helps synthesize vitamin D when exposed to sunlight. Healthy skin is essential for overall well-being and immune defense.
Why do we use wind turbines for energy? Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy of wind into electricity, providing a clean, renewable energy source. They reduce greenhouse gas emissions and reliance on fossil fuels, helping to combat climate change. Wind power is increasingly used in many countries to support sustainable development.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, became the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His success was due to careful planning, experience with polar conditions, and the use of sled dogs. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of Antarctica and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cell division called? Cell division, or mitosis, is the process by which a cell divides to produce two identical daughter cells. This process is essential for growth, repair, and reproduction in living organisms. Mitosis ensures that genetic material is accurately passed on to new cells.
Who wrote the poem “The Raven”? Edgar Allan Poe wrote “The Raven,” first published in 1845. The poem explores themes of grief, loss, and madness through the haunting visit of a mysterious raven. Poe’s use of rhythm, symbolism, and dark imagery makes “The Raven” a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly reducing travel time and shipping costs. The canal is vital for international trade and global commerce.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process by which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients within the plant. Transpiration also plays a significant role in the water cycle and influences local climate conditions.
Who developed the polio vaccine and why was it important? Dr. Jonas Salk developed the first effective polio vaccine in the early 1950s, greatly reducing the incidence of the disease worldwide. Polio was a crippling and sometimes deadly illness, especially among children. Salk’s vaccine marked a turning point in public health, preventing countless cases of paralysis and death.
What is the significance of the Berlin Wall? The Berlin Wall was a physical barrier that divided East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989. It symbolized the ideological conflict between communism and democracy during the Cold War. The fall of the wall in 1989 marked the beginning of German reunification and the end of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe.
Why do we need protein in our diet? Protein is essential for building and repairing tissues, producing hormones and enzymes, and supporting immune function. It provides the building blocks for muscles, skin, hair, and internal organs. A lack of protein can lead to fatigue, weakened immunity, and poor growth and development.
Who composed the opera "The Magic Flute"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "The Magic Flute" in 1791, combining elements of fairy tale, comedy, and profound philosophical themes. The opera is famous for its memorable melodies and enchanting characters. "The Magic Flute" remains one of the most beloved and frequently performed operas in the world.
What is the purpose of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)? UNESCO was established in 1945 to promote international collaboration in education, science, and culture. The organization works to preserve cultural heritage, support universal education, and foster freedom of expression. UNESCO's initiatives help build peace and sustainable development worldwide.
Who was the first person to swim across the English Channel? Captain Matthew Webb became the first person to swim across the English Channel in 1875. He completed the feat in less than 22 hours, battling cold water, strong currents, and exhaustion. Webb’s achievement inspired many future long-distance swimmers and remains a legendary accomplishment in sports history.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization occurs when the remains or traces of organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. The process often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineralization where organic material is replaced by minerals. Fossils provide crucial evidence of ancient life and help scientists understand the history of Earth.
Why do volcanoes form islands? Volcanoes can form islands when eruptions occur underwater and lava accumulates, eventually rising above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which were created by volcanic activity over millions of years.
Who wrote the novel "The Catcher in the Rye"? J.D. Salinger wrote "The Catcher in the Rye," published in 1951. The novel follows the experiences of Holden Caulfield, a teenager struggling with alienation and identity. Salinger's work is celebrated for its candid exploration of adolescence and its impact on modern literature.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer is a region in Earth’s upper atmosphere that absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation. It protects living organisms from UV damage, which can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Preserving the ozone layer is crucial for environmental and human health.
Why do some animals live in groups? Animals may live in groups to improve their chances of finding food, defending against predators, and caring for young. Living in groups allows individuals to work together and share resources. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and birds forming flocks for migration.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the process of crystallization? Crystallization is the process by which atoms or molecules arrange themselves into a well-ordered, repeating pattern to form a solid crystal. It can occur from solutions, melts, or vapor. Crystallization is important in geology, chemistry, and the manufacturing of products like sugar and salt.
Who was the first female prime minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the role of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. This organ plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we experience wind? Wind is caused by differences in air pressure resulting from the uneven heating of Earth’s surface by the sun. Air moves from areas of high pressure to low pressure, creating currents. Wind helps distribute heat, moisture, and seeds, influencing weather and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of genetic inheritance? Genetic inheritance is the passing of traits from parents to offspring through genes found in DNA. Each parent contributes half of an offspring’s genetic material, resulting in a unique combination. Inheritance explains how characteristics like eye color or blood type are transmitted across generations.
Who discovered the vaccine for smallpox? Edward Jenner discovered the vaccine for smallpox in 1796 by using material from cowpox blisters to immunize people. This groundbreaking work laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox. Jenner’s discovery remains one of the greatest achievements in public health.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Why do humans laugh? Laughter is a response to humor, surprise, or social interaction, and it helps strengthen social bonds. It can also reduce stress, improve mood, and trigger beneficial physical changes in the body. Scientists believe laughter evolved as a way to communicate and build trust among groups.
Who painted "The Persistence of Memory"? Salvador Dalí painted "The Persistence of Memory" in 1931, featuring melting clocks in a surreal landscape. The artwork explores themes of time, dreams, and the subconscious. Dalí’s painting is a hallmark of the Surrealist movement and is displayed at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
What is the purpose of the Red Cross? The Red Cross is an international humanitarian organization founded to provide emergency assistance, disaster relief, and health services. It operates in nearly every country, helping victims of war, natural disasters, and health crises. The Red Cross also promotes education in first aid and international humanitarian law.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis by using sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide to produce glucose and oxygen. Unlike plants, their photosynthetic machinery is located in the cell membrane, not in chloroplasts. Cyanobacteria are among the oldest life forms and have helped shape Earth’s atmosphere.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister broke the four-minute barrier in 1954, running the mile in 3 minutes and 59.4 seconds. His achievement was considered impossible at the time and inspired athletes around the world to push human limits. Bannister’s record was soon surpassed, but his legacy endures.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the ancient world’s largest and most important centers of learning. It housed thousands of scrolls and attracted scholars from many cultures, contributing greatly to the advancement of science and philosophy. Its destruction marked a significant loss of knowledge and cultural heritage.
Why do some animals have camouflage patterns? Camouflage patterns help animals avoid predators or sneak up on prey by blending into their environment. This adaptation can include colors, shapes, and behaviors that match surroundings such as leaves, rocks, or sand. Camouflage increases survival rates and is found in insects, reptiles, mammals, and birds.
Who developed the first theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and have since moved apart. Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics, although they were initially controversial.
What is the process of water purification in treatment plants? Water purification involves several steps, including filtration to remove physical debris, chemical treatment like chlorination to kill microbes, and sometimes advanced processes such as reverse osmosis. These methods ensure that drinking water is safe and free from contaminants. Modern treatment plants are essential for public health.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The artwork depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea, symbolizing love and beauty. Botticelli’s painting is celebrated for its graceful figures and mythological themes.
What is the importance of coral reefs in the ocean? Coral reefs provide habitats for thousands of marine species, protect coastlines from erosion, and support fishing and tourism industries. They are among the most diverse ecosystems but are threatened by pollution, overfishing, and climate change. Conservation of coral reefs is crucial for ocean health.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which explores the impact of the Napoleonic wars on Russian society. The novel is famous for its complex characters, philosophical insights, and vivid historical detail. "War and Peace" is considered one of the greatest works of world literature.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, and produces bile for digestion. It also stores energy and helps regulate blood sugar levels. The liver is vital for metabolism and overall health, and its failure can be life-threatening.
Why do birds migrate seasonally? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climates as seasons change. Migration can cover thousands of kilometers and often follows ancient routes. This behavior ensures survival and reproductive success in changing environments.
Who was the first woman to travel solo around the world by airplane? Amelia Earhart achieved fame as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, and she later set records for solo flights around the world. Her daring adventures challenged gender norms and inspired future aviators. Earhart disappeared during her attempt to circumnavigate the globe in 1937, leaving a lasting legacy.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Understanding the greenhouse effect is essential for environmental protection.
Who invented the vaccine for rabies? Louis Pasteur developed the first effective rabies vaccine in the late 19th century. His work demonstrated the principles of immunization and saved countless lives. Pasteur’s discoveries helped establish the field of microbiology and modern vaccines.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, limited the powers of the English monarchy and established principles of legal rights and due process. It influenced the development of constitutional law in many countries and is seen as a foundation for democracy. The Magna Carta’s legacy endures in legal systems worldwide.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes happen when tectonic plates shift or collide, releasing energy as seismic waves. This movement typically occurs along faults or plate boundaries and can cause significant damage. Earthquake monitoring and building codes help reduce risks in vulnerable regions.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty" in 1889. The ballet is known for its enchanting music and elaborate choreography, telling the story of Princess Aurora. "Sleeping Beauty" remains a staple of classical ballet and is performed by companies worldwide.
What is the role of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorb floodwaters, and provide habitats for a wide range of plants and animals. They help maintain biodiversity and protect against erosion. Wetland conservation is important for environmental balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick, with contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953. Their breakthrough revealed how genetic information is stored and transmitted in living organisms. The discovery has revolutionized biology and medicine.
What is the process of cloud formation in meteorology? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds in the sky. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather patterns.
What is the process of evaporation and where does it commonly occur? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into vapor, usually due to heat from the sun. It commonly occurs on the surface of oceans, lakes, and rivers, contributing to the water cycle. This process is vital for maintaining natural water distribution and regulating climate.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. The light bulb revolutionized society by enabling safe, reliable indoor lighting and extending productive hours after sunset. Edison's invention paved the way for modern electric power systems and transformed homes and cities.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify, attack, and remove harmful pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Maintaining a healthy level of white blood cells is essential for overall well-being.
Why do we experience different climates on Earth? Different climates occur because of variations in latitude, altitude, proximity to oceans, and atmospheric circulation. The tilt of Earth’s axis and its orbit around the sun also influence seasonal changes and temperature patterns. These factors create a diverse range of environments across the planet.
Who wrote the novel "War and Peace"? Leo Tolstoy wrote "War and Peace," published in 1869, which is regarded as one of the greatest novels of all time. The book explores themes of love, war, fate, and the human condition during the Napoleonic era in Russia. Tolstoy’s work continues to influence literature and philosophy worldwide.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators like bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling plants to produce fruits and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail to reproduce, threatening food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinator populations is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to sail solo around the world? Joshua Slocum became the first person to sail solo around the world in 1895–1898. He completed the journey in his boat, the Spray, overcoming storms, loneliness, and navigation challenges. Slocum’s adventure inspired countless sailors and remains a landmark achievement in maritime history.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Cyanobacteria use chlorophyll to absorb sunlight and convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. They are among the oldest organisms on Earth and played a crucial role in oxygenating the atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria continue to support aquatic food webs and global ecosystems.
Why do we need carbohydrates in our diet? Carbohydrates are a primary source of energy for the body, fueling brain function, physical activity, and metabolism. They are broken down into glucose, which cells use to produce ATP, the energy currency of life. Consuming the right balance of carbohydrates supports health and prevents fatigue.
Who composed "Clair de Lune"? Claude Debussy composed "Clair de Lune," one of his most famous piano pieces, in 1890. Its gentle melodies evoke images of moonlight and tranquility, making it a favorite among musicians and audiences alike. Debussy’s composition is a hallmark of Impressionist music.
What is the significance of the Grand Canyon? The Grand Canyon, located in Arizona, USA, is a vast geological formation carved by the Colorado River over millions of years. Its layered rocks reveal Earth’s ancient history and attract millions of visitors annually. The canyon is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a symbol of natural beauty and scientific discovery.
Who developed the theory of relativity? Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity in the early 20th century, fundamentally changing our understanding of space, time, and gravity. His Special and General Relativity theories have had profound impacts on physics, astronomy, and technology. Einstein’s work continues to inspire scientific advances and exploration.
What is the function of the liver in humans? The liver filters blood, metabolizes nutrients, stores vitamins, and detoxifies harmful substances. It also produces bile, which helps digest fats, and plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar levels. A healthy liver is vital for digestion, energy, and overall health.
Why do animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other organisms or objects, helping them avoid predators or attract prey. For example, some butterflies mimic toxic species, while certain insects resemble leaves or twigs. Mimicry increases survival by confusing predators and enhancing adaptation to the environment.
Who painted "Water Lilies"? Claude Monet painted "Water Lilies," a series of about 250 oil paintings created between 1897 and 1926. These works depict Monet’s flower garden in Giverny and are celebrated for their vibrant colors and impressionistic style. "Water Lilies" has influenced generations of artists and is displayed in museums worldwide.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands form when underwater volcanoes erupt, building up layers of lava and ash until they rise above the surface. Over time, repeated eruptions create landmasses that support unique ecosystems. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, which emerged from volcanic activity in the Pacific Ocean.
Who was the first female astronaut from the United States? Sally Ride became the first American woman to travel to space in 1983 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger. Her mission broke gender barriers in science and inspired generations of women to pursue careers in STEM. Ride’s achievements remain a milestone in the history of space exploration.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It significantly shortens shipping routes between Europe and Asia, boosting global trade and economic development. The canal is strategically important for international commerce and maritime navigation.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur due to Earth’s tilted axis and its orbit around the sun, causing variations in sunlight and temperature throughout the year. This tilt leads to changes in day length and weather patterns, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. The cycle of seasons shapes ecosystems and influences human activities.
Who invented the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440, revolutionizing the spread of information and literacy. The printing press made books affordable and accessible, fueling the Renaissance and scientific progress. Gutenberg’s invention is considered one of the most important in human history.
What is the function of the stomach in digestion? The stomach stores and mixes food, secretes digestive enzymes and acids, and breaks down proteins into smaller molecules. Its muscular walls churn food to help with chemical digestion before it moves into the intestines. Proper stomach function is essential for nutrient absorption and overall health.
Who wrote the play "The Tempest"? William Shakespeare wrote "The Tempest" around 1610–1611, weaving themes of magic, forgiveness, and power into a story set on a remote island. The play explores the relationship between Prospero, a sorcerer, and the other castaways. "The Tempest" remains one of Shakespeare’s most imaginative and frequently performed works.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support immense biodiversity, providing habitats for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fishing and tourism, and contribute to oxygen production. Preserving coral reefs is vital for the health of oceans and the people who rely on them.
What is the process of water desalination and why is it important? Water desalination is the technique of removing salts and minerals from seawater or brackish water to produce freshwater. The process is crucial in regions where natural freshwater sources are scarce, providing clean drinking water for millions of people. Methods include reverse osmosis and distillation, both of which require significant energy but offer solutions for drought-stricken areas.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932, piloting her plane from Newfoundland, Canada to Ireland. Her courageous feat broke records and inspired women around the world to pursue careers in aviation and other fields traditionally dominated by men. Earhart’s legacy continues to influence aviation and women’s history.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs are vital for marine biodiversity, providing habitats and shelter for thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and support fishing and tourism industries. The health of coral reefs is threatened by pollution, climate change, and overfishing, making their conservation a global priority.
Why do people celebrate the Lunar New Year? The Lunar New Year is celebrated in many East and Southeast Asian cultures as the beginning of a new year based on the lunar calendar. Traditions include family reunions, feasts, fireworks, and the exchange of red envelopes with money for good luck. The festival symbolizes renewal, prosperity, and the importance of family and community.
Who developed the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, developed the first programmable computer, the Z3, in 1941. The Z3 could perform floating-point arithmetic and was used for engineering calculations. Zuse’s work laid the foundation for modern computing and influenced the design of later electronic computers.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria, founded in ancient Egypt, was one of the largest and most influential libraries in history. It was a center of learning, attracting scholars from across the Mediterranean and housing countless scrolls on science, philosophy, and literature. The library’s destruction is often seen as a symbol of lost knowledge and the fragility of cultural heritage.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for their eggs and young, protecting them from predators and harsh weather. Nests can be simple or elaborate, made from twigs, grass, mud, or even feathers. The act of nest-building also promotes bonding between parent birds and helps ensure the survival of their offspring.
Who composed the musical "West Side Story"? Leonard Bernstein composed the music for "West Side Story," which premiered in 1957. The musical, with lyrics by Stephen Sondheim, reimagines Shakespeare’s "Romeo and Juliet" in the context of rival street gangs in New York City. Its groundbreaking fusion of classical, jazz, and Latin styles made it a classic of American musical theater.
What is the process of volcanic island formation? Volcanic islands are formed when underwater volcanoes erupt, layering lava and ash until they rise above the ocean’s surface. Over time, repeated eruptions build landmasses that become islands, such as the Hawaiian archipelago. These islands often have unique ecosystems and provide insights into geological processes.
Why do humans need iron in their diet? Iron is an essential mineral that enables the production of hemoglobin, which carries oxygen in the blood. Without enough iron, people can become fatigued and develop anemia, a condition marked by weakness and poor concentration. Dietary sources of iron include red meat, beans, spinach, and fortified cereals.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in 1912. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and later drifted apart. Wegener’s theory eventually led to the development of plate tectonics, revolutionizing earth sciences.
What is the importance of honeybees in agriculture? Honeybees are critical pollinators, supporting the production of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds. Their pollination increases crop yields and quality, making them indispensable for food security. Threats to honeybee populations, such as disease and pesticides, pose serious risks to global agriculture.
Why do we have blood types? Blood types are determined by specific antigens on the surface of red blood cells, which help the immune system distinguish between self and foreign cells. Understanding blood types is crucial for safe blood transfusions and organ transplants, as incompatible types can trigger immune reactions. The main blood groups are A, B, AB, and O, each with positive or negative Rh factors.
Who invented the printing press and why is it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the spread of information. The press allowed books and documents to be produced quickly and cheaply, making literacy and knowledge accessible to many. Gutenberg’s invention paved the way for the Renaissance, scientific progress, and the modern world.
What is the process of nitrogen fixation? Nitrogen fixation is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into compounds that plants can absorb and use for growth. This process is carried out by certain bacteria and is essential for the fertility of soils. Nitrogen fixation supports agriculture and natural ecosystems by providing a key nutrient for plant development.
Why do people use compasses for navigation? Compasses are used for navigation because they reliably indicate magnetic north, helping travelers determine direction in unfamiliar terrain. The invention of the compass enabled explorers to sail across oceans and discover new lands. Compasses remain a vital tool in hiking, boating, and orienteering.
Who painted "The Birth of Venus"? Sandro Botticelli painted "The Birth of Venus" in the late 15th century, depicting the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell. The painting is celebrated for its graceful lines, mythological subject, and symbolic meaning. "The Birth of Venus" is a highlight of Renaissance art and draws visitors to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.
What is the importance of wetlands in the ecosystem? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitat for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do people celebrate the Day of the Dead in Mexico? The Day of the Dead, or Día de los Muertos, is celebrated in Mexico to honor and remember deceased loved ones. Families create altars, offer food and gifts, and gather in cemeteries to celebrate life and memory. The holiday blends indigenous traditions and Catholic beliefs, emphasizing the cyclical nature of existence.
Who was the first African American woman in space? Dr. Mae Jemison became the first African American woman in space in 1992 aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour. She conducted scientific experiments and inspired many with her achievements in science and education. Jemison continues to advocate for STEM opportunities for underrepresented groups.
What is the process of rock formation? Rock formation occurs through three main processes: igneous rocks form from cooled lava or magma, sedimentary rocks develop from compacted sediments, and metamorphic rocks arise from existing rocks transformed by heat and pressure. These processes shape Earth’s landscapes and provide resources for human use. The rock cycle is fundamental to geology and planetary science.
Who composed the symphony "New World Symphony"? Antonín Dvořák composed the "New World Symphony" (Symphony No. 9) during his stay in the United States in the 1890s. The piece incorporates American musical themes and has become one of the most beloved orchestral works. Dvořák’s symphony reflects his admiration for American culture and landscapes.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic scripts, enabling scholars to translate the mysterious language. The Rosetta Stone unlocked centuries of history and is displayed in the British Museum.
What is the process of cellular respiration in animals? Cellular respiration is the process by which animals convert glucose and oxygen into energy, carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs primarily in the mitochondria of cells and provides the ATP needed for movement, growth, and other bodily functions. Cellular respiration is essential for survival and underpins all activity in living organisms.
Who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat? Sir Francis Chichester was the first person to circumnavigate the globe solo in a sailboat, completing his journey in 1967. He sailed the vessel Gipsy Moth IV, overcoming storms and challenging conditions. Chichester’s achievement demonstrated the possibilities of solo ocean navigation and inspired future sailors.
What is the significance of the Human Genome Project? The Human Genome Project was an international scientific effort to map all the genes in human DNA, completed in 2003. It provided insights into genetic diseases, human evolution, and medicine. The project has paved the way for advances in genomics, personalized medicine, and biotechnology.
Why do icebergs float in water? Icebergs float because solid ice is less dense than liquid water, causing buoyancy. Most of an iceberg’s mass is hidden below the surface, with only a small portion visible above water. This phenomenon is crucial for marine navigation and plays a role in ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the novel “War and Peace”? Leo Tolstoy wrote “War and Peace,” a monumental work of Russian literature published in the 1860s. The novel explores themes of love, war, family, and fate through a vast cast of characters set during the Napoleonic Wars. Tolstoy’s masterpiece is celebrated for its depth, realism, and philosophical insight.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs are diverse underwater ecosystems that support thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, provide food and income for millions, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who was the first woman to win the Fields Medal in mathematics? Maryam Mirzakhani became the first woman to win the Fields Medal in 2014 for her outstanding contributions to the geometry and dynamics of Riemann surfaces. Her groundbreaking work opened new areas of research and inspired women in mathematics worldwide. Mirzakhani’s legacy continues through her pioneering ideas.
What is the process of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria? Photosynthesis in cyanobacteria uses specialized pigments to capture sunlight, converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen. These ancient microbes played a key role in oxygenating Earth’s atmosphere billions of years ago. Cyanobacteria remain vital in aquatic ecosystems and biotechnology applications.
Why do volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries? Volcanoes form at tectonic plate boundaries because magma rises when plates move apart or one plate is forced under another. This process allows molten rock to reach the surface, creating volcanic eruptions. Plate boundaries are hotspots for geological activity and the formation of new land.
Who composed the opera "La Traviata"? Giuseppe Verdi composed "La Traviata" in 1853, telling the story of a doomed romance between Violetta and Alfredo. The opera is renowned for its emotional music and dramatic plot. "La Traviata" is one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who was the first astronaut to set foot on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first astronaut to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His famous words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind,” were broadcast to millions. Armstrong’s achievement marked a milestone in space exploration.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone in archaeology? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts—Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic—allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s written language. The stone is a symbol of linguistic and historical breakthroughs.
Why do some plants produce flowers? Plants produce flowers to facilitate reproduction through the attraction of pollinators and the production of seeds. Flowers contain male and female reproductive organs, enabling genetic diversity. The evolution of flowers has been crucial for the survival and spread of many plant species.
Who invented the first practical steam locomotive? George Stephenson invented the first practical steam locomotive, named "Locomotion No. 1," in 1825. His designs improved transportation, enabling rapid movement of goods and people. Stephenson’s work was fundamental to the development of the railway industry.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks into smaller particles by physical, chemical, or biological means. Physical weathering involves temperature changes and abrasion, while chemical weathering includes reactions with water and air. Weathering shapes landscapes and contributes to soil formation.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains controversial and influential in global history.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is essential for physical and mental restoration, memory consolidation, and immune system support. It helps regulate hormones, metabolism, and emotional health. Chronic sleep deprivation can lead to poor concentration, health problems, and reduced quality of life.
Who wrote the play “The Importance of Being Earnest”? Oscar Wilde wrote “The Importance of Being Earnest” in 1895. The play is a witty satire of Victorian society and explores themes of identity, marriage, and social conventions. Wilde’s humor and clever dialogue have made it a classic of English theater.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together, becoming visible as clouds. Cloud formation is essential for precipitation and influences weather patterns around the globe.
What is the process of evaporation and how does it affect the water cycle? Evaporation is the transformation of liquid water into water vapor due to heat, usually from the sun. This process moves water from surfaces like oceans and lakes into the atmosphere, forming clouds and eventually leading to precipitation. Evaporation is a key driver in the global water cycle, influencing weather and climate.
Who invented the first practical electric light bulb? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His light bulb was reliable, long-lasting, and safe for use in homes and businesses. This invention revolutionized society by making electric lighting widely accessible and changing the way people lived after dark.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system is responsible for transporting blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout the body. In animals, it consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is vital for survival, growth, and energy distribution.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight is essential for plants because it provides the energy needed for photosynthesis, the process by which they produce food. Through photosynthesis, plants convert light energy into chemical energy, creating glucose and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot thrive, and ecosystems would collapse.
Who wrote the novel “The Great Gatsby”? F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote “The Great Gatsby,” published in 1925. The novel explores themes of wealth, love, and the American Dream through the story of Jay Gatsby and his lavish parties. “The Great Gatsby” is considered a classic of American literature and remains widely studied and admired.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants, controlling floods, and replenishing groundwater. They support a rich diversity of plant and animal life and serve as breeding grounds for many species. Conserving wetlands is crucial for maintaining ecosystem balance and protecting biodiversity.
Who was the first person to climb Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 1953. Their successful ascent became a symbol of human endurance and exploration. Climbing Everest remains one of the greatest achievements in mountaineering history.
What is the greenhouse effect and why is it important? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Without it, Earth would be too cold for most living organisms. However, excess greenhouse gases can lead to global warming and climate change.
Why do animals form social groups? Animals form social groups for protection, finding food, raising offspring, and communicating. Living in groups can increase survival rates and provide opportunities for learning and cooperation. Examples include wolves hunting in packs and dolphins living in pods.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and vibrant colors express Van Gogh’s emotional intensity and creativity. “The Starry Night” is considered one of the most iconic works in art history.
What is the process of digestion in humans? Digestion is the breakdown of food into nutrients that can be absorbed and used by the body. It starts in the mouth with chewing and saliva, continues in the stomach and intestines with enzymes and acids, and ends with nutrient absorption and waste elimination. Proper digestion is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created the protocols for linking documents and sharing information through web browsers. The World Wide Web transformed communication, commerce, and education worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This remarkable behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy, such as solar, wind, and hydro power, is vital because it is sustainable and reduces reliance on fossil fuels. It helps combat climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions and supports energy independence. Investing in renewables is crucial for a cleaner and more resilient future.
What is the process of evaporation and why is it important for the water cycle? Evaporation is the process where liquid water transforms into water vapor due to heat from the sun. This process occurs on the surfaces of oceans, lakes, and rivers, returning water to the atmosphere. Evaporation is crucial for the water cycle, regulating climate and replenishing precipitation.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Everest? Sir Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay, a Sherpa from Nepal, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Everest on May 29, 1953. Their achievement marked a milestone in mountaineering history. The successful expedition inspired countless climbers and expanded understanding of high-altitude exploration.
What is the function of red blood cells in the human body? Red blood cells transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and carry carbon dioxide back to the lungs for exhalation. They contain hemoglobin, a protein that binds to oxygen, giving blood its red color. Healthy red blood cells are vital for energy, brain function, and overall well-being.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microbes. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
What is the significance of the Silk Road? The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes connecting Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. It facilitated the exchange of goods, ideas, religions, and cultures across continents. The Silk Road played a major role in shaping world history and fostering cross-cultural interaction.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the function of the liver in the human body? The liver processes nutrients, detoxifies harmful substances, produces bile for digestion, and stores energy in the form of glycogen. It plays a crucial role in metabolism and immune function. Proper liver health is essential for overall well-being.
Who wrote the novel "Don Quixote"? Miguel de Cervantes, a Spanish author, wrote "Don Quixote," published in two parts in 1605 and 1615. The novel follows the adventures of an idealistic knight and is considered one of the greatest works in world literature. "Don Quixote" has influenced countless writers and remains widely read today.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from the male parts of a flower to the female parts, enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and agricultural crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted "Girl with a Pearl Earring"? Johannes Vermeer, a Dutch Baroque painter, created "Girl with a Pearl Earring" around 1665. The painting is famous for its enigmatic expression and masterful use of light and color. It is often called the "Mona Lisa of the North" and remains one of Vermeer’s most celebrated works.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who composed the ballet "Swan Lake"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Swan Lake" in 1876. The ballet tells the story of Odette, a princess transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer, and is renowned for its beautiful music and choreography. "Swan Lake" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation is the process by which water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This transition occurs when warm, moist air rises and encounters cooler temperatures at higher altitudes. Condensation is crucial for creating precipitation and maintaining the Earth’s water cycle.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel into space in 1963 aboard Vostok 6. Her journey lasted almost three days and proved that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates all bodily activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, and cognitive functions. Proper functioning of the nervous system is vital for survival and everyday life.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate during winter to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows down significantly, allowing them to use stored body fat for energy. This adaptation is common in mammals such as bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan, as he grows up and pursues his dreams, encountering a host of memorable characters along the way. Dickens’ work is celebrated for its rich storytelling and social commentary.
What is the significance of the invention of the wheel? The invention of the wheel revolutionized transportation, agriculture, and technology by enabling the movement of goods and people with greater ease. Wheels are essential components of vehicles, machinery, and countless devices. This simple yet profound invention played a key role in the development of civilization.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents were once joined together in a supercontinent called Pangaea and gradually moved apart. Although controversial at first, his ideas laid the groundwork for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo as they develop from larvae to adults. It involves distinct stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with dramatic changes in form and function. For example, caterpillars become butterflies through metamorphosis, adapting to different environments and roles.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Plants need sunlight to perform photosynthesis, the process that converts light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose. Sunlight provides the energy required to combine carbon dioxide and water, producing food and releasing oxygen. Without sunlight, plants cannot grow or sustain life on Earth.
Who painted the mural "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" in the late 15th century on the wall of the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during the famous biblical meal and is renowned for its composition and emotional depth. "The Last Supper" remains one of the most iconic works of Renaissance art.
What is the importance of recycling for the environment? Recycling reduces waste, conserves natural resources, and lowers pollution levels by transforming used materials into new products. It helps save energy and decreases the need for raw material extraction, protecting ecosystems. Recycling is a key practice for sustainable living and environmental protection.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and enchanting story have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies and is beloved by audiences of all ages.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces enzymes that help break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon, hormones that regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and metabolic health.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and favorable climate conditions. Migration often involves navigating across continents, using landmarks and the Earth's magnetic field for guidance. This behavior is vital for survival and maintaining healthy bird populations.
Who invented the first practical electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first practical electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a reliable source of continuous electric current, paving the way for modern electrical devices. Volta’s work is honored in the unit of electric potential, the volt.
What is the process of erosion and its effects on landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and transports soil from one place to another. While erosion is a natural process, human activities can accelerate it, leading to environmental challenges.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The tragedy tells the story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. Shakespeare’s play is one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, help prevent flooding, and provide habitat for a wide variety of plants and animals. They support biodiversity and contribute to the health of surrounding ecosystems. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who discovered the law of electromagnetic induction? Michael Faraday discovered the law of electromagnetic induction in 1831, showing that a changing magnetic field can produce an electric current. This principle is the foundation for electric generators, transformers, and many modern technologies. Faraday’s experiments greatly advanced the understanding of electricity and magnetism.
What is the significance of the Apollo 11 mission? The Apollo 11 mission, launched by NASA in 1969, was the first to land humans on the Moon. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the lunar surface, while Michael Collins piloted the command module. The mission represented a major achievement in space exploration and inspired generations worldwide.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for the water cycle because it leads to precipitation, returning water to Earth's surface. Condensation also helps regulate atmospheric temperature and humidity.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria using a microscope? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first to observe bacteria under a microscope in the late 17th century. His homemade lenses allowed him to see tiny organisms he called "animalcules." Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries laid the foundation for microbiology and transformed our understanding of life.
What is the function of platelets in human blood? Platelets are small cell fragments in blood that help clot wounds and prevent excessive bleeding. When an injury occurs, platelets gather at the site and form a plug, releasing chemicals that trigger clotting. This process is vital for healing and protecting the body from infection.
Why do deserts have extreme temperatures? Deserts experience extreme temperatures because they have little moisture in the air to buffer heat changes. During the day, the sun rapidly heats the surface, but at night, the lack of clouds allows heat to escape quickly. This results in very hot days and cold nights in many desert regions.
Who wrote the novel "The Odyssey"? "The Odyssey" is an ancient Greek epic poem attributed to Homer, believed to have been composed in the 8th century BCE. It tells the story of Odysseus’s long and perilous journey home after the Trojan War. The poem explores themes of adventure, loyalty, and perseverance and remains influential in literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide habitats for diverse wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Protecting wetlands is crucial for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She is known for her novel "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which combines adventure and educational themes. Lagerlöf’s work is celebrated for its vivid storytelling and impact on Swedish literature.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in Earth's climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in the atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping Earth warm enough to support life. Without it, the planet would be too cold for most living organisms. However, human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change.
Why do birds migrate long distances? Birds migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions. Migration helps them survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Many species follow specific routes and rely on instinct, environmental cues, and learned behaviors.
Who invented the first vaccine and what disease did it target? Edward Jenner developed the first vaccine in 1796 to protect against smallpox. He used material from cowpox blisters to immunize people, pioneering the concept of vaccination. Jenner’s discovery laid the foundation for modern immunology and led to the eventual eradication of smallpox.
What is the role of the pancreas in digestion? The pancreas produces digestive enzymes that break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats in the small intestine. It also releases insulin and glucagon to regulate blood sugar levels. Proper pancreatic function is essential for nutrient absorption and energy management.
Who painted "The Starry Night"? Vincent van Gogh painted "The Starry Night" in 1889 while he was living in an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The swirling sky and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and innovative style. Today, the painting is considered one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the process of erosion? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and affect ecosystems.
Who was the first female astronaut in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa. The canal is crucial for global trade and has shaped international relations.
Why do we use passwords for online accounts? Passwords protect online accounts from unauthorized access by verifying a user’s identity. They help keep personal information, financial data, and private communications safe. Strong, unique passwords are essential for safeguarding digital security and preventing cybercrime.
Who wrote the play "Waiting for Godot"? Samuel Beckett wrote "Waiting for Godot," first performed in 1953. The play is a landmark of absurdist theater, exploring themes of meaning, time, and human existence through two characters waiting for someone named Godot. Beckett’s work has influenced modern drama and philosophical thought.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? Kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are essential for detoxification and homeostasis.
Who was the first person to propose the theory of continental drift? Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist and geophysicist, proposed the theory of continental drift in the early 20th century. He suggested that continents once formed a single landmass called Pangaea and gradually drifted apart. Although controversial at first, Wegener’s ideas paved the way for modern plate tectonics.
What is the process of fermentation and its uses? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation insects undergo from their juvenile form to adulthood, involving distinct stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, undergoing dramatic changes in structure and function. This process allows insects to exploit different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world? Sir Robin Knox-Johnston became the first person to sail solo nonstop around the world in 1969 aboard his boat "Suhaili." His journey took 312 days and overcame severe storms and isolation. Knox-Johnston's achievement is celebrated as a monumental milestone in maritime history.
What is the significance of the Library of Alexandria? The Library of Alexandria was one of the greatest centers of learning in the ancient world, housing thousands of manuscripts and attracting scholars from many cultures. Its destruction resulted in the loss of invaluable knowledge and records of ancient civilizations. The library remains a symbol of the importance of preserving and sharing human knowledge.
Why do deserts form on Earth? Deserts form due to factors such as low precipitation, high evaporation rates, and geographical barriers like mountains that block moisture-laden winds. Many deserts occur at latitudes where dry air sinks and inhibits cloud formation. Deserts play a role in Earth's climate and are home to unique adaptations in plants and animals.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who navigates social class, ambition, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’s work is renowned for its rich characters and exploration of themes like justice, redemption, and love.
What is the importance of mangrove forests? Mangrove forests protect coastlines from erosion and storm surges, provide habitats for countless marine and terrestrial species, and support local fisheries. Their complex root systems trap sediments and filter pollutants, maintaining water quality. Mangroves are increasingly recognized for their role in carbon storage and climate change mitigation.
Who invented the safety elevator and how did it change architecture? Elisha Otis invented the safety elevator in 1852, introducing a braking mechanism that prevented the cab from falling if the cable broke. This innovation made it feasible to construct taller buildings, leading to the development of skyscrapers. Otis’s invention transformed urban landscapes and modern architecture.
What is the process of condensation in the water cycle? Condensation occurs when water vapor in the air cools and changes into liquid droplets, forming clouds. This process is essential for precipitation, as condensed water eventually falls as rain or snow. Condensation helps regulate Earth's temperature and is a key stage in the water cycle.
Who was the first female Nobel laureate in literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. Her works include "The Wonderful Adventures of Nils," which is celebrated for its imaginative storytelling and depiction of Swedish folklore. Lagerlöf paved the way for women writers in international literature.
What is the significance of the Mayan calendar? The Mayan calendar was a sophisticated system used by the Maya civilization to track time, predict astronomical events, and determine religious ceremonies. It included several cycles, such as the Haab’ and Tzolk’in, and was more accurate than many contemporary Western calendars. The calendar reflects the advanced mathematical and astronomical knowledge of the Maya.
Why do volcanoes create fertile soils? Volcanic eruptions deposit minerals and nutrients onto the land, enriching the soil and making it highly fertile. As volcanic rocks weather and decompose, they release elements like potassium and phosphorus. Many agricultural regions around the world benefit from soil formed by past volcanic activity.
Who composed the opera "Carmen"? Georges Bizet composed the opera "Carmen," which premiered in 1875. The opera tells the story of a passionate and tragic love affair between Carmen, a free-spirited woman, and Don José, a soldier. "Carmen" is celebrated for its memorable melodies and dramatic intensity, making it one of the most popular operas ever written.
What is the process of erosion and why is it important? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. This process shapes landscapes, creates valleys, and transports nutrients across ecosystems. While erosion is a natural force, excessive human-induced erosion can lead to loss of fertile land and environmental problems.
Who discovered the structure of benzene and its significance? August Kekulé, a German chemist, proposed the ring structure of benzene in 1865. His insight solved a long-standing mystery in organic chemistry and paved the way for the development of aromatic compounds. Benzene’s structure underpins much of modern chemistry, including the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and materials.
What is the importance of coral reefs? Coral reefs support a vast diversity of marine life, protect shorelines from erosion, and provide resources for fishing and tourism. They are sometimes called the "rainforests of the sea" due to their biodiversity. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change, pollution, and overfishing, making their conservation critical.
Who was the first person to run a mile in under four minutes? Roger Bannister, a British athlete, became the first person to run a mile in under four minutes on May 6, 1954. His time was 3 minutes, 59.4 seconds, breaking a psychological barrier in athletics. Bannister’s achievement inspired runners worldwide and is considered one of the greatest feats in sports history.
What is the process of plate tectonics and its impact on geography? Plate tectonics is the movement of large plates that make up Earth’s crust, driven by heat from the planet’s interior. This movement causes earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, mountain formation, and the drifting of continents. Plate tectonics continually reshape Earth’s geography and influence natural disasters.
Who painted "The Night Watch"? Rembrandt van Rijn, a Dutch master, painted "The Night Watch" in 1642. The painting is famous for its dramatic use of light and shadow, as well as its dynamic composition of a city militia. "The Night Watch" is a highlight of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and a symbol of Dutch Golden Age art.
What is the function of the nervous system in animals? The nervous system in animals controls and coordinates actions by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It consists of the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, enabling responses to external stimuli, movement, and thought. Proper functioning of the nervous system is essential for survival, behavior, and adaptation.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her flight from Newfoundland to Ireland took nearly 15 hours and demonstrated both her courage and skill as a pilot. Earhart’s accomplishment advanced the role of women in aviation and remains a historic milestone.
What is the process of condensation and why is it important? Condensation is the process where water vapor in the air cools and changes back into liquid water, forming droplets. This typically occurs when humid air encounters a cooler surface or temperature, creating dew, fog, or clouds. Condensation is essential in the water cycle, as it allows for the formation of precipitation and helps regulate Earth’s climate.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing voice communication over long distances for the first time. The device revolutionized both personal and business interactions, making real-time conversations possible across cities and countries. Bell’s invention laid the foundation for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the function of the circulatory system in the human body? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body using blood vessels. The heart pumps blood to all tissues, maintaining cellular health and homeostasis. A healthy circulatory system is essential for energy, immunity, and overall well-being.
Why do seasons change during the year? Seasons change because of Earth’s axial tilt and its orbit around the sun. As the planet moves, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, causing shifts in temperature and daylight hours. These changes influence plant growth, animal behavior, and human activities across the globe.
Who wrote the play "Romeo and Juliet"? William Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet" in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers from feuding families and explores themes of love, fate, and conflict. "Romeo and Juliet" remains one of the most famous and frequently performed works in world literature.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater supplies. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Conservation of wetlands is vital for ecological balance and human well-being.
Who painted the "Starry Night" and why is it significant? Vincent van Gogh painted "Starry Night" in 1889, capturing swirling skies over a quiet town. The work is celebrated for its emotional intensity, bold colors, and innovative brushwork. "Starry Night" is considered a masterpiece of Post-Impressionist art and is studied and admired worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it affect the planet? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Understanding and managing the greenhouse effect is crucial for environmental sustainability.
Why do animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission. His historic step was broadcast worldwide, marking a major milestone in space exploration. Armstrong’s achievement inspired generations and expanded humanity’s understanding of the cosmos.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the importance of education for society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who composed the symphony “Ode to Joy”? Ludwig van Beethoven composed “Ode to Joy” as the choral finale of his Ninth Symphony, completed in 1824. The melody celebrates universal brotherhood and joy, and has become an anthem for peace and unity. “Ode to Joy” is recognized worldwide and used in various cultural and political events.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from the soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microbes to promote healthy growth. Healthy roots are vital for plant stability and productivity.
Why do some animals migrate long distances? Animals migrate long distances to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better climate conditions. Migration can span thousands of kilometers, as seen in monarch butterflies, whales, and birds. This behavior helps species survive seasonal changes and is critical for maintaining healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change the world? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the process of weathering in geology? Weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals into smaller particles through physical, chemical, and biological processes. Physical weathering includes freeze-thaw cycles and abrasion, while chemical weathering involves reactions with water and air. Weathering helps form soil and shapes landscapes over time.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
What is the role of DNA in living organisms? DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, contains the genetic instructions that determine the development, functioning, and reproduction of all living things. It carries information that is passed down from parents to offspring, ensuring continuity of traits. DNA is essential for cellular processes and is the basis of heredity and evolution.
Who was the first person to run a marathon in under two hours? Eliud Kipchoge, a Kenyan athlete, became the first person to run a marathon in under two hours in 2019 during the Ineos 1:59 Challenge. His time was 1:59:40, although it does not count as an official world record due to controlled race conditions. Kipchoge's achievement is celebrated as a milestone in distance running.
What is the importance of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands act as natural water filters, absorbing pollutants and replenishing groundwater. They provide critical habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. The conservation of wetlands is essential for maintaining healthy ecosystems and protecting water resources.
Why do humans need sleep? Sleep is vital for physical and mental health, enabling the body to repair tissues, consolidate memories, and regulate hormones. It helps maintain immune function and emotional well-being. Chronic lack of sleep can lead to fatigue, poor concentration, and increased risk of health issues.
Who composed the opera “Carmen”? Georges Bizet composed the opera “Carmen,” which premiered in 1875. The story is set in Spain and follows the passionate and tragic tale of Carmen, a free-spirited woman. “Carmen” is renowned for its memorable melodies and has become one of the most popular operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it important? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process provides the primary source of energy for most living organisms and helps maintain atmospheric oxygen levels. Without photosynthesis, life on Earth would not be possible.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature? Selma Lagerlöf, a Swedish author, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1909. She was recognized for her storytelling and contributions to Swedish literature. Lagerlöf’s works are celebrated for their imagination and deep humanity.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was key to deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text written in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to unlock the secrets of Egypt’s language and history. The Rosetta Stone is a symbol of linguistic and archaeological breakthroughs.
Why do birds migrate? Birds migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, and better weather conditions, often traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh climates. This behavior is guided by instinct, environmental cues, and sometimes learned routes.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who painted “The Starry Night”? Vincent van Gogh painted “The Starry Night” in 1889 while staying at an asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. The painting’s swirling skies and bright stars reflect Van Gogh’s emotional state and creative genius. “Starry Night” is celebrated as one of the most iconic works of modern art.
What is the function of the pancreas in the human body? The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest food and hormones like insulin that regulate blood sugar levels. It plays a key role in converting food into energy and maintaining metabolic balance. Dysfunction of the pancreas can lead to conditions such as diabetes or pancreatitis.
Why do we need renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources like solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete the Earth’s resources. They help reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, combating climate change. Renewable energy also supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of India? Indira Gandhi became the first female prime minister of India in 1966. She served for over fifteen years, implementing bold economic and political policies and strengthening India’s international presence. Gandhi remains a significant figure in Indian and global history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the microscope and how did it change science? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and Robert Hooke made significant contributions to the invention and development of the microscope in the 17th century. The microscope allowed scientists to observe cells, bacteria, and other tiny organisms for the first time. This breakthrough revolutionized biology and medicine by revealing the complexity of life.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
What is the function of the circulatory system in humans? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body via blood. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis and support cellular function. A healthy circulatory system is essential for overall vitality and well-being.
Who was the first woman to travel to space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman to travel to space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating that women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and paved the way for future female astronauts.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215 in England, was one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional law and individual freedoms, influencing democratic governments worldwide. Its principles remain relevant in contemporary legal systems.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold and food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. During hibernation, their body temperature drops, and bodily functions decrease to minimal levels. This adaptation allows them to endure harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” first published in 1861. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan who encounters love, loss, and personal growth as he moves through Victorian society. Dickens’ novel is celebrated for its vivid characters and exploration of social class and morality.
What is the process of pollination and why is it important for plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops humans rely on.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, allowing people to transmit voices over electrical wires. His invention revolutionized communication by making real-time conversation possible over long distances. The telephone paved the way for the development of modern telecommunication networks.
What is the importance of clean air for health and the environment? Clean air is vital for respiratory health, reducing the risk of diseases such as asthma and lung cancer. It also supports healthy ecosystems and prevents damage to crops, forests, and bodies of water. Maintaining clean air is essential for public health and environmental sustainability.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong plays an important role in social bonding, reproduction, and ecological balance.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria using a microscope in the late 17th century. His discoveries opened the door to microbiology and the study of microscopic life. Leeuwenhoek’s work revolutionized medicine and our understanding of disease.
What is the greenhouse effect and its role in climate change? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gas concentrations, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is critical for environmental sustainability.
Who composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet “Sleeping Beauty,” which premiered in 1890. The ballet is renowned for its beautiful melodies, enchanting story, and elaborate choreography. “Sleeping Beauty” remains a staple of classical ballet repertoires worldwide.
What is the function of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell because they generate energy in the form of ATP through cellular respiration. They convert nutrients from food into usable energy needed for growth, movement, and cellular activities. Healthy mitochondria are crucial for overall cellular function and organismal health.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples during their final meal together, capturing a moment of intense emotion and drama. “The Last Supper” is celebrated as a masterpiece of Renaissance art and religious symbolism.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, or ice. It can create valleys, cliffs, and other landforms by transporting soil and rock from one place to another. Erosion is a key factor in shaping Earth’s surface over time.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping British politics. Thatcher’s leadership left a lasting legacy in both national and global history.
What is the importance of biodiversity in ecosystems? Biodiversity refers to the variety of living organisms in an ecosystem, including plants, animals, and microorganisms. High biodiversity supports healthy ecosystems, resilience to environmental changes, and provides resources such as food and medicine. Protecting biodiversity is crucial for maintaining ecological balance and human well-being.
Why do glaciers retreat and what does it mean for the planet? Glaciers retreat when melting outpaces snowfall due to rising global temperatures, shrinking their mass and surface area. This contributes to sea level rise and affects freshwater supplies for many regions. Glacier retreat is a visible indicator of climate change and can disrupt ecosystems and human societies.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it revolutionize medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo distinct changes in form and structure throughout their life cycle. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources at each stage, contributing to their evolutionary success.
Who was the first person to invent a working electric battery? Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist, invented the first true electric battery known as the voltaic pile in 1800. His invention provided a continuous source of electric current and sparked new experiments in electricity. Volta’s work laid the foundation for modern electrical technology and devices.
What is the role of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It consists of the heart, blood vessels, and blood, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is crucial for energy production, growth, and overall health.
Why do we experience seasons? Seasons occur because Earth’s axis is tilted relative to its orbital plane around the sun. As the planet travels through its orbit, different regions receive varying amounts of sunlight, resulting in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. These seasonal changes affect weather patterns, plant growth, and animal behavior.
Who wrote the novel "Wuthering Heights"? Emily Brontë wrote "Wuthering Heights," which was published in 1847. The novel is known for its dark, passionate story of love and revenge set on the Yorkshire moors. Brontë’s only novel has become a classic of English literature, admired for its complex characters and emotional intensity.
What is the function of enzymes in biological systems? Enzymes are proteins that act as catalysts, speeding up chemical reactions in living organisms. They are essential for processes such as digestion, energy production, DNA replication, and cell signaling. Without enzymes, most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to sustain life.
Who was the first woman to travel into space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Her achievement paved the way for future female astronauts and inspired generations.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It houses an extraordinary variety of plants and animals and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the global climate. The Amazon is also vital for indigenous cultures and biodiversity conservation.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe and secure place for their eggs and young. Nests protect against predators and harsh weather and sometimes help regulate temperature and humidity. The construction and location of nests vary greatly among bird species, reflecting their unique needs and behaviors.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information through linked documents accessible via browsers. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge across the globe.
What is the process of fossilization? Fossilization is the process by which the remains or traces of living organisms are preserved in sedimentary rock over millions of years. It often begins with rapid burial, followed by mineral replacement or casting. Fossils are crucial for understanding past life and the history of Earth.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the “Iron Lady,” she served for over a decade, implementing economic reforms and shaping modern British politics. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in global history.
What is the role of chlorophyll in plants? Chlorophyll is the pigment in plants that absorbs sunlight, allowing photosynthesis to occur. It enables plants to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen, providing energy for growth. Chlorophyll also gives plants their characteristic green color.
Why do volcanoes erupt? Volcanoes erupt when magma from beneath Earth's crust rises due to pressure and escapes through openings in the surface. This can be triggered by tectonic plate movements or the accumulation of gases. Eruptions shape landscapes, create new landforms, and impact climate and ecosystems.
Who composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "The Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890 in Saint Petersburg, Russia. The ballet is celebrated for its enchanting music, elegant choreography, and fairy-tale story. It is a staple of classical ballet and performed by companies worldwide.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts the moment Jesus announces that one of his disciples will betray him. "The Last Supper" is renowned for its composition, emotional intensity, and artistic innovation.
What is the significance of the Suez Canal? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt that connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. Opened in 1869, it allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, greatly shortening trade routes. The canal remains vital for global commerce and geopolitics.
Why do humans need vitamins? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Most vitamins cannot be produced by the body and must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the play "Death of a Salesman"? Arthur Miller wrote "Death of a Salesman," which premiered in 1949. The play explores themes of the American Dream, family, and personal failure through the life of Willy Loman, a struggling salesman. Miller’s work is regarded as a classic of American theater and continues to be widely studied and performed.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is a biological process in which insects undergo a dramatic transformation from one stage of life to another. It typically includes stages such as egg, larva, pupa, and adult, with each stage having distinct forms and behaviors. This adaptation allows insects to exploit different environments and resources throughout their lifecycle.
Who was the first person to invent the telephone? Alexander Graham Bell is credited with inventing the first practical telephone in 1876. His invention allowed people to communicate over long distances using electrical signals, revolutionizing global communication. Bell’s telephone paved the way for the modern telecommunications industry.
What is the importance of coral reefs in marine environments? Coral reefs are among the most diverse and productive ecosystems in the world, supporting thousands of species of fish, invertebrates, and plants. They protect coastlines from erosion and provide food and income for millions of people. Coral reefs are also important for medicine and tourism, but they are threatened by pollution and climate change.
Why do humans need vitamins in their diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that the body requires for normal growth, development, and metabolism. They play crucial roles in processes such as immune function, energy production, and cell repair. Since the human body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food to prevent deficiencies and maintain health.
Who composed the ballet “The Nutcracker”? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed “The Nutcracker,” which premiered in 1892. The ballet is based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann and tells the tale of a young girl's magical adventure with a nutcracker prince. “The Nutcracker” is especially popular during the holiday season and is performed by ballet companies around the world.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys are organs that filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain the body’s fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for overall health and detoxification.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote “Great Expectations,” published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who dreams of rising above his humble beginnings and becoming a gentleman. Dickens explores themes of social class, ambition, and personal growth, making it one of his most celebrated works.
What is the greenhouse effect and how does it impact Earth’s climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat from the sun, keeping the planet warm enough to support life. Human activities have increased the concentration of greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions is crucial for mitigating environmental impacts.
Why do some animals hibernate during winter? Hibernation is a survival strategy used by certain animals to conserve energy during periods of cold and food scarcity. During hibernation, animals lower their metabolic rates and body temperatures, often remaining inactive for weeks or months. This allows them to survive harsh conditions until resources become available again.
Who invented the printing press and why was it significant? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press around 1440 in Germany. The printing press enabled the mass production of books and other written materials, greatly increasing access to information. This technological breakthrough helped spread literacy, science, and ideas, fueling the Renaissance and shaping modern society.
What is the role of wetlands in the environment? Wetlands serve as natural water filters, removing pollutants and improving water quality. They provide habitat for many species, help prevent flooding, and support biodiversity. Wetlands are essential for maintaining ecological balance and are a focus of conservation efforts worldwide.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is famous for its enigmatic smile and masterful technique, making it one of the most recognized artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors each year.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This takes place mainly in the mitochondria and is essential for powering bodily functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who wrote the play “Romeo and Juliet”? William Shakespeare wrote “Romeo and Juliet” in the late 16th century. The play tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose families are embroiled in conflict. Its themes of love, fate, and societal pressure continue to resonate with audiences today.
What is renewable energy and why is it important? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished and do not deplete Earth’s resources. It helps reduce pollution, combat climate change, and supports sustainable development. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a cleaner, safer future.
Who discovered penicillin and how did it change medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. Penicillin led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. This discovery is considered one of the most important breakthroughs in medical history.
What is the process of pollination in plants? Pollination is the transfer of pollen from the male part of a flower (anther) to the female part (stigma), enabling fertilization and seed production. This process is often carried out by insects, birds, wind, or water. Pollination is essential for the reproduction of flowering plants and the production of many crops.
Who invented the World Wide Web and what was its impact? Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers, making it easy to access and exchange knowledge. The Web revolutionized communication, commerce, and education, transforming how people live and work.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports nutrients, oxygen, and hormones to cells throughout the body and removes waste products like carbon dioxide. It includes the heart, blood, and blood vessels, working together to maintain homeostasis. Efficient circulation is essential for energy, growth, and overall health.
Who invented the first programmable computer? Konrad Zuse, a German engineer, built the Z3 in 1941, widely considered the first programmable, fully automatic digital computer. The Z3 used binary arithmetic and floating-point calculations, laying the groundwork for modern computing. Zuse’s innovations influenced the development of computers worldwide.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta in legal history? The Magna Carta, signed in 1215, was a charter that limited the power of the English king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It is seen as a foundational document for modern democracy and constitutional law. Its principles influenced legal systems and the development of human rights.
Why do plants need sunlight to grow? Sunlight provides the energy required for photosynthesis, the process by which plants make food from carbon dioxide and water. Without sunlight, plants cannot produce the glucose needed for growth, repair, and reproduction. Sunlight also influences flowering, seed production, and overall plant health.
Who wrote the novel "Great Expectations"? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," first published in 1861. The novel follows the life of Pip, an orphan who faces social and personal challenges as he rises in society. Dickens’s work explores themes of ambition, love, and redemption, and remains a classic of English literature.
What is the purpose of the immune system in humans? The immune system protects the body from infections and diseases by identifying and destroying harmful invaders like bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs, including white blood cells and antibodies. A strong immune system is vital for survival and recovery.
Who was the first person to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro? Hans Meyer, a German geographer, and Ludwig Purtscheller, an Austrian mountaineer, were the first to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro in 1889. Their successful ascent opened the way for scientific studies and tourism in the region. Kilimanjaro remains a popular destination for climbers from around the world.
What is the process of photosynthesis and its importance for life? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process creates the food and oxygen that sustain nearly all life on Earth. Without photosynthesis, ecosystems would collapse, and most living organisms would not survive.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet,” which premiered in 1938. Based on Shakespeare’s tragic play, the ballet is known for its dramatic music and expressive choreography. Prokofiev’s score has become one of the most beloved works in the ballet repertoire.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world and is home to an incredible diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. It plays a key role in regulating the global climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen. The Amazon is also a source of medicines and supports unique ecosystems.
Who invented the telephone and how did it change communication? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling people to transmit speech over long distances for the first time. His invention revolutionized personal and business communication, connecting people and places across the globe. The telephone paved the way for modern telecommunications, including mobile phones and the internet.
What is the significance of the Rosetta Stone? The Rosetta Stone, discovered in Egypt in 1799, was crucial for deciphering ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs. It contains the same text in three scripts: Greek, Demotic, and hieroglyphic, allowing scholars to understand the language and history of ancient Egypt. The Stone is a symbol of breakthroughs in archaeology and linguistics.
Why do animals hibernate during winter? Animals hibernate to conserve energy and survive periods when food is scarce and temperatures are low. During hibernation, their metabolism slows, and body temperature drops, allowing them to live off stored fat. Hibernation is a common adaptation in mammals like bears, bats, and hedgehogs.
Who painted “The Last Supper”? Leonardo da Vinci painted “The Last Supper” between 1495 and 1498 in Milan, Italy. The mural depicts Jesus and his disciples at the moment he announces that one will betray him. “The Last Supper” is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and artistic innovation.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants in the soil and absorb water and nutrients needed for growth. They also store food and interact with soil organisms to support plant health. A strong root system is essential for stability, resilience, and productivity in plants.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her courageous flight demonstrated the possibilities of aviation for women and inspired generations. Earhart’s legacy endures as a symbol of adventure and perseverance.
What is the importance of renewable energy sources? Renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydro power are sustainable and do not deplete Earth's resources. They help combat climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and pollution. Investing in renewables supports energy independence and creates new jobs.
Who composed the opera “The Marriage of Figaro”? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed “The Marriage of Figaro,” which premiered in 1786. The opera is a comedic masterpiece that explores themes of love, class, and mistaken identity. Mozart’s music and the witty libretto have made it one of the most beloved operas in history.
What is the process of erosion and how does it shape landscapes? Erosion is the gradual removal of soil, rock, or sediment by wind, water, or ice. This natural process shapes valleys, coastlines, and mountains over time. Erosion influences soil fertility, ecosystem health, and the formation of geological features.
What is the function of the circulatory system in animals? The circulatory system transports blood, nutrients, oxygen, and waste products throughout an animal’s body. It helps regulate temperature and maintain homeostasis. This system is essential for survival, supporting organs and tissues by ensuring they receive the resources they need.
Who invented the telephone and how did it impact society? Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876, enabling real-time voice communication over long distances. The telephone revolutionized how people connected, transforming business, personal relationships, and emergency response. Its invention paved the way for modern telecommunications and the global networks we rely on today.
What is the significance of the Declaration of Independence? The Declaration of Independence, adopted in 1776, marked the American colonies’ formal separation from British rule. It articulated the principles of liberty, equality, and self-government, inspiring movements for democracy worldwide. The document remains a cornerstone of American identity and political philosophy.
Why do earthquakes occur? Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates in Earth’s crust shift, releasing energy as seismic waves. These sudden movements often happen along faults or plate boundaries. Earthquakes can cause significant damage to structures and landscapes and are monitored to improve safety and preparedness.
Who was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean? Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean in 1932. Her daring journey helped break gender barriers in aviation and encouraged women to pursue careers in science and exploration. Earhart remains a symbol of courage and determination.
What is the process of cellular respiration? Cellular respiration is the process by which cells convert glucose and oxygen into energy (ATP), carbon dioxide, and water. This occurs in the mitochondria and is essential for powering cell functions. Cellular respiration supports movement, growth, and survival in all living organisms.
Who painted "The Last Supper"? Leonardo da Vinci painted "The Last Supper" between 1495 and 1498 on the wall of a monastery in Milan. The masterpiece depicts Jesus with his disciples and is celebrated for its composition, emotion, and innovative techniques. "The Last Supper" is one of the most recognized and studied artworks in history.
What is the importance of renewable energy? Renewable energy comes from sources like sunlight, wind, and water that are naturally replenished. It reduces reliance on fossil fuels, lowers pollution, and helps combat climate change. Investing in renewable energy is crucial for a sustainable and clean future.
Why do some animals hibernate? Animals hibernate to survive periods of cold or food scarcity by slowing their metabolism and conserving energy. Commonly, mammals like bears and bats enter hibernation during winter months. Hibernation allows these animals to endure harsh conditions until resources become plentiful again.
Who was the first person to propose heliocentrism? Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish astronomer, proposed the heliocentric model in the 16th century, placing the Sun at the center of the solar system. His revolutionary theory challenged the prevailing geocentric view and laid the groundwork for modern astronomy. Copernicus’ work sparked the Scientific Revolution.
What is the role of the digestive system in humans? The digestive system breaks down food into nutrients that the body can absorb and use for energy, growth, and repair. It includes organs such as the mouth, stomach, intestines, and liver, each playing a specific role. Digestion ensures that essential vitamins, minerals, and energy reach every cell in the body.
Who composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet”? Sergei Prokofiev composed the ballet “Romeo and Juliet” in 1935, based on Shakespeare’s tragic play. The music is known for its dramatic intensity and memorable melodies, and the ballet is performed by companies worldwide. Prokofiev’s work is celebrated for capturing the emotion and conflict of the story.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Why do we need vitamins in our diet? Vitamins are essential nutrients that support various bodily functions, including immunity, metabolism, and cell growth. Since the body cannot produce most vitamins, they must be obtained from food. Deficiencies can lead to serious health problems, making a balanced diet important for well-being.
Who wrote the novel “Great Expectations”? Charles Dickens wrote "Great Expectations," published in 1861. The story follows the orphan Pip as he navigates ambition, love, and personal growth in Victorian England. Dickens’ novel is renowned for its memorable characters and social commentary.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the function of the immune system in humans? The immune system defends the body against infections, diseases, and harmful substances. It uses a network of cells, tissues, and organs to identify and destroy pathogens. A healthy immune system is essential for survival and recovery from illness.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments such as carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates bodily functions by transmitting electrical signals between the brain, spinal cord, and the rest of the body. It enables us to perceive the environment, move muscles, and respond to stimuli. The nervous system is essential for memory, learning, and maintaining homeostasis.
Who discovered the structure of DNA and why was it important? James Watson and Francis Crick, with crucial contributions from Rosalind Franklin, discovered the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953. This breakthrough explained how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA’s structure revolutionized genetics, medicine, and biotechnology.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, limited the powers of the king and established certain legal rights for subjects. It laid the foundation for constitutional government and the rule of law. The Magna Carta has influenced legal systems around the world and remains a symbol of liberty and justice.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and prevent overheating. When the body becomes too warm, sweat glands release moisture that evaporates and cools the skin. Sweating also helps remove some waste products from the body.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. He achieved this feat through careful planning, use of sled dogs, and efficient travel techniques. Amundsen’s success marked a major milestone in polar exploration.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest on Earth, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to a vast diversity of plants, animals, and indigenous people, and acts as a major carbon sink, helping regulate the planet’s climate. Protecting the Amazon is vital for global biodiversity and environmental health.
Who wrote the play "Othello"? William Shakespeare wrote "Othello" in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of a Moorish general in Venice. "Othello" remains a powerful work, frequently performed and studied for its complex characters and dramatic impact.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the loss of water vapor from plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This process helps transport nutrients from roots to leaves and cools the plant. Transpiration also drives the movement of water through ecosystems and influences local climate.
Who invented the World Wide Web and how did it change society? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He created protocols for sharing information via linked documents, revolutionizing communication, commerce, and education. The Web is now an essential part of modern life, connecting billions of people worldwide.
What is the function of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function and homeostasis.
Why do birds sing? Birds sing to communicate with one another, attract mates, defend territories, and sometimes warn of danger. Songs and calls vary widely among species and can even identify individuals. Birdsong is also important for social bonding and maintaining ecological balance.
Who painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel? Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City between 1508 and 1512. His frescoes depict scenes from the Book of Genesis and are celebrated for their artistic mastery and dramatic storytelling. The Sistine Chapel remains a major attraction for visitors and art lovers worldwide.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which certain gases in Earth’s atmosphere trap heat, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for a stable and healthy environment.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6, demonstrating women’s capability for spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired generations and remains a landmark in space exploration.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
Who invented the printing press and how did it impact society? Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press in the 15th century, revolutionizing the way information was shared. The printing press enabled mass production of books, making knowledge accessible to many people. It played a crucial role in the spread of literacy, science, and new ideas during the Renaissance.
What is the function of roots in plants? Roots anchor plants to the ground, absorb water and nutrients from soil, and store energy. They also interact with soil microorganisms to promote healthy growth. Strong roots are essential for plant stability and productivity.
Why do animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and whales moving between feeding and breeding areas.
Who composed the ballet "The Nutcracker"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed "The Nutcracker" in 1892, based on a story by E.T.A. Hoffmann. The ballet’s music and choreography have made it a holiday favorite around the world. "The Nutcracker" is regularly performed by major dance companies each winter.
What is the importance of education in society? Education equips individuals with knowledge, skills, and critical thinking abilities needed for personal growth and societal progress. It fosters innovation, reduces poverty, and promotes equality. A well-educated population strengthens economies and supports democratic governance.
What is the function of the skeletal system in humans? The skeletal system provides structure and support for the human body, protecting vital organs and enabling movement through joints and muscles. Bones also produce blood cells in the marrow and store minerals such as calcium and phosphorus. A healthy skeletal system is essential for overall mobility and resilience.
Who was the first person to discover bacteria? Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, was the first person to observe and describe bacteria in the late 17th century using a homemade microscope. His discoveries opened up the world of microbiology, revealing tiny organisms previously unknown to science. Leeuwenhoek’s work laid the foundation for modern bacteriology and cell theory.
What is the importance of the Amazon Rainforest? The Amazon Rainforest is the largest tropical forest in the world, spanning several countries in South America. It is home to an extraordinary variety of plants, animals, and indigenous peoples. The Amazon plays a crucial role in regulating Earth’s climate by absorbing carbon dioxide and producing oxygen.
Why do humans sweat? Humans sweat to regulate body temperature and maintain homeostasis, especially in hot conditions or during physical activity. Sweat evaporates from the skin, cooling the body and preventing overheating. Sweating also helps excrete certain waste products and maintain electrolyte balance.
Who composed the opera “The Barber of Seville”? Gioachino Rossini composed “The Barber of Seville,” which premiered in 1816. The opera is a comic masterpiece, known for its energetic arias and witty plot involving the clever barber Figaro. “The Barber of Seville” remains one of the most frequently performed operas worldwide.
What is the process of photosynthesis and why is it essential? Photosynthesis is the process by which plants, algae, and some bacteria convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into glucose and oxygen. This process provides food for the plant and releases oxygen into the atmosphere, which is vital for most living organisms. Photosynthesis supports life by forming the base of the food chain.
Who was the first woman to travel to the deepest part of the ocean? Kathy Sullivan became the first woman to travel to Challenger Deep, the deepest known point in the ocean, in 2020. She is also an astronaut, making her the first person to both walk in space and reach the ocean’s deepest spot. Sullivan’s achievements highlight the spirit of exploration across frontiers.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Why do migratory birds travel such long distances? Migratory birds travel long distances to find optimal conditions for feeding, breeding, and survival, often moving between continents. Changing seasons, food availability, and climate drive these remarkable journeys. Migration ensures species can avoid harsh environments and maintain healthy populations.
Who invented the light bulb and how did it change society? Thomas Edison is credited with inventing the first practical incandescent light bulb in 1879. His invention revolutionized lighting, making it safer and more convenient than candles or gas lamps. Edison’s work led to widespread electrification and modern conveniences.
What is the function of the kidneys in humans? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine that is expelled from the body. They help regulate blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and red blood cell production. Healthy kidneys are vital for maintaining overall bodily function.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the late 15th century, depicting the mythological goddess emerging from the sea on a shell. The artwork is celebrated for its graceful figures and vibrant colors. Botticelli’s painting remains a masterpiece of the Italian Renaissance.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Why do some animals use camouflage? Animals use camouflage to blend into their surroundings, avoiding predators or sneaking up on prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, or shapes that match the environment. Camouflage increases survival chances and is found in many species from insects to mammals.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello,” first performed around 1604. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general, and his manipulative subordinate Iago. “Othello” remains a powerful work in the English literary canon.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms such as yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, gases, or acids. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Who discovered penicillin and its impact on medicine? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928, observing that a mold inhibited bacterial growth in his laboratory. This discovery led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin remains one of the most important medical breakthroughs of the 20th century.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases such as carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, leading to global warming and climate change. Addressing the greenhouse effect is crucial for a healthy planet.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll breaks down as temperatures drop and daylight decreases. Other pigments, such as carotenoids and anthocyanins, become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who was the first woman in space? Valentina Tereshkova, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first woman in space in 1963. She orbited Earth aboard Vostok 6 for nearly three days, proving women could endure the rigors of spaceflight. Tereshkova’s achievement inspired future generations of women in science and exploration.
What is the process of metamorphosis in insects? Metamorphosis is the transformation that insects undergo from one life stage to another, such as from larva to adult. For example, a caterpillar becomes a butterfly through metamorphosis, which involves dramatic changes in form and function. This process allows insects to occupy different ecological niches during their life cycle.
Who was the first person to invent the printing press? Johannes Gutenberg invented the first movable-type printing press in the mid-15th century in Germany. His invention revolutionized the production of books, making literature and scientific knowledge more accessible. The printing press played a crucial role in the spread of ideas during the Renaissance and beyond.
What is the role of the kidneys in the human body? The kidneys filter waste products and excess fluids from the blood, producing urine for excretion. They also help regulate blood pressure, balance electrolytes, and maintain overall fluid balance. Healthy kidneys are vital for detoxification and homeostasis in the body.
Why do birds build nests? Birds build nests to provide a safe place for laying eggs, incubating them, and raising their young. Nests protect eggs and chicks from predators and harsh weather. The materials and construction techniques vary widely depending on the species and environment.
Who wrote the play “Othello”? William Shakespeare wrote “Othello” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of jealousy, betrayal, and racism through the story of Othello, a Moorish general in the Venetian army. “Othello” remains one of Shakespeare’s most powerful and performed works.
What is the significance of the Magna Carta? The Magna Carta, signed in England in 1215, is considered one of the first documents to limit the power of the monarchy and establish certain legal rights. It laid the groundwork for constitutional law and individual freedoms. Its influence is seen in modern legal systems and democratic governments worldwide.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry? Marie Curie was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911 for her work on radium and polonium. Her pioneering research on radioactivity changed the course of science and medicine. Curie remains a role model for scientists and women worldwide.
What is the process of erosion and how does it affect landscapes? Erosion is the gradual wearing away of land by natural forces such as wind, water, and ice. It shapes coastlines, creates valleys, and moves soil from one place to another. Human activities like deforestation and construction can accelerate erosion and impact ecosystems.
Why do some animals migrate? Animals migrate to find food, suitable breeding grounds, or better weather conditions, sometimes traveling thousands of kilometers. Migration helps species survive seasonal changes and avoid harsh environments. Examples include birds flying south for the winter and wildebeest crossing the Serengeti.
Who painted the “Mona Lisa”? Leonardo da Vinci painted the “Mona Lisa” between 1503 and 1519. The portrait is renowned for its enigmatic smile and subtle details, making it one of the most famous artworks in history. The “Mona Lisa” is housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris and attracts millions of visitors annually.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who was the first person to reach the South Pole? Roald Amundsen, a Norwegian explorer, was the first person to reach the South Pole in December 1911. His meticulous planning and use of sled dogs helped him succeed where others had failed. Amundsen’s achievement expanded knowledge of polar regions and inspired future expeditions.
What is the process of fermentation? Fermentation is a metabolic process where microorganisms like yeast and bacteria convert sugars into alcohol, acids, or gases. It is used in making bread, beer, yogurt, and other foods, and helps preserve food while enhancing flavors. Fermentation is important in culinary traditions and food science.
Why do leaves change color in autumn? Leaves change color in autumn because chlorophyll, the pigment responsible for green color, breaks down as daylight decreases and temperatures drop. Other pigments like carotenoids and anthocyanins become visible, producing yellow, orange, and red hues. This process helps plants prepare for winter by conserving resources.
Who invented the first practical automobile? Karl Benz, a German engineer, is credited with inventing the first practical automobile in 1885. His Motorwagen used an internal combustion engine and was the foundation for modern cars. Benz’s invention revolutionized transportation and paved the way for the automotive industry.
What is the importance of clean water for health? Clean water is vital for drinking, cooking, sanitation, and agriculture. It prevents diseases such as cholera and dysentery, which can be caused by contaminated water sources. Access to clean water is fundamental for healthy communities and economic development.
Who wrote the novel “Pride and Prejudice”? Jane Austen wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” published in 1813. The novel explores themes of love, class, and social expectations in early 19th-century England. Austen’s work remains influential and widely read for its wit and insight.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Who discovered penicillin and its significance? Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 when he observed that a mold inhibited bacterial growth. This breakthrough led to the development of antibiotics, revolutionizing medicine and saving millions of lives. Penicillin is considered one of the most important discoveries in medical history.
What is the process of cloud formation? Clouds form when warm, moist air rises and cools, causing water vapor to condense into tiny droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and influences weather patterns.
What is the process of transpiration in plants and why is it important? Transpiration is the process by which water travels from the roots of a plant, moves up through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature, maintain nutrient flow, and influences local humidity and rainfall patterns. Transpiration also plays a crucial role in the global water cycle.
Who was the first person to climb all fourteen 8,000-meter peaks? Reinhold Messner, an Italian mountaineer, became the first person to climb all fourteen peaks over 8,000 meters without supplemental oxygen. He completed this feat in 1986, demonstrating extraordinary endurance and skill. Messner’s achievement is celebrated as one of the greatest accomplishments in modern mountaineering.
What is the importance of the International Date Line? The International Date Line is an imaginary line, mostly following the 180th meridian, that determines where the calendar date changes by one day. Crossing the line from west to east subtracts a day, while crossing from east to west adds a day. It helps standardize global timekeeping and coordinates activities across continents.
Why do some animals use mimicry? Animals use mimicry to resemble other species or natural objects for protection, hunting, or attracting mates. For example, some butterflies imitate toxic species to avoid predators, and certain insects mimic leaves or twigs for camouflage. Mimicry increases survival chances by confusing or deterring threats.
Who composed the opera "Don Giovanni"? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed "Don Giovanni," which premiered in 1787. The opera blends comedy, tragedy, and supernatural elements in the story of the notorious seducer Don Juan. "Don Giovanni" is considered one of Mozart’s greatest works and a masterpiece of operatic literature.
What is the function of white blood cells in the human body? White blood cells are part of the immune system and help defend the body against infections and diseases. They identify and attack pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. Different types of white blood cells have specialized roles, including producing antibodies and destroying infected cells.
Who invented the airplane and how did it change transportation? The Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, invented and flew the first powered airplane in 1903. Their invention revolutionized transportation, enabling rapid travel across continents and oceans. Aviation has since transformed commerce, tourism, and global connectivity.
What is the significance of the Great Wall of China? The Great Wall of China was built over centuries to protect Chinese states from invasions and raids by nomadic tribes. Stretching thousands of miles, it stands as a symbol of China’s engineering prowess and historical resilience. The Wall attracts millions of tourists and remains a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Why do we experience lunar eclipses? Lunar eclipses occur when the Earth passes between the Sun and the Moon, casting a shadow on the Moon’s surface. This can only happen during a full moon. Lunar eclipses are visible from anywhere on the nighttime side of Earth and have been observed and studied for centuries.
Who painted "Guernica" and what does it represent? Pablo Picasso painted "Guernica" in 1937 as a response to the bombing of the town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War. The painting depicts the horrors of war and the suffering of innocent civilians. "Guernica" is a powerful anti-war symbol and one of Picasso’s most famous works.
What is the process of photosynthesis in aquatic plants? Aquatic plants use photosynthesis to convert sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water into glucose and oxygen. This process occurs in submerged leaves and stems, providing oxygen for aquatic life and helping regulate carbon levels in the water. Photosynthesis in aquatic ecosystems supports fish, invertebrates, and other organisms.
Who was the first woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize? Bertha von Suttner, an Austrian pacifist and author, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1905. Her work advocating for disarmament and peaceful conflict resolution influenced global peace movements. Von Suttner’s legacy continues to inspire activists and leaders around the world.
What is the role of mitochondria in cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
Why do some countries use geothermal energy? Countries with abundant geothermal resources, such as Iceland and New Zealand, use geothermal energy to generate electricity and heat buildings. Geothermal energy is sustainable, produces minimal pollution, and provides reliable power. Harnessing geothermal energy helps reduce dependence on fossil fuels and supports environmental goals.
Who wrote the novel "The Grapes of Wrath"? John Steinbeck wrote "The Grapes of Wrath," published in 1939. The novel chronicles the struggles of a family during the Great Depression as they migrate from Oklahoma to California. Steinbeck’s work highlights themes of poverty, injustice, and resilience, and remains a classic of American literature.
What is the importance of pollinators in agriculture? Pollinators such as bees, butterflies, and birds transfer pollen between flowers, enabling the production of fruits, vegetables, and seeds. Without pollinators, many crops would fail, impacting food supply and biodiversity. Protecting pollinators is essential for sustainable agriculture and healthy ecosystems.
Who was the first person to walk in space? Alexei Leonov, a Soviet cosmonaut, became the first person to walk in space in 1965 during the Voskhod 2 mission. He floated outside his spacecraft for twelve minutes, demonstrating the feasibility of extravehicular activity. Leonov’s achievement paved the way for future space exploration.
What is the process of cloud seeding and why is it used? Cloud seeding involves dispersing substances such as silver iodide or salt into clouds to encourage precipitation. It is used to increase rainfall, reduce drought, and improve water supplies in dry regions. Cloud seeding is also employed to minimize hail and enhance snowpack in some areas.
Why are coral reefs important for marine life? Coral reefs provide habitat, food, and breeding grounds for thousands of marine species. They protect coastlines from erosion, support fisheries and tourism, and are sources of novel medicines. Coral reefs are threatened by climate change and pollution, making their conservation a global priority.
Who composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty"? Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky composed the ballet "Sleeping Beauty," which premiered in 1890. The ballet is based on the fairy tale of Princess Aurora and features lush music and elaborate choreography. "Sleeping Beauty" is a staple of classical ballet and has been performed worldwide.
What is the process of transpiration in plants? Transpiration is the process in which water moves from the roots of a plant, travels through the stem, and evaporates from the leaves into the atmosphere. This helps regulate plant temperature and maintain the flow of nutrients and minerals. Transpiration also contributes to the water cycle and affects local humidity.
Who was the first person to walk on the Moon? Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon on July 20, 1969, during NASA’s Apollo 11 mission. His historic words, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind," were broadcast to millions worldwide. Armstrong’s achievement marked a major milestone in human exploration and space science.
What is the importance of the Suez Canal in global trade? The Suez Canal is a man-made waterway in Egypt connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without circumnavigating Africa, significantly shortening travel time. The canal is a vital artery for international trade and has strategic economic and geopolitical significance.
Why do animals camouflage themselves? Camouflage helps animals blend into their environment, making it harder for predators to spot them or easier for them to ambush prey. This adaptation can involve colors, patterns, and even body shapes that mimic surroundings. Camouflage increases an animal’s chance of survival and is found in species ranging from insects to mammals.
Who composed the symphony “Symphonie Fantastique”? Hector Berlioz composed “Symphonie Fantastique” in 1830, a groundbreaking work known for its vivid storytelling and innovative orchestration. The symphony follows the dreams and torments of an artist, using musical techniques to depict emotions and events. Berlioz’s composition is considered a masterpiece of the Romantic era.
What is the function of the nervous system in humans? The nervous system controls and coordinates body activities by transmitting signals between different parts of the body. It includes the brain, spinal cord, and nerves, and is responsible for sensation, movement, thought, and emotion. The nervous system enables rapid responses and adaptation to internal and external stimuli.
Who wrote the novel “Crime and Punishment”? Fyodor Dostoevsky wrote “Crime and Punishment,” published in 1866. The novel explores themes of morality, guilt, and redemption through the story of Raskolnikov, a young student who commits murder. Dostoevsky’s psychological insight and philosophical depth make it a classic of world literature.
What is the significance of the Hubble Space Telescope? The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990, has revolutionized astronomy by capturing detailed images of distant galaxies, nebulae, and stars. Its observations have helped scientists determine the age of the universe, study black holes, and discover new planets. Hubble’s work has greatly expanded our understanding of the cosmos.
Why do we need proteins in our diet? Proteins are essential nutrients that help build and repair tissues, produce enzymes and hormones, and support the immune system. They are made up of amino acids, some of which the body cannot produce and must be obtained from food. A lack of protein can lead to health problems such as muscle loss and weakened immunity.
Who was the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher became the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Known as the "Iron Lady," she served for over a decade and implemented significant economic and social reforms. Thatcher’s leadership remains influential and controversial in British and global politics.
What is the process of cloud formation in the atmosphere? Clouds form when moist air rises, cools, and condenses into tiny water droplets or ice crystals. These particles cluster together and become visible as clouds, which can take various shapes and sizes. Cloud formation is a key part of the water cycle and affects weather and climate.
Who painted “The Birth of Venus”? Sandro Botticelli painted “The Birth of Venus” in the mid-1480s during the Italian Renaissance. The painting depicts the goddess Venus emerging from the sea on a shell and is celebrated for its beauty and mythological symbolism. Botticelli’s work is a highlight of art history and is housed in Florence’s Uffizi Gallery.
What is the importance of the ozone layer? The ozone layer absorbs most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation, protecting living organisms from DNA damage. It is crucial for environmental and human health, as excessive UV exposure can cause skin cancer and harm plant life. Efforts to restore the ozone layer, such as banning CFCs, have helped preserve its protective function.
Who discovered the structure of DNA? James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the double helix structure of DNA in 1953, with key contributions from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins. Their discovery revealed how genetic information is stored and replicated in living organisms. Understanding DNA has transformed medicine, genetics, and biology.
What is the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate? The greenhouse effect is the process by which gases like carbon dioxide and methane trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere, keeping the planet warm enough for life. Human activities have increased greenhouse gases, causing global warming and climate change. Managing the greenhouse effect is essential for protecting the environment.
Why do people celebrate New Year’s Day? New Year’s Day marks the beginning of a new calendar year and is celebrated as a time for reflection, renewal, and setting goals. Traditions vary around the world, often including fireworks, parties, and rituals to bring good luck. The holiday is observed globally and symbolizes hope for the future.
Who invented the World Wide Web? Tim Berners-Lee, a British computer scientist, invented the World Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN. He developed protocols for sharing information via linked documents using browsers. The Web has revolutionized communication, commerce, and access to knowledge worldwide.
What is the significance of coral reefs in marine ecosystems? Coral reefs support an incredible diversity of marine life, providing food, shelter, and breeding grounds for thousands of species. They protect coastlines from erosion and contribute to local economies through tourism and fishing. Healthy coral reefs are vital for the balance and productivity of ocean ecosystems.
Who wrote the play “Macbeth”? William Shakespeare wrote “Macbeth” in the early 17th century. The tragedy explores themes of ambition, power, guilt, and fate as Macbeth, a Scottish nobleman, rises to power through murder and deceit. “Macbeth” remains a classic in literature and is frequently performed worldwide.
What is the role of mitochondria in living cells? Mitochondria are organelles known as the "powerhouses" of the cell, converting nutrients into ATP, the main energy currency. They support movement, growth, and cellular repair by providing energy for all cellular processes. Dysfunctional mitochondria are linked to various diseases and aging.
